106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
CS (HA)-203
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED-SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
&
THE STATE OF DELHI BILL, 2003
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  5TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE LOK  SABHA ON  26TH DECEMBER, 2003)
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
 
E.mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in
Website:http//rajyasabha.nic.in
 
CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                                           
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT
 Chapter I          -           The Constitution (One Hundred and Second
Amendment) Bill, 2003
 Chapter II        -           The State of Delhi Bill, 2003
4. ANNEXURES
5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
    1.   Shri Pranab Mukherjee      ----  Chairman
          RAJYA SABHA
    2.  Shri Kapil Sibal
   3.   Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj
   4.   Shri  Motilal Vora
   5.   Shrimati   Ambika Soni
   6.   Shri  B.P. Singhal
   7.   Shri  Janeshwar Mishra
   8.   Dr.  V. Maitreyan
   9.   Shri  Lalu Prasad
  10.   Shri Drupad Borgohain
  11.   Shri Ram Jethmalani
*12.   Shri Pramod Mahajan
@13.Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
#14.   Dr. L.M. Singhvi
          LOK SABHA
  15.   Shri Adhi Sankar       
  16.   Begum Noor Bano    
  17.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
  18.   Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale     
  19.   Shri M.O.H. Farook 
  20.   Shri Rajen Gohain     
  21.   Shri Vinay Katiyar     
  22.   Shri K. Karunakaran 
  23.   Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
  24.   Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann      
  25.   Shri Ram Nagina Mishra   
  26.   Shri P. H. Pandian     
  27.   Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy    
  28.   Shri Subodh Roy      
  29.   Shri Anadi Sahu
  30.   Shri P.A. Sangma
  31.   Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
  32.   Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
  33.   Shri Manabendra Shah
  34.   Abdul Rashid Shaheen
  35.   Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
  36.   Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
*      Nominated w.e.f. 27 February, 2003.
@    Nominated w.e.f. 5 May, 2003.
#      Nominated w.e.f. 27 July, 2003.
   37.   Sardar Buta Singh
   38.   Shri Ramjilal Suman
   39.   Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
   40.   Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
  41.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma
   42.   Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
$43.   Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
@44.   Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur     
           SECRETARIAT

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
           Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
           Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
           Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
$    Nominated w.e.f. 26 February, 2003.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 7 April, 2003.
 PREFACE
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill, 2003.*
2.      In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, The Chairman,
Rajya Sabha in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the Bill, as intorduced in the Lok Sabha on 18 August
2003 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report.
3.      The Committee considered the Bills in its sittings held on 18 September, 16 and 30 October and 19 November
2003.
3.1    The Committee took oral evidence of Home Secretary in its sitting held on 18 September 2003.
3.2    On 16 October, 2003 the Committee held further discussion on the Bills. In its meeting held on 
30 October 2003, the Committee resumed the inconclusive discussion and took up clause-by-clause consideration of the
Bills.
3.3    The Committee considered the draft Report on the Bills and adopted the same in its meeting held on 19 November
2003.
4.      In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following papers pertaining to the subject
matter of the Bills.
         (i)   Background Note on the Bills received from Ministry of Home Affairs; and
         (ii)   Replies of the Ministry of Home Affairs to the queries raised by Members of the Committee in its meetings
and other relevant information supplied by the Ministry.
5.      For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed
in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
November 19, 2003
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs.
 
 
*    Bills Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 18 August 2003.
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 40911 dated 5 September 2003.
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
The Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003
       The  Bill inter alia  seeks to repeal articles 239AA and 239AB of the Constitution, pertaining to special
provisions with respect to Delhi and provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery in the  National Capital
Territory and to delete the words “the National Capital  Territory of Delhi and” in the Explanation  under

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
article 54 of the  Constitution, so as to facilitate the enactment of the Delhi State Bill, 2003  which
provides for creation of the new State of Delhi covering the entire National Capital Territory of Delhi as at
present.
1.1    The  Bill proposes to insert a new article 371J in view of the special requirements of the National
Capital, conferring exclusive powers on-
        ---the Parliament to make laws with respect to  ‘Public Order’ 1, and ‘Police2 for entire Delhi and Entries
64, 65 and 66 of the State List in so far as they relate to ‘Public Order’ and ‘Police’, and ‘Local
Government’3 and ‘Land’4 in relation to New Delhi5 only and entries 64,65 and 66 of the State List in so
far as they  relate to ‘local Government’ and ‘Land’ pertaining to New Delhi;
        ---  the President acting, to such extent as he  thinks fit, through the Governor of the State of Delhi shall
exercise the executive power with regard to ‘Public Order’ 1 and ‘Police’ 2 in respect of entire Delhi and
‘Local Government’3 and ‘Land’4 in relation to New Delhi5 only;
          ---   the President to make special provision for the reservation of appointments or posts under the State of Delhi
in favour of the Scheduled Tribes;
        ---  the President to give direction to the State  of Delhi for good governance and proper development of
the State and to require that the master plan 6 prepared for the
State shall not be implemented without his previous approval. Such direction or requirement, as the case may be, of
the President shall be binding on the Government of the State of Delhi.
2. Here, it is pertinent to trace the evolution of  the administrative set up of Delhi since the pre-independence
days. Delhi was a Chief Commissioner’s province directly administered by  the Governor-General under the
Government of India Act, 1935. This arrangement  continued till shortly after the commencement of the
Constitution. In 1952, Delhi was provided with a Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministers as one of the Part-C
States vide  the  Part C States Act, 1951. However, the  then Legislature of Delhi did not have the power to make laws with
respect to ‘Public Order’, ‘Police’ including Railway Police, ‘Municipal/Local authorities’ and public utility authorities,
lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the Union, including transfer of land and alienation thereof.
2.1    In 1956, Delhi became a Union Territory under the direct administration of the President and the   Legislative
Assembly and the Council of Ministers ceased to exist after the  enforcement of the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956 enacted pursuant to the recommendations of the States Reorganisation Commission7 Report (1955)
which among the far reaching changes in the boundaries and namesof various states, re-named Part C States as Union Territories. The
Delhi Administration Act, 1966 gave Delhi a Metropolitan Council8 and an Executive Council9 in order to meet the aspirations of
the people for a responsive administration. The Metropolitan Council could discuss and make recommendations in respect of
legislative and budget proposals and development schemes but could not legislate on its own. The Executive Council assisted the
Administrator in the exercise of his functions in all matters except in certain reserved subjects such  as law and order,
services, police, land and buildings.
2.2    In  1977, the Government decided that Delhi should be given the same status as the Union Territories with
legislatures subject to special provisions to safeguard the interests of the Central Government in the national capital in
respect of law & order and the administration of New Delhi. Accordingly, the Constitution (Forty-Seventh) Amendment
Bill, 1978 and the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Bill, 1978 were introduced in the Parliament. These Bills,
however, lapsed upon dissolution of the Sixth Lok Sabha.
3.      In  1990, the Government proposed to confer Statehood on Union Territory of Delhi. Accordingly, the
Constitution (Seventy-Second) Amendment Bill, 1990 envisaged that the Legislative Assembly of the Capital State of
Delhi, as it was to be known, would not have powers to legislate on matters relating to ‘Public Order’ and ‘Police’; the
Governor of the new State would have special responsibilities and powers with respect to ‘Law and Order’ in the State;
and matters relating to the municipal services required by the Government of India, the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and
the Master Plan of Delhi would be subject to the approval of the Governor. The said Bill also lapsed on the dissolution of the
Ninth Lok Sabha.
4.      The  existing governmental set-up for Delhi 10  was introduced on 1 December 1993 through the
Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 giving a legislature without altering its constitutional status of Union
Territory by insertion of a new article 239AA in the Constitution. The salient features of the existing dispensation are as
follows:
           ---  The Union Territory of Delhi to be called the National Capital  Territory of Delhi and the
Administrator thereof to be designated as the Lieutenant Governor.

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
           ---  Delhi is a Union Territory with a Legislature and a Council of Ministers headed by Chief Minister.
              ---  Delhi Legislative Assembly is empowered to make laws on any matters enumerated in the State List or in the
Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to Union Territories except matters with
respect to ‘Public Order’, ‘Police’ and ‘Land’ of the State List.
              ---  Delhi has its own Consolidated Fund and Contingency Fund and the Legislative Assembly has full financial autonomy in
deciding budgetary allocation. However, yearly  statement of estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Capital is required to  be laid before Legislative Assembly only after obtaining President’s previous
sanction.
         ---In case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor and Ministers, the matter is to be
referred by the Lieutenant Governor to the President for decision.
5.      The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on Statehood to Delhi submitted to the Committee, stated
that, the existing constitutional arrangement for Delhi, enables the Central Government to exercise overriding control
not only in regard to matters which have been excluded from the purview of Legislative Assembly of Delhi but
also in regard to matters in respect of which the Legislative Assembly has been empowered to make laws for the whole
or any part of the National Capital Territory.  In other words, the Legislative Assembly of Delhi does not enjoy
any legislative sovereignty even in respect of matters on which it is competent to make laws. It further states that the
present arrangement has failed to meet the democratic aspirations of the people of Delhi.
5.1    Keeping  this in view, the Government, in June 1998, decided that the area covered under  the Union
Territory of Delhi, except for specific areas which would be centrally administered, should be granted full Statehood. In
accordance with the decision, a draft Delhi Reorganisation Bill, 1998 was prepared and sent to the Government of Delhi
for eliciting its comments/views.  In September 2002, the Chief Minister of Delhi forwarded to the Central
Government, a resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly of Delhi in full strength on 11 September 2002 that the
NCT of Delhi be granted Statehood by bringing about major institutional and structural reforms based on broad
consensus to empower the citizens of Delhi through their elected representatives to provide good city governance
befitting the National Capital of our country.
5.2   The  Chief Minister of Delhi had also discussed the matter of granting Statehood to  Delhi at the
political level, wherein it was agreed to request the Central Government for Statehood to Delhi with a special status
under article 371 of the Constitution in view of the specific financial and security concerns of the capital of the country.
The matter was also discussed in a Workshop held on 11 January 2003 which amongst others was attended by the
Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly and the President of the Delhi Unit of the main opposition party.
The consensus that emerged in the Workshop was for seeking Statehood to Delhi along with a special status to Delhi State under
new article 371J of the Constitution.
6.       The Home Secretary, during his deposition before  the Committee on the Bill on 18 September
2003, informed that against this backdrop, the Government decided to grant full Statehood to the entire
National Capital Territory as at present by  creating a new State to be known as the State of Delhi. Accordingly,
the State of Delhi Bill, 2003 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 18 August 2003.
6.1   In  order to enact the State of Delhi Bill, 2003, it is necessary to repeal  articles 239AA and 239AB
of the Constitution which confer the existing status on the Union Territory of Delhi. Hence, the Constitution
(One Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003.
7.       The Committee took up consideration of the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 in its
meeting held on 18 September 2003. During the course of the meeting, the officials of  Ministry of Home Affairs
led by the Home Secretary made a detailed presentation before the Committee on various provisions of the Bill.
8.     The  Committee held further discussion on the Bill in its meetings held on 16 and 30 October 2003
wherein Members of the  Committee expressed their support for the proposal of granting Statehood to Delhi.
The Committee however, sought clarifications with regard to loss of distinct identity of being a National Capital
Territory as a result of the deletion of article 239AA of the Constitution.
8.1   In  reply to the point raised in the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that in some countries
like the USA and Australia, a separate area is identified and recognized as the National Capital and is under the overall
political and administrative control of the federal government though certain measure of autonomy has been given to the local
government. In some countries like Austria (Vienna) and Nigeria (Lagos) no separate area is identified, but the federal
capital functions as a city-state, while in Malaysia, the capital Kuala Lumpur lies within one of the Federal States.
8.1.1 The Ministry informed that until 1991, no Act defined Delhi/New Delhi as the National Capital. With the
enactment of the National Capital Territory Act, 1991, it has been provided under Article 239AA of the

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
Constitution that the  Union Territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital Territory  of Delhi,
thereby indicating the identity of Delhi as the capital. After Delhi gets the Statehood, the area under New
Delhi/NDMC area will practically be under the control of the Union as provided for in the proposed Bill,
although it is not specifically defined as the national capital area. However, the national capital character of the
proposed State of Delhi will be protected through the following provisions:----
            (i)    Parliament shall have exclusive power to make law for the  whole or any part of the State of Delhi
with respect of Public Order and Police  and, Local Government and Land in relation to the areas as
defined in clause (27) of section 2 of New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
            (ii)   The President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through the Governor of the State shall exercise the
executive power with regard to ‘Police’ and ‘Public ‘Order’ in respect of the State of Delhi and, with
regard to ‘Local Government’ and ‘Land’ in respect of areas defined in clause (27) of section 2 of New
Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
         (iii) The  President shall have executive power to give direction to the State of Delhi for good governance
and proper development of the State and to require that the master plan prepared for the State shall not be
implemented without his previous approval. The directions of the President will be binding on the government of
the State of Delhi.
8.1.2The Ministry further stated that no specific provision is required to be made in the Constitution or any law to
specify that Delhi will be the capital of the country.
8.2    However, while further clarifying the Government’s viewpoint in the matter, the Additional Secretary in the
Ministry of Home Affairs stated, in the meeting of the Committee held on 30 October 2003, that after enactment of the
present legislation, the NDMC area would no doubt be the National Capital
Territory of India although the Bill  has not specifically stated the same in as many words. He, however sought
Committee’s advice in the matter.
8.3    While deliberating on the issue of preserving the distinct identity of the National Capital Territory, a parallel was
sought to be drawn in the Committee with the status of Washington D.C. and Canberra.  Here, it may be relevant to have a brief
understanding of the governmental and  administrative set-up existing in Washington D.C. and Canberra. As per
the information supplied by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the following distinct features of these two capital
cities are as follows :
Washington D.C.
        (i)     The United States of America has a federal system with Washington D.C. being its capital city.
        (ii)    Washington  is situated in the District of Columbia. This District does not form part of  any
constituent State of the Federal Union. Instead, it is placed under the exclusive legislative
jurisdiction of the U.S. Congress.
        (iii)   The  District enjoys some attributes of Statehood but has no attributes of sovereignty.
        (iv)   The  Government of District of Columbia has got certain delegated legislative powers.
          (v)     Under the District of Columbia Self-Government and Governmental  Reorganisation Act, 1973, a
representative Legislative Council consisting of fourteen members has been established.
        (vi)   The  legislative powers of the council are subject to the reservation of the right of the Congress to
act as legislature for the district.
          (vii)    The executive power of the district are vested in the Mayor who is elected directly by the qualified electors
of the district.
        (viii)The  budget for the district is passed by the council and is submitted by the  Chairman of the Council to the
Mayor who submits it to the US President for laying it before the U.S. Congress.
          (ix)     There is a National Capital Planning Commission which is a federal planning agency responsible for preserving the
important historical and natural features of the national capital.
       Thus,  the capital of the United States of America is a Union Territory which is located within the District
of Columbia on the land donated by  the State Government to the Federal Government  and is governed by an elected
Mayor.
Canberra
        (i)    Australia  has a federal government with its seat in Canberra known as Australian Capital Territory

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
established by the Parliament of Australia.
          (ii)      A National Capital Authority was also established to represent  Federal Government’s interest in the
planning and development of Canberra. This authority performs a custodial role 
vis-a -vis the unique heritage and  culture of Canberra. It also administers and reviews the national Capital
Plan and is responsible for fostering an awareness of the national capital.
          (iii)     The Australian Capital Territory functions as a State Government and is headed by a Chief Minister who is
the executive head of the capital territory.
        (iv)   The  Capital Territory has a legislative assembly consisting of seventeen members.
          Thus, although the Australian Capital Territory functions as a State Government, the distinct identity of national
capital is maintained by the National Capital Authority on behalf of the Federal Government.
8.4    After having had an understanding of the existing systems prevailing in Washington D.C. and Canberra, it
becomes amply clear that the  proposed constitutional set-up for Delhi does not match with either of the two
Capitals. The Ministry of Home Affairs has also admitted this fact when it replied that the proposed constitutional set-up
for Delhi will perhaps be the only model of its kinds in the world where the Union Government will function from
within a territory governed by a State Government. The Ministry further stated that in view of the unique position
occupied by Delhi, it is not possible to compare it to any other capital city or State.
8.5    In the  light of above, it becomes clear that no common trend exists in different countries.
9.     After  having gone through the administrative set-ups as prevailing in the capitals of  the United
States of America and Australia - two major countries having federal system of governance, the Committee is
also of the view that  Delhi’s status is sui generis. Keeping this unique feature of Delhi in mind, the Committee
recommends that  while granting Statehood to it to fulfill political aspirations of the people,  Delhi’s
distinct identity as the national capital should be preserved.  Although, the Government has taken care to
retain certain powers with it in the  proposed constitutional set-up with a view to preserve the identity of
Delhi  being a  national capital, these  provisions alone, however, are not sufficient. In this context, a
view was expressed that New Delhi or areas falling under the jurisdiction of New Delhi Municipal Council
be earmarked or designated as the National Capital Territory. But according to the proposed constitutional set-up and
as clarified by the Ministry of Home Affairs, these areas will also form part of  the new State of Delhi.
All that is being proposed by way of retaining powers vis-a- ­vis Land and Local Government in respect of
New Delhi is a measure to have control over land management to preserve and protect the  establishments
of the Union Government located largely in that area. Thus, it  is crystal clear that Delhi’s identity of
being national capital is likely to  get enfeebled to a certain extent if not lost completely. Therefore, there
is need to preserve and promote a sense of Delhi’s distinct identity of being the national capital even after
granting Statehood to it. Mere retention of certain powers with the Union Government and insertion of certain
special provisions in the Constitution alone will not be adequate to  preserve Delhi’s identity as national capital.
What is essential is that whatever is being done should also be seen, understood and realised by the people. Therefore, the
Committee is of the considered view that Delhi’s distinct identity of being the national capital should be
preserved.
9.1   In this context, the Committee would like to refer to the Constitution (Seventy-second) Amendment Bill,
1990 which preferred to call ‘State of  Delhi’ as ‘Capital State of Delhi’. This amendment Bill, however,
lapsed on the dissolution of the Ninth Lok Sabha.  The nomenclature ‘Capital State of Delhi’ appears
appropriate as it not only  identifies Delhi as a State but also helps to maintain Delhi’s distinct  identity
as capital of India. However, keeping in view the fact that Delhi is now known as ‘National Capital Territory of
Delhi’, it will be more appropriate to christen the proposed new State as ‘National Capital  State of Delhi’. The
Committee is of the opinion that such christening of the  proposed new State will not only preserve and
promote general awareness attached to Delhi as being a national  capital but will also reinforce the fact that
Delhi is first and foremost the ‘Capital  of India’ and then a State.
10.   With regard to the proposed insertion of new article 371J sub-clause (3) which seeks to confer executive powers on
the President to give  direction to the State of Delhi for good governance and proper development of that State, a view
emerged in the Committee that these powers were omnibus, sweeping and overriding in nature. It was felt that such
powers of the President, which shall be binding on the Government of State of Delhi, would  impinge on the
concept of Statehood proposed to be conferred on Delhi. It was further felt that expressions like  ‘good
governance’ and ‘proper development’ used in the said clause were not only ambiguous but also variable concepts. It was
apprehended that such overriding and sweeping powers may be used by the Union Government as a ploy to destabilize the
elected Government of Delhi. Therefore, the Committee observed that the Government should spell out the purpose of
the proposed provision in the Bill itself and desired that necessary safeguards should also be provided to prevent its

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
misuse for political ends.
11.      In its meeting held on 30 October 2003, the  Committee considered the Bill clause-by-clause.
Clause 2
12.      Clause 2 pertains to omission of the words “the National Capital Territory of Delhi and” appearing in the
Explanation  in article 54 of the Constitution.
12.1  The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3
13.      Clause 3 pertains to deletion of articles 239AA and 239AB of the Constitution.
13.1  The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 4
14.      Clause 4 pertains to insertion of article 371J after article 371J of the Constitution regarding special provisions with
respect to the State of Delhi.
14.1  The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 1
15.    Clause  1, the enacting formula and the title are adopted without any change.
16.    The Committee recommends that the Government may consider its observations in paras 9, 9.1 and 10 in
this Chapter and the Bill, as reported by  it, be passed.
CHAPTER-II
THE STATE OF DELHI BILL, 2003
       Chapter-I  of this Report deals with the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003
which is, in effect, an enabling amendment to pave the way for enactment of the State of Delhi Bill, 2003.
Therefore, as a  sequel, this Chapter deals with the State of Delhi Bill, 2003.
2.       The State of Delhi Bill, 2003 proposes to form a  new State of Delhi comprising the entire area of National
Capital Territory of Delhi as at present. It also proposes to make the necessary supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions thereto.
2.1    The salient features of the State of Delhi Bill, 2003 are enumerated below:
             (i)       To create a new State to be known as the State of Delhi comprising the entire National Capital Territory of Delhi
as at present;
          (ii)      To allot the three Rajya Sabha seats of the National Capital Territory of Delhi to the new State;
          (iii)     To allot the seven Lok Sabha seats of the National Capital Territory of Delhi to the new State;
        (iv)   The  new State to have Unicameral Legislature, i.e ., only Legislative Assembly;
          (v)     (a)   The Legislative Assembly’s strength of 70 of the National Capital Territory of Delhi to continue for the
Legislative Assembly of the new State, keeping in view the proposed configuration;
                   (b)   For the purpose of the term of Legislative Assembly of  five years as provided in article 172 of
the Constitution for the new State to be reckoned from the date of the  first meeting of the
existing Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;
               (c)   The number of seats for SCs in the Legislative Assembly of the new State may   be as per
the present reservation status of Assembly seats in the National Capital Territory of Delhi;
             (vi)       The High Court of Judicature at National. Capital Territory of Delhi to be the High Court of the new State;
        (vii) The  President to determine the grants-in-aid of the revenue of the new State and its share in the
Union duties and taxes;
        (viii) The composition and strength of  the All India Services for the new State to continue as in
respect of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 1, till the Central Government, by  notification,
provides for a separate cadre for the new State;
        (ix)   Ownership  of land within New Delhi to vest in the Union. All other land, stores, articles and goods
held for the purposes of governance of the National Capital Territory of Delhi to be passed to the new State
except properties held for Union purposes.
        (x)    To  empower the President to remove difficulties and the Central Government to make rules;

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
        (xi)    To  delete Part I of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order,  1951 to
form Part XXV-Delhi of Constitution (Scheduled Caste) Order, 1950; and
        (xii)  To  repeal Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
3.      The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on Statehood to Delhi submitted to the Committee, stated
that the ‘National Agenda for Governance’ assured the people of Delhi that the National Capital would be granted full
Statehood.
4.      In view of the unique and special needs of Delhi as the National Capital Territory of the country, and
considering the aspirations of the people of Delhi in matters of their participation in the governance of the territory,
various methods have been evolved in order to realize an appropriate structure for the national  capital of the
country as has been discussed in Chapter-I of the Report.
5.      Subsequent to the commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 on 1 February
1992, thestatus of the National Capital Territory of Delhi was governed by articles 239 AA and 239 AB of the
Constitution. The Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 dealt with in Chapter I of the Report proposes
to delete the said articles so as to facilitate the enactment of the State of Delhi Bill, 2003.
6.       The Committee, in its meeting held on 18 September 2003  took oral evidence of Home Secretary on the Bill. The
Home Secretary, during his presentation on the Bill,  apprised the Committee of the need to change the
existing constitutional arrangement for Delhi so as to assign more legislative powers to Delhi Legislative Assembly
to meet the democratic aspirations of the people of Delhi.
6.2    In its meeting held on 16 October 2003, the Committee held  in-house discussion on the various aspects of the Bill.
On 30 October 2003, the Committee resumed in-house discussion on the Bill followed by clause-by-clause consideration of the
Bill thereof.
7.       While considering the State of Delhi Bill, 2003, a section of Members of the Committee felt that the
present  Bill was short of the concept of Statehood. They were of the view that by retaining certain key powers
like ‘Public Order’ and ‘Police’ in case of entire Delhi including NDMC areas and ‘Land’ and 'Local Government' in case of
NDMC areas, the Union Government proposed a truncated version of Statehood for Delhi. Therefore, they felt that
the present legislative measure offered too little and too late for the people of Delhi.
8.       With regard to All India Services namely, IAS, IPS and Indian Forest Service, some Members were of the
view that there was indication for creation of a separate cadre for Delhi in the Bill. They were of the view that it would
not be appropriate considering that the administration of Delhi required the expertise, wisdom and experience of those
who have been working in different States and Union Territories.
8.1    In this regard the Government has submitted in its written reply that status quo is proposed to be
maintained insofar as the strength and composition of the All India Services for the new State is concerned, till such
time the Central Government decides to establish a separate cadre for the State of Delhi. It further stated that the
concern of the Committee in this regard would be taken into consideration at the appropriate time.
9.       Another Member wanted to know whether the interests of the State of Delhi would be safeguarded at the time of
bifurcation of assets and liabilities between the State and the  Centre. The Ministry in its written replies stated
that as per the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the bifurcation of assets and liabilities between the States are to be
settled mutually. However, in case of any disputes/disagreements, the Central Government has the power to settle the
issue amicably in a fair and equitable manner. Moreover, in case of Delhi most of the orgnisations with the exception of
NDMC and Delhi Police will stand transferred to State Government in  toto . Hence, the question of bifurcation
of assets and liabilities would be a limited one.
10.    Another member while drawing the attention of the Committee, stated that a substantial percentage of
tribals/hill people  from different parts of the country lived in Delhi. However, no provision for
representation of the tribals/hill people in the Delhi Legislative Assembly had been made in the proposed Bill.
10.1In  response to the above query, the Ministry has stated, in its written reply, that “At present no Scheduled
Tribes have been identified in Delhi. Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of Delhi
can be made after the Scheduled Tribes in Delhi are specified by the President by notification under Article 342
(1) of the  Constitution. Article  332 of the  Constitution makes provision for reservation of Scheduled
Tribes in a State Legislature. Once the President determines the Scheduled Tribes in Delhi, Article 332 will apply
automatically. The Delimitation Commission can then re-delimit the constituencies of Delhi and make provision for
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes as also the Scheduled Tribes. Hence no separate provision is needed in the Bill’’.
10.2The  Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that just as a specific  provision has been made

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
vide  new article 371J (i) (c) of the  Constitution empowering the President of India to give directive to
the State  Government for reservation of appointments or posts under the State of Delhi in favour of the
Scheduled Tribes, the Government may explore  the possibility of making similar provision of empowering the
President to give directive for the purpose of reservation  of two seats in the Delhi Legislative Assembly so as
to give representation to  the Scheduled Tribes living in Delhi. The Committee further recommends that
the  Government may initiate the process of identifying/specifying Scheduled Tribes in Delhi as per the provisions of
Article 342 (1) of the Constitution.
11.      On 30 October 2003, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
12.      Clause 2 defines various expressions used in the proposed Legislation.
12.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 3
13.      Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the new State of Delhi.
13.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 4
14.      Clause 4 proposes to amend the First Schedule to  the Constitution by way of inserting “29.Delhi.”  The
territories specified in Section 3 of the State of Delhi Act, 2003” after entry 29 under the heading “The States”.
Similarly, it seeks to omit “Delhi” from the heading “The Union Territories”.
14.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 5
15.      Clause 5 proposes to empower the Government of the State  of Delhi to alter, after the appointed day, the
area or boundaries of any  district or other territorial division within the new State.
15.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clauses 6 and 7
16.      Clauses 6 and 7 provide for the allocation of three seats in the Council of States to the State of Delhi by
way of continuing the  representation of three seats in the Council for the existing Union Territory  of
NCT of Delhi for the new State also. The sitting Members from the State of Delhi in the Council of States will be
deemed to be duly elected and will represent in new State for the unexpired term.
16.1  The Committee adopts the Clauses without any change.
Clause 8
17.      Clause 8 proposes to continue the representation of seven  seats in the House of the People for the existing
Union Territory of NCT of  Delhi for the new State also. The sitting  members from State of Delhi in the
House of the People will be deemed to represent the new State.
17.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 9
18.      Clause 9 provides that the sitting members of the House of the People representing the constituencies on the
appointed day shall be deemed to be  elected and will represent the new State.
18.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 10
19.      Clause 10 provides for a Legislative Assembly for  the State of Delhi consisting of a total number of 70
persons to be chosen by direct election and the consequent amendment to the Second Schedule to the Representation to
the People Act, 1950. Assembly Constituencies of the existing Union Territory of NCT of Delhi shall be deemed to be
the Assembly Constituencies of the new State of Delhi. The period of five years shall be deemed to have commenced
on the date on  which the duration of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union Territory commenced under
the National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
19.1  Subject to the recommendations of the Committee at Para 10.2 of the Report, the clause is adopted.
Clause 11

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
20.     Clause 11 provides that the existing Speaker and  the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the
existing Union Territory of NCT of Delhi shall be deemed to be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Delhi.
20.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 12
21.      Clause 12 proposes to provide for the continuance of the existing rules of procedure of the Legislature.
21.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clauses 13 to 22
22.     Clauses 13 to 22 provide that the existing High Court of Judicature at Delhi will be High Court of the new State of
Delhi. The detailed provision contained in the clauses follow broadly the relevant provisions of the previous
Reorganisation Acts and deal inter alia  with the powers, function and the procedure to be  followed by the new
High Court.
22.1    The Committee adopts the clauses without any change.
Clause 23
23.     Clause 23 provides for the authorisation of expenditure by the President before the appointed day and by the
Governor after the appointed day from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Delhi.
23.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 24
24.     Clause 24 provides that the report of the  Comptroller and Auditor General of India for a period prior to
the appointed day should be submitted to the Governor of the State of Delhi.
24.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 25
25.     Clause 25 provides that until Parliament makes law under article 158(3) of the Constitution to provide for allowances and
privileges to the  Governor of State of Delhi, he shall have the  same allowances and privileges as that of the
Administrator of the Union Territory of Delhi.
25.1  During the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill, the Secretary, Legislative Department pointed out that since
a law, namely, the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982, already existed, there was no
need for keeping a separate provision for Governor of Delhi in the present Bill.
25.2  In view of the submission made by the Secretary, Legislative Department, the Committee feels that this
clause is redundant and hence, be omitted.
Clause 26
26.     Clause 26 proposes to empower the President to determine, by order, the grants-in-aid to the State of Delhi and its share
in the Union duties and taxes.
26.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clauses 27 to 43
27.     Clauses 27 to 43 pertain to the apportionment of assets and liabilities between the existing Union Territory and the
State of Delhi including cash balances, arrears of  taxes, right to  recover loans and advances, investments in the loans,
etc. assets and liabilities of State Undertakings, refund of taxes collected in excess, certain deposits, liabilities as guarantor
of co-operative societies, provident fund and pension accounts, government contracts actionable wrong items in
suspense, special provision for apportionment of benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability and finally the
power of the Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases of assets or liability.
27.1    The Committee adopts the clauses without any change.
Clause 44
28.     Clause 44 provides for continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electricity and water
and also the disposal of sewage on the pattern of section 107 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
28.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
Clause 45
29.     Clause 45 provides that a  Co-operative Bank which is newly formed on the appointed day or within
three  months thereof in the State of Delhi, may commence and conduct banking business without obtaining license from
the Reserve Bank of  India provided that the bank makes an application for the license within three months of its
formation. Such a bank will continue to function without license until it is granted a license by the Reserve Bank or the
license refused.
29.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 46
30.    Clause 46 proposes for a general provision to  enable continuance of existing road transport permits and
follows the corresponding provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
30.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clauses 47 and 48
31.    Clauses 47 and 48 propose for special provisions relating to retrenchment-compensation in certain cases
with  regard to  registered co-operative societies, commercial or industrial undertakings and special provisions as
to income  tax in the  pattern of similar provisions of the States Reorganisation Act,  1956.
31.1  The Committee adopts the clauses without any change.
Clause 49
32.    Clause 49 deals with and provides for the continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions or
universities to residents in the territories comprising the new State of Delhi.
32.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clauses 50 to 53
33.     Clauses 50 to 53 deal with the provisions relating  to services and generally follow similar provisions as
are provided under corresponding sections of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
33.1  The Committee adopts the clauses without any change.
Clauses 54 to 59
34.     Clauses 54 to 59 provide for consequential amendments in the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and also make usual provisions
regarding continuance of existing laws of the Union Territory of Delhi in the new State of Delhi subject to adaptations
of the laws and their interpretations by the Courts and Tribunals, continuance of  authorities exercising
statutory  functions, legal proceedings, etc.  in the pattern of similar provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
34.1  The Committee adopts the clauses without any change.
Clause 60
35.     Clause 60 proposes to make the necessary consequential amendments in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950
and the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territory) Order, 1951.
35.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 61
36.     Clause 61 provides that within three years from  the appointed day, the President may, by order, do
anything not inconsistent  with the provisions which appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the
purpose of removal of any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.
36.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 62
37.     Clause 62 proposes to empower the Central Government to make rules by carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
37.1  The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 63
38.     Clause 63 provides for the repeal of the (Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi) Act, 1991.
38.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
The First Schedule
39.     The First Schedule provides for amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 by way of
substituting the figures “XXIV” appearing in paragraph 2 with the figures “XXV” and inserting “Part XXV -
Delhi”  after Part XXIV in the Schedule.
39.1    The Committee adopts the Schedule without any change.
The Second Schedule
40.     The Second Schedule provides for amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order,
1951 by way of  substituting the words and figures “Parts I to III” appearing in paragraph 2 with the words and
figures “Parts I to II”. It further provides for omission of the words “Any reference in  this order to a Union
Territory in Part I of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a
Union Territory as from the first  day of November, 1956” appearing in paragraph 4, and substituting the words
and figures “Part II” and “Part III” with  the words and figures “Part I” and “Part II”, respectively. The Schedule
also provides for omission of the words and figures “Part I- Delhi” and renumbering Part II and Part III in the
Schedule  as Part I and Part II, respectively.
40.1  The Committee adopts the schedule without any change.
Clause 1
41.    Clause  1, the Enacting formula and the title are adopted.
42.       The Committee recommends that the Government may consider its observations/ recommendations in
paras 10.2, 19.1 and 25.2 in this Chapter and the Bill, as reported by it, be passed.
ANNEXTURE
 
ANNEXURE - I
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
18 AUGUST, 2003
 
 
Bill No. 67 of 2003
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
      BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
 
 
      1.  (1)This Act may be called the Constitution (One hundred and second
Amendment) Act, 2003.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notifica­tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
                  2.   In article 54 of the Constitution, in the Explanation, the words
“the National Capital Territory of Delhi and” shall be omitted.
Amendment of
article 54.
       3.  Articles 239AA and 239AB of the Constitution shall be omitted. Omission of articles
239AA and 239AB.
       4.  After article 371-J of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:----
Insertion of new
article 371J.
Special Provision

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
           '371J(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
           (a) Parliament shall have exclusive power to make law—
                 (i)  for the whole or any part of the State of Delhi with respect to
any matter specified in entries 1 and 2 of the State List in the Seventh
Schedule and entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate
to the said entries 1 and 2;
                 (ii)for New Delhi only with respect to any matter specified in
entries 5 and 18 of the State List in the Seventh Schedule and entries
64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said entries 5
and 18;
           (b)the executive power, in so far as it relates to —
                 (i)  entries 1 and 2 referred to in paragraph (i) of sub-clause (a) in
respect of the State of Delhi; and
                 (ii)entries 5 and 18 referred to in paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (a) in
respect of New Delhi,
      shall be exercised by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit,
through the Governor of the State of Delhi;
      (c)the President may make special provision for the reservation of
appointments or posts under the State of Delhi in favour of the Scheduled
Tribes.
with respect to the
State of Delhi.
       Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, the expression “New
Delhi” has the meaning assigned to it in clause (27) of section 2 of the New
Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
45 of 1994.
 
      (2)Clause (1) of article 342, in relation to the State of Delhi, shall have
effect as if the words “and where it is a State, after consultation with the
Governor thereof,” had been omitted therein.
      (3)The President shall have executive power—
      (i)  to give direction to the State of Delhi for good governance and proper
development of that State; and
      (ii)to require that the master plan prepared for the State of Delhi shall not
be implemented without his previous approval,
and such direction or requirement, as the case may be, of the President shall
be binding on the Government of the State of Delhi.
      Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, the expression “master
plan” means any plan which provides for land uses, building regulation or
any other control norms for the development of the State of Delhi.’.
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
            The Government of India have proposed to grant full statehood to the
entire National Capital Territory of Delhi as at present, to create a new State to be
known as the State of Delhi. Considering the requirement of the national capital, it
is intended to insert a new article 371J to provide that notwithstanding anything in
the Constitution, the Parliament shall have exclusive powers to make laws for the
whole or any part of the State of Delhi with respect to entries 1 and 2 of the State
List and entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to entries 1 and 2.
The executive powers, in so far as it relates to entries 1 and 2 of the State List in

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
relation to the whole State of Delhi and entries 5 and 18 of the State List in relation
to only New Delhi area shall be exercised by the President acting, to such extent as
he thinks fit, through Governor of the State. Special power has also been conferred
on the President to protect the interest of the Scheduled Tribes in consonance with
the existing constitutional scheme. President is also empowered to give direction
for the good governance and proper development of the State of Delhi. The
constitutional amendment also provides for repealing articles 239AA and 239AB
and modification in article 54 of the Constitution.
2.     This Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective.
        NEW DELHI;                                       L.K. ADVANI
The 13th August, 2003.
 
 
 
 
Election
President
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special
Provisions with
respect to Delhi..
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*                  *                   *                 *                *
      54.      The President shall be elected by the members of
an electoral college consisting of—
      (a)the elected members of both Houses of Parliament;
and
      (b)the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of
the States.
      Explanation.  — In this article and in article 55, “State”
includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the
Union Territory of Pondicherry.
*                  *                   *                 *                *
      239AA. (1) As from the date of commencement of the
Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union
Territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital
Territory of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the
National Capital Territory) and the administrator thereof
appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the
Lieutenant Governor.
      (2) (a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the
National Capital Territory and the seats in such
Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by direct
election from territorial constituencies in the National
Capital Territory.
      (b)The total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly, the number of seats re­served for Scheduled
Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into
territorial constituencies (including the basis for such
division) and all other matters relating to the functioning
of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law
made by Parliament.
      (c)The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall
apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a
State, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the
members thereof respectively; and any reference in
articles 326 and 329 to "appropriate Legislature" shall be
deemed to be a reference to Parliament.
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (3)(a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
Legislative Assembly shall have power to make laws for
the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State
List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter
is applicable to Union Territories except matters with
respect to entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and entries
64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the
said entries 1, 2 and 18.
      (b)Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the
powers of Parliament under this Constitution to make
laws with respect to any matter for a Union Territory or
any part thereof.
      (c)If any provision of a law made by the Legislative
Assembly with respect to any matter is repugnant to any
provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to
that matter, whether passed before or after the law made
by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other
than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in
either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case
may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the
repugnancy, be void:
      Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative
Assembly has been reserved for the consideration of the
President and has received his assent, such law shall prevail
in the National Capital Territory:
      Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall
prevent Parliament from enact ­ing at any time any law with
respect to the same matter including a law adding to,
amend­ing, varying or repealing the law so made by the
Legislative Assembly.
      (4)There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of
not more than ten per cent of the total number of members
in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the
head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the
exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect
to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws,
except in so far as he is, by or under any law, required to act
in his discretion:
      Provided that in the case of difference of opinion
between the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers on any
matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the
President for decision and act according to the decision
given thereon by the President and pending such decision it
shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any case
where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that it is
necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such
action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems
necessary.
      (5)The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the
President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision in case
of failure of
constitutional
machinery.
President on the advice of the Chief Minister and the
Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President.
      (6)The Council of Ministers shall be collectively
responsible to the Legislative Assembly.
      (7)(a) Parliament may, by law, make provisions for
giving effect to, or supplement ­ing the provisions
contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matter
incidental or con­sequential thereto.
      (b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall
not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect of
amending, this Constitution.
      (8)The provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may be,
apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the
Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they
apply in relation to the Union Territory of Pondicherry, the
administrator and its Legisla ­ture, respectively; and any
reference in that article to “clause (1) of article 239A” shall
be deemed to be reference to this article or article 239AB, as
the case may be.
      239AB. If the President, on receipt of a report from the
Lieutenant Governor or other­wise, is satisfied —
      (a)that a situation has arisen in which the administration
of the National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in
accordance with the provisions of article 239AA or of
any law made in pursuance of that article; or
      (b)that for the proper administration of the National
Capital Territory it is neces­sary or expedient so to do,
the President may by order suspend the operation of any
provision of article 239AA or of all or any of the provisions
of any law made in pursuance of that article for such period
and subject to such conditions as may be specified in such
law and make such incidental and consequential provisions
as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for
administer­ing the National Capital Territory in accordance
with the provisions of article 239 and article 239AA.
*                    *                   *                  *                   *
 
LOK SABHA
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 
(Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)
ANNEXURE-II
18 AUGUST, 2003
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 Bill No. 68 of 2003  

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
THE STATE OF DELHI BILL, 2003
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PART I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
      1.    Short title.
      2.    Definitions.
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF DELHI
      3.    Establishment of the State of Delhi.
      4.    Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.
      5.    Saving powers of the Government.
PART III
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States
      6.    Allocation of seats in the Council of States to the
State of Delhi.
      7.    Allocation of sitting members and term of their office.
The House of the People
      8.    Allocation of seats in the existing House of the
People.
      9.    Provision as to sitting member.
The Legislative Assembly
      10. Provisions as to the Legislative Assembly.
      11.  Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
      12.  Rules of Procedure.
PART IV
HIGH COURT
      13.  High Court for the State of Delhi.
      14.  Provisions as to Advocates.
CLAUSES     
      15.  Practice and procedure in the High Court of Delhi.
      16.  Custody of seal of the High Court of Delhi.
      17.  Form of writs and other processes.
      18.  Powers of Judges.
      19.  Principal seat and other places of sitting of the High
Court of
             Delhi.
      20.  Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.
      21.  Transfer of proceedings to the High Court of Delhi.

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
      22.  Interpretation, etc.
      PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND
DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES
      23.  Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by
the
             Legislature.
      24.  Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union
Territory.
      25.  Allowances and privileges of Governor of the State of
Delhi.
      26.  Distribution of revenues.
PART VI
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
      27.  Definition.
      28.  Land and goods.
      29.  Cash balances.
      30.  Arrears of taxes.
      31.  Right to recover loans and advances.
      32.  Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.
      33.  Refund of taxes collected in excess.
      34.  Certain deposits.
      35.  Provident Fund.
      36.  Pensions granted by the Administrator, etc.
      37.  Contracts.
      38.  Liability in respect of actionable wrong.
      39.  Liability as guarantor of co-operative societies.
      40.  Items in suspense.
      41.  Residuary provision.
      42.  Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.
      43.  Power of Central Government to order allocation or
adjustment
             in certain cases.
CLAUSES
PART VII
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTS,
CORPORATIONS
AND INTER-STATE AGREEMENTS
      44.  Continuance of arrangement in regard to generation
and supply of electric power and supply of water and
disposal of sewage.

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
      45.  Provisions as to Co-operative banks.
      46.  Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain
existing road transport permits.
      47.  Special provisions relating to retrenchment
compensation in certain cases.
      48.  Special provision as to income-tax.
      49.  Continuance of existing facilities in certain
institutions or universities, etc.
PART VIII
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
      50.  Provisions relating to All India Services.
      51.  Provisions relating to other services.
      52.  Provisions as to continuance of officers in the same
post.
      53.  Powers of Central Government to give directions.
PART IX
      LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
      54.  Amendment of section 15 of Act 37 of 1956.
      55.  Territorial extent of laws.
      56.  Power to adapt laws.
      57.  Power to construe laws.
      58.  Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc.
      59.  Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other
laws.
      60.  Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders.
      61.  Power to remove difficulties.
      62.  Power to make rules.
      63.  Repeal of Act 1 of 1992.
      THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
      THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1950.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 68 of 2003
THE STATE OF DELHI BILL, 2003
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the State of Delhi and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1.   This Act may be called the State of Delhi Act, 2003.
2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
      (a)“Administrator” means the administrator appointed by the President
under article 239;
      (b)“appointed day” means the day which the Central Government
may, by notification, appoint;
      (c)“article” means an article of the Constitution;
      (d)“assembly constituency” and “parliamentary constituency” have the
meanings assigned to them in the Representation of the People Act,
1950;
      (e)“Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to
in article 324;
      (f)      “existing Union Territory” means the Union Territory of Delhi
called as the National Capital Territory of Delhi as existing
immediately before the appointed day;
      (g)“law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-
law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument, having immediately
before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or any part of
the existing Union Territory;
      (h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
      (i)  “sitting member”, in relation to the either House of Parliament or
of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union Territory, means a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title.
Definitions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eatablishment of
the state of Delhi.
 
 
Amendment of the
First Schedule to the
Constitution.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saving powers of
Government
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allocation of seats
in the Council of
States to the State of
Delhi.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 to 1950.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that
House or that Assembly, as the case may be;
      (j)“treasury” includes a sub-treasury.
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF DELHI
3.   On and from the appointed day, there shall be established a new State
to be known as the State of Delhi comprising the territories of the existing
Union Territory.
4.   On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the
Constitution,—
      (a)under the heading “I. THE STATES”, after entry 28, the following
entry shall be inserted, namely:—
      “29. Delhi The territories specified in section 3 of the State of Delhi
Act, 2003.”;
      (b)under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORlES”, entry 1
relating to Delhi shall be omitted and entries 2 to 7 shall consecutively
be re-numbered as entries 1 to 6.
5.   Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed to
affect the power of the Government of the State of Delhi to alter, after the
appointed day, area or boundaries of any district or other territorial
division in the State.
PART III
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States
6.   On and from the appointed day, there shall be allotted three seats in
the Council of States to the State of Delhi and in the Fourth Schedule to
the Constitution, the entry 29 relating to the existing Union Territory shall
be deemed to be the entry relating to the State of Delhi.
 
 
7.   (1)On and from the appointed day the three sitting members of the
Council of States, representing the existing Union territory, shall be
deemed to have been duly elected under clause (4) of article 80 to fill
the seats allotted to the State of Delhi.
      (2) The term of office of the sitting members shall remain unaltered.
The House of the People
8.  (1)On and from the appointed day, the allocation of seats to the State of
Delhi in the House of the People shall be seven and the number of seat
to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be one out of those seats
and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950
shall be deemed to be amended, accordingly.
      (2)On and from the appointed day, the parliamentary constituencies of
the existing Union territory shall be deemed to be the parliamentary
constituencies of the State of Delhi and the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall be
construed accordingly.
9.   The sitting members of the House of the People representing the
constituencies which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of
section 8 become the constituencies of the State of Delhi shall be deemed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allocation of
sitting members
and term of their
office.
 
 
 
 
 
Allocation of seats
in the existing
House of the
people.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision as to

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 to 1950.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speaker and Deputy
Speaker
 
 
 
 
Rules of Procedure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High Court for the
State of Delhi.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to have been elected under sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of article 81 to the
House of the People by those constituencies.
The Legislative Assembly
10.On and from the appointed day,—
      (i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Delhi to be filled by person chosen by direct election from assembly
constituencies shall be seventy and the Second Schedule to the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to be
amended, accordingly;
      (ii) the assembly constituencies of the existing Union territory shall be
deemed to be the assembly constituencies of the State of Delhi and the
Delimitation of Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall be
construed accordingly;
      (iii)  the sitting members of the Legislative Assembly representing the
constituencies which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions
of clause (ii) become the constituencies of the State of Delhi, shall be
deemed to have been elected under clause (1) of article 170 to the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi;
      (iv) the period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172
shall, in case of Legislative Assembly deemed to be the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Delhi under clause (ii), be deemed to have
commenced on the date on which the duration of the Legislative
Assembly of the existing Union territory commenced under section 5
of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
11.The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the
Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker, of the Legislative Assembly of the
existing Union territory shall be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker
respectively, of the Legislative Assembly deemed to be the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Delhi under clause (ii) of section 10.
12.The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative
Assembly of the existing Union territory, as in force immediately before
the appointed day, shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of article
208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative
Assembly deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi
under clause (ii) of section 10 subject to such modifications and
adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.
PART IV
HIGH COURT
13.On and from the appointed day,—
      (a)the High Court for the existing Union territory (hereinafter referred
to as the existing High Court) shall be deemed to be the High Court for
the State of Delhi under article 214, to be called the High Court of
Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the High Court of Delhi);
      (b)the Judges of the existing High Court holding office immediately
before that day shall unless they have elected otherwise, become, on
that day, the Judges of the High Court of Delhi;
      (c)the High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of the territories
comprised in the State of Delhi, all such jurisdiction, powers and
authority as, under the law in force immediately before that day, are
exercisable in respect of those territories by the existing High Court.
14.(1)On and from the appointed day, in the Advocates Act, 1961, in
sitting member.
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions as to
the Legislative
Assembly.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1992
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision as to
advocates.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section 3,—
                 (i) in sub-section (1), for clause (f), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
                       “(f) for the State of Delhi to be known as the Bar Council of
Delhi;”;
                 (ii) in sub-section (2), the words “in the case of the State Bar
Council of Delhi, the Additional Solicitor-General of India, ex
officio” shall be omitted.
      (2)Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an
advocate entitled to practise in the existing High Court shall be entitled
to practise as an advocate in the High Court of Delhi.
      (3)All persons who immediately before the appointed day, are
advocates on the roll of the existing Bar Council of Delhi shall, on and
from the appointed day, become advocates on the roll of the Bar
Council of Delhi.
      (4)The right of audience in the High Court of Delhi shall be regulated
in accordance with the like principles as, immediately before the
appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in the
existing High Court.
15.Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately
before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the
existing High Court shall, with the necessary modifications, applies in
relation to the High Court of Delhi.
16.The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to
the custody of the seal of the existing High Court shall, with the necessary
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High
Court of Delhi.
17.The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to
the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the
existing High Court shall, with necessary modifications, apply with
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded
by the High Court of Delhi.
18.The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to
the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the
existing High Court and with respect to all matters ancillary to the
exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modification, apply in
relation to the High Court of Delhi.
19.(1) The principal seat of the High Court of Delhi shall be at the same
place at which the principal seat of the existing High Court is located
immediately before the appointed day.
      (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Judges
and division courts of the High Court of Delhi may also sit at such
other place or places within the territories to which the jurisdiction of
that High Court extends as the Chief Justice of that High Court may,
with the approval of the Governor of the State, appoint.
20.The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to
appeals to the Supreme Court from the existing High Court and the Judges
and division courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply
in relation to the High Court of Delhi.
21.(1) All proceedings pending in the existing High Court immediately
before the appointed day shall, from such day, stand transferred to the
High Court of Delhi.
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 of 1961.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Practice and
procedure in the
High Court of
Delhi.
Custody of Seal of
the High Court of
Delhi.
 
Form of writs and
other processes.
 
 
Powers of Judges.
 
 
Principal seat and
other places of
sitting of the High
Court of Delhi.
 
 
 
Procedure as to

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transfer of
proceedings to the
High Court of
Delhi.
 
 
 
Interpretation etc.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorisation of
expenditure pending
its sanction by the
Legislative.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1992
 
 
 
      (2) Every proceeding transferred under sub-section (1) shall be
disposed of by the High Court of Delhi as if such proceeding was
entertained by that High Court.
 
22.(1) For the purposes of section 21—
                 (a)proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until
that court has disposed of all issues between the parties, including
any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the
proceedings and shall include appeals, application for leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review petitions for
revision and petitions for writs; and
                 (b)references to a High Court shall be construed as including
references to a Judge or division court thereof and references to an
order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by
that court or Judge.
      (2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an
advocate entitled to practise in the existing High Court and was
authorised to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that
High Court to the High Court of Delhi under section 21 shall have the
right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Delhi
in relation to those proceedings.
PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF
REVENUES
23.(1) The President may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise
by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of
Delhi as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months
beginning with the appointed day, pending the sanction of such
expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi:
      Provided that the Governor of Delhi may, after the appointed day,
authorise by order such further expenditure as he deems necessary
from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Delhi for any period not
extending beyond the said period of six months.
      (2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Delhi shall
make separate orders under sub-section (1) in respect of periods falling
in different financial years.
24.The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to
in section 48 of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
Act, 1991, relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory in
respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be submitted to the
Governor of the State of Delhi who shall cause them to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly of that State.
25.The allowances and privileges of the Governor of the State of Delhi
shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under
clause (3) of article 158, be the same as are provided to the Administrator
of the existing Union territory immediately before the appointed day.
26.The President shall, by order, determine the grants-in-aid of the
appeals to
Supreme Court.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reports relating to
the accounts of
the existing Union
territory.
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 of 1994
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash balances.
 
 
 
 
 
Arrears of taxes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revenues of the State of Delhi and share of that State in the Union
duties and taxes in such manner as he thinks fit till 31st day of March,
2004.
PART VI
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
27. In this Part “Union purposes” means the purposes of Government
relatable to any of the matters mentioned in List I of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution and entries 1 and 2 of List II of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution and entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they
relate to the said entries 1 and 2.
28.            (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, all land and all stores,
articles and other goods held immediately before the appointed day, by
the Union for the purposes of the governance of the existing Union
territory, shall, on and from that day pass to the State of Delhi, unless
any such land, stores, articles, or goods are owned or held for Union
purposes:
      Provided that the ownership of land which is within the boundary of
New Delhi shall vest in the Union.
      Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression
“New Delhi” has the meaning assigned to it in clause (27) of section 2
of the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
      (2) The stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in
particular institutions, workshops or undertakings or on particular
works under construction, shall be retained by the Union if such
institution, workshop, undertaking or work is carried on for Union
purposes.
      (3) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property
of every kind and any rights in or over such property.
29.The total of the cash balances in all treasuries, the Reserve Bank of
India, the State Bank of India and any nationalised bank, of the existing
Union territory immediately before the appointed day shall be the cash
balances of the State of Delhi.
      Explanation—In this section, “balance” includes a debit balance.
30.(1) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (including arrears of
land revenue) on any property situated in the territory of the State of
Delhi shall belong to the State of Delhi.
      (2) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty, other than a tax or
duty specified in sub-section (1), shall belong to the State of Delhi if
the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included in the territory of
the State of Delhi:
      Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall empower the
State of Delhi to recover any tax or duty which that State is not
competent to impose.
31.(1) The liability of the Union or the Government of the existing Union
territory whether attributable to the Consolidated Fund of India or the
Consolidated Fund of the existing Union territory, in respect of any
loan taken by the Union or the Government of the existing Union
territory for the purposes of the existing Union territory shall be the
liability of the State of Delhi on and from the appointed day subject to
such contribution from the Union as may be determined by the Central
Government.
 
Allowances and
privileges of
Governor of the
State of Delhi.
 
Distribution of
revenues.
 
 
 
 
Definition.
 
 
 
 
Land and goods.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
Right to recover
loans and advances.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assets and
liabilities of State
undertakings.
 
 
 
 
Refund of taxes
collected in excess.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (2) The right to recover any loans or advances made by the Union or
the Government of the existing Union territory before the appointed
day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in the
territory of the State of Delhi shall belong to the State of Delhi
      Provided that the right to recover loans or advances of pay and
travelling allowances to a Government servant made before the
appointed day by the Administrator shall pass to the State of Delhi if
such Government servant is allotted to that State.
32.The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial undertaking of the
existing Union territory shall pass to the State of Delhi.
      Explanation — For the purposes of this section the expression “any
commercial undertaking of the existing Union territory” shall not
include any undertaking to which the provisions of Part VII are
applicable.
33.The liability of the Union to refund—
      (a)any tax or duty on property, including land revenue collected in
excess, shall go to the State of Delhi if the property is situated in the
territories of that State;
      (b)any other tax or duty collected in excess shall go to the State of
Delhi if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included in the
territory of the State of Delhi.
34.The liability of the Union in respect of any civil deposit or local fund
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the State of Delhi,
if the deposit has been made in the territory of the State of Delhi.
35.(1) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account
of a Government servant employed in connection with the
administration of the existing Union territory and in service on the
appointed day shall, on and from that day, be the liability of the State
of Delhi if that Government servant is permanently allotted to that
State.
      (2) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account
of a Government servant employed in connection with the
administration of the existing Union territory who has retired from
service before the appointed day shall be the liability of the State of
Delhi.
36.(1) Subject to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section (4), the State
of Delhi shall, in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day
by the Administrator of the existing Union territory, pay the pensions
drawn in the treasuries in Delhi of the existing Union territory.
      (2) Subject to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section (4), the
liability in respect of pensions of Government servants employed in
connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory who retire or
proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed day
but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that
day, shall be the liability of the State of Delhi.
      (3) The liability of the Union in respect of pensions granted before the
appointed day by the Administrator and drawn in any treasury outside
the existing Union territory shall be the liability of the State of Delhi.
      (4)In respect of the period commencing on the appointed day and
ending on the 31st day of March, 2004, and in respect of each
subsequent financial year, the total payments made by the State of
Delhi in respect of pensions referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certain deposits.
 
 
Provedent fund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pensions granted
by the
administrator, etc.
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contracts.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liability in respects
of actionable wrong.
 
 
 
section (2) shall be apportioned between the State of Delhi and the
Union in such manner as may be agreed between them before the
expiration of one year from the appointed day, or in default of such
agreement in such manner as the Central Government may, by order,
direct.
      (5)The liability in respect of the pension of any Government servant
employed immediately before the appointed day in connection with the
affairs of the existing Union territory and retiring on or after that day,
shall be that of the State of Delhi or the Union, as the case may be, but
the portion of the pension in respect of the period of service of any
such Government servant before the appointed day shall be
apportioned between the State of Delhi and the Union in such manner
as may be agreed between them before the expiration of one year from
the appointed day, or in default of such agreement in such manner as
the Central Government may, by order, direct.
      (6) Any reference in this section to a pension shall be construed as
including a reference to the commuted value of the pension.
37.(1) Where before the appointed day, the Union has made any contract
in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the existing
Union territory that contract shall be deemed to have been made in the
exercise of the executive power of the State of Delhi, if the purposes of
the contract are, on and from that day, exclusively purposes of that
State, and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue,
under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they would have
been rights or liabilities of the Union, be rights or liabilities of the
State of Delhi.
      (2)For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be
included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any
contract—
                 (a)any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court
or other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract; and
                 (b)any liability in respect of expenses incurred in, or in
connection with, any such proceedings.
      (3)This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this
Part relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans,
guarantees and other financial obligations.
38.Where, immediately before the appointed day, the Union, in
connection with the governance of the existing Union territory, is subject
to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong, other than breach of
contract, that liability shall,—
      (a)if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories of the
existing Union territory, be a liability of the State of Delhi; and
      (b)in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Delhi but
subject to such financial adjustments as may be agreed upon between
the State of Delhi and the Union, or in default of such agreement, as
the Central Government may, by order, direct.
39.Where, immediately before the appointed day, the Union, in
connection with the governance of the existing Union territory, is liable as
guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative society or
other person, that liability of the Union shall be a liability of the State of
Delhi if the area of the operations of such society or person is limited to
the territories of the existing Union territory.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision as to co-
operative bansks.
40.If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability
of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it
shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision.
41.The benefit or burden of any assets or liabilities of the Union in
connection with the governance of the existing Union territory not dealt
with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be retained by the
Union.
42.Where the State of Delhi and the Union agree that the benefit or burden
of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in a
manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this
Part, then, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or
burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed
upon.
43.Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, the Union
becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or the State of
Delhi becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of
opinion on a reference made within a period of three years from the
appointed day by the State of Delhi that it is just and equitable that
property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the
State of Delhi or that a contribution towards that liability should be made
by the Union, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such
manner, or the Union shall make to the State of Delhi such contribution in
. respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with
the Government of the State of Delhi, by order, determine.
PART VII
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTS, CORPORATIONS AND
INTER-STATE AGREEMENTS
44.If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangements in regard
to the; generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water or the
disposal of sewage for any area or in regard to the execution of any project
for such generation, supply or disposal has been or is likely to be modified
to the disadvantage of that area by reason of the fact that it has been
transferred by the provisions of Part II from the existing Union territory to
the State of Delhi in which the power station and other installation for the
generation and supply of such power or disposal of the sewage or the
catchment area, reservoir and other work for the supply of water, or
disposal of sewage, as the case may be, are located, the Central
Government may give directions as it deems fit, to the State Government
or other authority concerned for the maintenance of previous arrangement.
45.Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, where by virtue of the provisions of 
Part II, a co-operative bank is newly formed on the appointed day or
within three months thereof in the State of Delhi, it may commence and
conduct banking business without obtaining a licence under that section
from the Reserve Bank of India, until it is granted such a licence or until it
is informed by the Reserve Bank of India that such a licence cannot be
granted to it:
      Provided that such bank applies to the Reserve Bank of India for such
a licence within a period of three months from the date of formation of the
bank.
46.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 81 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, a permit granted in the existing Union territory
shall, if such permit was immediately before the appointed day, valid
and effective in any area therein, be deemed to continue to be valid and
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liability as
guarantor of
comperative
societies.
 
 
Items in suspense
 
Residuary
provision.
 
 
Apportionment of
assets or liabilities
by agreement.
 
 
Power of Central
Government to
order allocation or
adjustment in
certain cases.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Continuance of
arrangements in
regard to
generation and
supply of electric
power and
supplyof water
and disposal of
sewage.
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1949

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Temporary
provisions as to
continuance of
certain existing road
transport permits.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special  provisions
relating to
retrenchment
compensations in
certain cases.
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 to 1947.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 of 1947.
 
effective in that area up to the 31st day of March, 2004, subject to the
provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area and it
shall not be necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by any
State or Regional Transport Authority for the purpose of validating it
for use in such area:
      Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the
Government of the State of Delhi, add to, amend or vary the conditions
attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was
granted.
      (2) No toll, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be
levied for a period up to and inclusive of the 31st day of March, 2004,
in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in the State of
Delhi under any such permit, if such vehicle was immediately before
that day exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees or
other charges for its operations within the existing Union territory:
      Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the
State Government of Delhi authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance
fees or other charges, as the case may be.
47.Where, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, any body corporate
constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co-
operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative
societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking is reconstituted or
reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other
body corporate, co-operative society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and
in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation, amalgamation or
dissolution, any workman employed by such body corporate or any such
co-operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re-employed by
any other body corporate, or in any other 
co-operative society or undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in section 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF, of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, such transfer or re-employment shall not
entitle him to any compensation under that section:
      Provided that:-
      (a)the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after
such transfer or re-employment are not less favourable to the workman
than those applicable to him immediately before the transfer or re-
employment; and
      (b)the employer in relation to the body corporate, the
 co-operative society or the undertaking where the workman is
transferred to or re-employed, is by agreement or otherwise, legally
liable to pay to the workman, in the event of his retrenchment,
compensation under section 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, on the basis that his service has been
continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer or re-
employment.
48.Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body corporate carrying
on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other
bodies corporate which after the transfer carry on the same business, the
losses of profits or gains sustained by the body corporate first mentioned
which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried
forward and set-off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies
corporate in accordance with the rules to be made by the Central
Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share of loss
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1988.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1961.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions relating
to All-India
services.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions relating
to other services.
 
allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act as if the transferee body
corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in the
years in which these losses were sustained.
49.On and from the appointed day, the Government of the State of Delhi
shall, in respect of the educational or technical institutions or universities
or any other State institutions located or which may be established in the
Sate of Delhi continue to provide facilities to the persons resident in the
territories comprising the State of Delhi which shall not in any respect be
less favourable than those which were being provided to them
immediately before that 5
day upon such terms and conditions (including those relating to any
contribution or payment to be made for the provisions of such facilities) as
may be agreed upon between the State of Delhi and the Union before the
1st day of April, 2004, or if no such agreement is reached by the said date,
as may be fixed by the order of the Central Government.
PART VIII
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
50.(1) In this section, the expression “State Cadre”,—
                 (a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the
meaning assigned to it in the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre)
Rules, 1954;
                 (b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning
assigned to it in the ‘ Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;
and
                 (c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning
assigned to it in the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.
      (2)The strength and composition of the State Cadre of the State of
Delhi shall, on and from the appointed day, continue as such as it is
existing immediately before such day in
respect of the existing Union territory, till the Central Government, by
notification, provides a separate Cadre for the State of Delhi.
      (3)Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on
or after the appointed day, of the All-India Services Act, 1951, or the
rules made thereunder, in relation to the State Cadres of the said
services and in relation to the members of those services borne on the
said Cadres.
51.(1) Every person employed in connection with the affairs of the State
of Delhi and serving, immediately before the appointed day, in the
existing Union territory shall, on and from that day,—
           (a)continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of
Delhi; and
           (b)be deemed to be provisionally allotted to serve in connection
with the affairs of the said State:
      Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall apply to a person to whom the
provisions of section 50 apply or to a person on deputation from any
State.
      (2)As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government
shall by general or special order, determine whether every person
referred to in clause (b) of sub­ section (1) shall be finally allotted for
service in the State of Delhi or under the Union in connection with the
affairs of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the
 
 
 
 
 
Special provision
as to income-tax.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Continuance of
existing facilitics
in certain
institutions or
universities, etc.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 of 1951.
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be
deemed to have taken effect.
      (3)As soon as may be after the Central Government passes orders
finally allotting an employee in terms of sub-section (2), the State of
Delhi or the Union shall take steps to
integrate him into the services under its control in accordance with
such special or general orders or instructions as may be issued by the
Central Government from time to time in this
behalf.
      (4)The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more
Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to—
           (a)the division of the services between the State of Delhi and the
Union; and
           (b)the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons
affected by the provisions of this section and the proper
consideration of any representations made by such persons:
      Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any law or rule for the time being in force, no representation
shall lie against any order passed by the competent authority on
matters arising out of the division and integration of services
under this Act, on the expiry of three months from the date of
publication or service, whichever is earlier, of such order:
      Provided further that, notwithstanding anything contained in the
preceding proviso, the Central Government may suo motu or
otherwise and for reasons to be recorded, reopen any matter and
pass such orders thereon, as may appear to it to be appropriate if
it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in order to prevent any
miscarriage of justice to any affected employee.
      (5)Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, on or after the
appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter 1 of Part
XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the
conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs
of the State of Delhi or the Union:
      Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before
the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section
(1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except
with the previous approval of the Central Government.
      (6)All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allotted
under sub­ section (2) in connection with the affairs of the existing
Union territory shall for purpose of
the rules regarding his conditions of service, be deemed to have been
rendered in connection with the affairs of the State or the Union to
which he is finally allotted.
      (7)The provisions of this section other than clause (b) of sub-section
(1) shall not apply in relation to any person to whom the provisions of
section 50 apply.
52.Every person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or
discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs
of the existing Union territory shall continue to hold the same post or
office and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly
appointed on the same terms and conditions of appointment and on the
same tenure to that post or office by the Government of, or the other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
Provisions as to
continuance of
officers in the same
posts.
 
 
 
 
Powers of Central
Government to give
directions.
 
 
Amendment of
section 15 of Act 37
of 1956.
 
 
Territorial extent of
laws.
 
 
 
 
Power to adapt
laws.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appropriate authority, in the State of Delhi or of the Union, as the case
may be:
      Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a
competent authority, on or after the appointed day, from passing in
relation to such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or
office
53.The Central Government may give such directions to the Government
of the State of Delhi as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of
giving effect to the foregoing
provisions of this Part and the said State Government shall comply with
such directions.
PART IX
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
54.On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956, in clause (b), for the words “and Jammu and
Kashmir and the Union territories of Delhi, and Chandigrah”, the words,
“Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi and the Union territory of Chandigarh” shall
be substituted.
55.The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected any
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the
appointed day extends or applies, and the territorial references in any such
law to the existing Union territory shall, until otherwise provided by a
competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as
meaning the territories within the existing Union territory before the
appointed day.
56.For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of
Delhi of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate
Government may, within two years from that day, by order, make such
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or
amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such
law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made
until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other
competent authority.
      Explanation  — In this section, the expression “appropriate
Government”, subject to the provisions of article 371J, means, as respects
any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government, and as respects any
other law, the Government of the State of Delhi.
57.Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been
made under section 56 for the adaption of a law made before the
appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to
enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in
relation to the State of Delhi, construe the law in such manner not
affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper in regard to the
matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case may be.
58.All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging lawful functions
throughout the existing Union territory or any part thereof immediately
before the appointed day shall unless their continuance is inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act or until other provision is made by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority, continue to exercise their
respective functions.
59.The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeat of Act 1 of
1992.
 
60.            (1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the First
Schedule.
      (2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as
directed in the Second Schedule.
61.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such
provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the
purpose of removing the difficulty:
      Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three
years from the appointed day.
      (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
62.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
      (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.
63.The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 shall
be repealed with effect from the appointed day.
 
 
 
 
Power to construe
laws.
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions as to
continuance of
courts, etc.
 
 
 
Effect of
provisisons of Act
inconsstent with
other laws.
 
Ammendment of
Scheduled Castes
Orders.
 
 
 
 
Power to remove
difficulties.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make
rules.
 
 
     
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 60(1)]
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER,
1950

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,—
            (1) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XXIV”, the figures “XXV” shall be
substituted;
            (2) in the Schedule, after Part XXIV, the following Part shall be inserted,
namely:-
“PART XXV—Delhi
Throughout the State of Delhi:—
            1.         Adi-Dharmi
            2.         Agria
            3.         Aheria
            4.         Balai
            5.         Banjara
            6.         Bawaria
            7.         Bazigar
            8.         Bhangi
            9.         Bhil
            10.       Chamar, Chanwar, Chamar, Jatva or Jatav Chamar, Mochi,
Ramdasia,
                        Ravidasi, Raidasi, Rehgarh or Raigar
            11.       Chohra (Sweeper)
            12.       Chuhra(Balmiki)
            13.       Dhanak or Dhanuk
            14.       Dhobi
            15.       Dom
            16.       Gharrami
            17.       Julaha (Weaver)
            18.       Kabirpanthi
            19.       Kachhandha
            20.       Kanjar or Giarah
            21.       Khatik
            22.       Koli
            23.       Lalbegi
            24.       Madari
            25.       Mallah
            26.       Mazhabi
            27.       Meghwal
            28.       Naribut
            29.       Nat(Rana)
            30.       Pasi
            31.       Perna
            32.       Sansi or Bhedkut
            33.       Sapera
            34.       Sikligar
            35.       Singiwala or Kalbelia
            36.       Sirkiband”
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 60(2)]
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) (UNION
TERRITORIES) ORDER, 1951
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951,—
   (1) in paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Part I to III”, the words and figures
“Parts I to II” shall be substituted;
   (2)        in paragraph 4,—
               (i) the words and figures “Any reference in this Order to a Union territory
in Part I of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
as a Union territory as from the first day of November, 1956,” shall be omitted;
               (ii) for the word and figures “Part II”, the word and figure 
“Part I” shall be substituted;
               (iii)  for the word and figures “Part III”, the word and figures “Part II” shall
be substituted;
   (3)        in the Schedule, PART I.-Delhi shall be omitted and Part II and Part III
shall respectively be renumbered as Part I and Part II.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
            With a view to satisfying the aspirations of the people of Delhi, the
Government have decided to undertake legislative measures to grant full statehood
to the National Capital Territory of Delhi. This Bill is intended to give effect to
this decision and will come into force on a date to be notified by the Central
Government. It seeks to form a new State of Delhi comprising the entire area of
National Capital Territory of Delhi as at present. It also seeks to make the
necessary supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions.
    
NEW DELHI;
The 13 August, 2003
L.K.Advani
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 3,117 AND 274 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
            [Copy of letter No. 12012/14/98-SR(Part-II), dated the 13th August, 2003
from Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister to the Secretary-General, Lok
Sabha]
            The President is having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Bill to grant full statehood to Delhi and for matters connected therewith,
recommends the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 3, 117(1)
and 274(1) of the Constitution and the consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha
under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
NOTES ON CLAUSES
            Clause 2.—This clause seeks to define various expressions used in the
proposed legislation.
            Clause 3.—This clause provides for the establishment of the new State of
Delhi.
            Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend the First Schedule to the
Constitution.
            Clause 5.—This clause empowers the Government of the State of Delhi to
alter, after the appointed day, the area or boundaries of any district or other
territorial division within the new State.
            Clauses 6 and 7.—This clause provides for the allocation of three seats in
the Council of States to the State of Delhi. Clause 7 deals with the representation
of new State of Delhi in the Council of States. At present there are three seats in
the said council for the existing Union territory. It is proposed to continue this
representation for the new State also. The sitting Member from the State of Delhi
in the Council of States will be deemed to be duly elected and will represent in

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
new State for the unexpired term.
            Clause 8.—This clause deals with the representation of State of Delhi in
the House of the People. At present there are seven seats in the House of the
People for the existing Union territory. It is proposed to continue their
representation for the new State also. The sitting Members from State of Delhi in
the House of the People will be deemed to represent the new. State.
            Clause 9.—This clause provides that the sitting members of the House of
the People representing the constituencies on the appointed day shall be deemed to
be elected and will represent the new State.
            Clause 10.—This clause provides for a Legislative Assembly for the State
of Delhi consisting of a total number of 70 persons to be chosen by direct election
and the consequent amendment to the Second Schedule to the Representation to
the People Act, 1950. Assembly Constituencies of the existing Union territory
shall be deemed to be the Assembly Constituencies of the New State of Delhi. The
period of five years shall be deemed to have commenced on the date on which the
duration of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory commenced
under the National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
            Clause 11.—This clause provides that the existing Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory shall be
deemed to be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of
the State of Delhi.
            Clause 12.—This clause provides for the continuance of the existing rules
of procedure of the Legislature.
            Clauses 13 to 22.—These clauses provide that the existing High Court of
Judicature at Delhi will be High Court of the new State of Delhi. The detailed
provision contained in other clauses follow broadly the relevant provisions of the
previous Reorganisation Acts and deal inter alia with the powers, function and the
procedure to be followed by the new High Court.
            Clause 23.—This clause provides for the authorization of expenditure by
the President before the appointed day, and by the Governor after the appointed
day, from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Delhi.
            Clause 24.—This clause provides that the report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for a period prior to the appointed day should be
submitted to the Governor of the State of Delhi.
            Clause 25.—This clause provides that until Parliament makes law under
article 158 (3) of the Constitution to provide for allowances and privileges to the
Governor of State of Delhi, he shall have the same allowances and privileges as
that of the Administrator of the Union Territory of Delhi.
            Clause 26.—The clause empowers the President to determine, by order, the
grants-in-aid to the State of Delhi and its share in the Union duties and taxes.
            Clauses 27 to 43.—These clauses relate to the apportionment of assets and
liabilities between the existing Union territory and the State of Delhi including
cash balances, arrears of taxes, right to recover loans and advances, investments in
the loans, etc. assets and liabilities of State Undertakings, refund of taxes collected
in excess, certain deposits, liabilities as guarantor of co-operative societies,
provident fund and pension accounts, government contracts actionable wrong,
items in suspense, special provision for apportionment of benefit or burden of any
particular asset or liability and finally the power of the Central Government to
order allocation or adjustment in certain cases of assets or liability.
            Clause 44.—This clause makes provisions for continuance of arrangements
in regard to generation and supply of electricity and water and also the disposal of
sewage on the pattern of section 107 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
            Clause 45.—This clause provides that a co-operative bank which is newly
formed on the appointed day or within three months thereof in the State of Delhi, it
may commence and conduct banking business without obtaining license from the
Reserve Bank of India provided that the bank makes an application for the license
within three months of its formation. Such a bank will continue to function without
license until it is granted a license by the Reserve Bank or the license refused.
            Clause 46.—This clause contains a general provision to enable continuance
of existing road transport permits and follows the corresponding provisions of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
            Clauses 47 and 48.—These clauses include for special provisions relating
to retrenchment-compensation in certain cases with regard to registered co-
operative societies, commercial or industrial undertakings and special provisions
as to income tax. These provisions follow similar provisions of the State
Reorganisation Act, 1956.
            Clause 49.—This clause deals with, and contains provisions for, the
continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions or universities to residents
in the territories comprising the new State of Delhi.
            Clauses 50 to 53.—These clauses deal with the provisions relating to
services and generally follow the similar provisions as are provided under
corresponding sections of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956.
            Clauses 54 to 59.—These clauses make consequential amendments in the
State Reorganisation Act, 1956 and also make usual provisions regarding
continuance of existing laws of the existing Union territory of Delhi in the new
State of Delhi subject to adaptations of the laws and their interpretations by the
Courts and Tribunals, continuance of authorities exercising statutory functions,
legal proceedings, etc. These provisions follow similar provisions of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956.
            Clause 60.—This clause seeks to make the necessary consequential
amendments in the Constitution (Schedule Castes) Order, 1950 and the
Constitution (Schedule Castes) (Union Territory) Order, 1951.
            Clause 61.—This clause provides that within three years from the
appointed day, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the
provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of
removal of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.
            Clause 62.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules
by carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
            Clause 63.—This clause provides for the report of the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
            At present, the National Capital Territory of Delhi is given a Non-Plan
grant of Rs. 325 crore in lieu of share of Union taxes and duties. As a State, Delhi
will be entitled to a share in the income tax and additional excise duties of the
Central Government. The net share of the Delhi State in the exise duty of the
Central Government shall be determined by the Finance Commission.
Consequently, the State’s revenue would be augmented and the Non-Plan revenue
deficit reduced correspondingly. In the past, Finance Commission has taken note
of such deficits and recommended suitable grants-in-aid under article 275 (1) of
the Constitution to the National Capital Territory of Delhi. It is, therefore, until the
provision is made by the Parliament in this regard, it is proposed under clause 26
to empower the President to determine, by order, the grants-in-aid of the revenues
of the State of Delhi and its share in the Union duties and taxes in such manner as
he thinks fit till 31st day of March, 2004.
            2.         Clause 51 (4) of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
to establish one or more Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in
regard to the discharge of its functions in relation to division of the services
between the State of Delhi and the Union and for ensuring fair and equitable
treatment in all the affected employees. Some expenditure may have to be incurred
out of the Consolidated Fund of India for discharging the duties and
responsibilities by the Committee.
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
      Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the President to determine by order the grant-
in-aid of the revenues of the new State of Delhi and its share of the Union duties
and taxes.
      2.        Clause 56 provides for the adaptation of existing laws to facilitate their
application to the proposed State of Delhi. The power to adapt is being conferred
on the Central Government in the case of laws relating to matters enumerated in
the Union List in the Seventh Scheduled to the Constitution and on the
Government of the proposed State of Delhi in the case of all other laws. This
power shall be subject to the provision contained in the proposed article 371J to be
inserted by the Constitution (One hundred and second Amendment) Bill, 2003.
      3.        Clause 62 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when enacted. The rules, if any, will be
confined to matters of procedure and other matters of minor detail relating to the
enforcement of the various provisions included in the Bill.
      4.        The various provisions aforementioned are modelled on identical or
analogous provisions in the State Reorganisation Acts passed by the Parliament
earlier. Besides, they are mainly of a consequential nature or pertain to matters of
detail and procedure. As such, the proposed delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUION OF INDIA
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[Articles 1 and 4]
I. The STATES
* * * * *
 
II. The UNION TERRITORIES
TABLE
Name                                       Extent
* * * * *
1.               Delhi           The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s
Province of Delhi.
* * * * *
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)]
Allocation of seats in the Council of States
29. Delhi .......................................................................................3
* * * * *

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950
(43 OF 1950)
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 3)
ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE
* * * * *
I.          STATES:
* * * * *
II. UNION TERRITORIES:
* * * * *
5. Delhi..............7        1                 ..         7        ..
* * * * *
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATES REORGANISATION ACT, 1957
(37 OF 1956)
* * * * *
            15.       As from the appointed day, there shall be a Zonal Council for each
of the following five zones, namely:—
                        (a) the Northern Zone, comprising the State of Haryana, Punjab,
Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union Territories
of Delhi and Chandigarh;
* * * * *
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER,
1950
C.O. 19
* * * * *
            2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races or tribes or parts
of, or groups within/castes or tribes specified in Parts I to XXIV of the Schedule to
this Order shall, in relation to the States to which those Parts respectively relate, be
deemed to be Scheduled Castes so far as regards members thereof resident in the
localities specified in relation to them in those Parts of that Schedule.
* * * * *
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) (UNION
TERRITORIES) ORDER, 1951
C.O. 32
* * * * *
            2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races or tribes or parts
of or, groups within, castes or tribes, specified in Part I to III of the Schedule to

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
this Order shall, in relation to the Union territories to which those Parts
respectively relate, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes so far as regards members
thereof resident in the localities specified in relation to them respectively in those
Parts of that Schedule.
* * * * *
            4. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I of the Schedule
shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as
from the first day of November, 1956, any reference to a Union territory in Part II
of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a
Union territory as from the first day of November, 1966 and any reference to a
Union territory in Part III of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the
territory constituted as a Union territory as from the day appointed under clause (b)
of section 2 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987).
THE SCHEDULE
            PART I.—Delhi
Throughout the Union Territory:—
     1.     Adi-Dharmi
     2.     Agria
     3.     Aheria
     4.     Balai
     5.     Banjara
     6.     Bazigar
     7.     Bhangi
     8.     Bhil
     9.     Chamar, Chanwar, Chamar, Jatva or Jatav Chamar, Mochi, Ramdasia,
            Ravidasi, Raidasi, Rehgarh or Raigar
     10.   Chohra (Sweeper)
     11.   Chuhra(Balmiki)
     12.   Dhanak or Dhanuk
     13.   Dhobi
     14.   Dom
     15.   Gharrami
     16.   Julaha (Weaver)
     17.   Kabirpanthi
     18.   Kanchhandha
     19.   Kanjar or Giarah
     20.   Khatik
     21.   Koli
     22.   Madari
     23.   Mallah
     24.   Mazhabi
     25.   Meghwal
     26.   Naribut
     27.   Nat(Rana)
     28.   Pasi
     29.   Perna
     30.   Sansi or Bhedkut
     31.   Sapera
     32.   Sikligar
     33.   Singiwala or Kalbelia
     34.   Sirkiband
* * * * *
 
 

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the State of Delhi and for matters connected
therewith.
 
 
 
( Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister )
MINUTES
 
XXVII
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18 September, 2003 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shri Pranab Mukherjee----Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.   Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
   3.  Shri Motilal Vora
   4.  Shrimati Ambika Soni
   5.  Shri B.P. Singhal
   6.  Shri Janeshwar Mishra
        LOK SABHA
   7.   Shri M.O.H. Farook
   8.  Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
   9.  Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
10.  Shri Subodh Roy
11.  Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
12.  Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
13.  Shri Manabendra Shah
14.  Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
15.  Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
16.  Shri Ramjilal Suman
17.  Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
18.  Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
        Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
        Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
        WITNESSES
   1.  Shri N. Gopalaswamy, Home Secretary
   2.  Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
  3.   Shri B.A. Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
  4.   Shrimati  Nisha Singh, Director (DD), Ministry of Urban Department and Poverty Alleviation
1.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members, the Home Secretary and his colleague, representative of Ministry
of Law and Justice and Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation. He, then, made some general
observations on the proposed legislations for granting Statehood to Delhi, namely, the Constitution (One Hundred and
Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill, 2003.
1.1   He briefly recounted the historical evolution of Delhi under the British Rule and after independence. He also

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
mentioned the various methods that had been evoked to meet the unique requirements of Delhi, keeping in view its
status of being the capital of the country.
2.     A Member suggested that information with regard to the administrative set-up of other capital cities such as
Washington D.C. and Canberra may be  obtained so as to facilitate the Committee to examine the
proposed legislations in the light of existing similar arrangements in other countries.
3.    The  Chairman then invited the Home Secretary to make a presentation on the Constitution (One
Hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill, 2003. He also requested the Ministry of
Home Affairs to provide  necessary information with regard to the administrative set-up of Washington D.C. and
Canberra.
4.     A presentation on both the Bills was made by the concerned Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs,
tracing the various administrative measures evolved for Delhi including the existing governmental set-up.
4.1 The Joint Secretary also highlighted the salient features of the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment)
Bill, 2003 and the State, of Delhi Bill, 2003 as he dwelt on the need for the proposed legislations.
5.     Thereafter, Members raised certain queries and sought clarifications on various issues arising out of the
presentation, such as,  the dual responsibility of the Central Government and the Delhi Government in the
administration of the State, the number of Rajya Sabha seats allotted, creation of exclusive  cadre of Officers
for Delhi State, security and public order, land and housing, etc.
5.1The  Chairman requested the Home Secretary to send the replies to the queries within seven days.
                (The witnesses then withdrew)
6.   The Committee, then, decided to have in-house discussion on the Bills and adjourned at 12.10 P.M. to meet again on
13 October, 2003.
XXXI
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING
        The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 16 October, 2003 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shri Pranab Mukherjee----Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.   Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
   3.  Shri Motilal Vora
   4.  Shri B.P. Singhal
   5.  Shri Janeshwar Mishra
   6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan
   7.  Shri Drupad Borgohain
        LOK SABHA
   8.   Begum Noor Bano
   9.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10.  Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
11.  Shri M.O.H. Farook
12.  Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
13.  Shri P.H. Pandian
14.  Shri Subodh Roy
15.  Shri Anadi Sahu
16.  Shri P.A. Sangma
17.  Shri Manabendra Shah
18.  Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
19.  Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
20.  Shri Ramjilal Suman
21.  Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
22.  Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
23.  Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
24.  Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
        Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
        Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
        WITNESSES
        
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
   1.  Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
  2.   Shrimati  Rita Acharya, Deputy Secretary
1.    The  Chairman placed the State of Delhi Bill, 2003 and the Constitution (One- hundred and Second
Amendment) Bill, 2003 before the Committee for further discussion in the light of the comments/replies received from
the Ministry of Home Affairs on the points/issues raised earlier in the Committee.
2.    As regards the State of Delhi Bill, 2003, a  Member expressed his views on the provision for a separate
cadre of officers for the State of Delhi, stating that the Central Government should be vested with the authority to post
officers in the State as and when the need arises as per the existing arrangement instead of having a separate state cadre.
He was of the view that expertise of officers belonging to other state cadres could prove immensely valuable to the State
of Delhi keeping in view its status of being the National Capital. He, therefore, was of the firm view that there should
not be any provision for a
separate cadre of officers for Delhi.
2.1Another Member sought clarification from the  Government with regard to maintaining a distinct identity
of Delhi as the capital of India. He reiterated his strong view that the status of Delhi as the national capital should be
clearly stated in the Bill.
2.2   Another Member demanded that in view of a large number of people belonging to Scheduled Tribes staying in
Delhi, a provision should be made in the Bill for reservation of two seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Delhi for them.
        (The Committee, adjourned at 11.26 A.M. and re-assembled at 11.50 A.M.)
3.     *                                               *                                                      *
3.1 *                                                *                                                      *
4.   *                                                *                                                      *
4.1*                                                *                                                      *
4.2   *                                                            *                                                                   *
5.     *                                                            *                                                                   *
6.     *                                                            *                                                                   *
7.     A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8.     The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.55 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on 28 October, 2003.
 
 
***Relates to other matters.
 
XXXIV
THIRTY-FOURTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 30 October, 2003 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shri Pranab Mukherjee----Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
   2.   Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
   3.  Shrimati Ambika Soni
   4.  Shri B.P. Singhal
   5.  Shri Drupad Borgohain
   6.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
   7.  Dr. L.M. Singhvi
        LOK SABHA
   8.   Shri Adhi Sankar
    9.   Begum Noor Bano
10.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
11.  Shri M.O.H. Farook
12.  Shri Rajen Gohain
13.  Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14.  Shri Subodh Roy
15.  Shri Anadi Sahu
16.  Shri P.A. Sangma
17.  Shri Manabendra Shah
18.  Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
19.  Shri C.K. Jaffer Shariebf
20.  Shri Ramjilal Suman
21.  Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
        Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
        Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
        WITNESSES
        
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
    1.  Shri Dev Swarup, Additional Secretary (CS)
   2.  Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary (CS)
   3.  Shri P.K. Jalali, Joint Secretary (UT)
   4.  Shri B.C. Mandal, Director
   5.  Shrimati Rita Acharya, Deputy Secretary
        
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
      Legislative Department
   1.  Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
   2.  Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
   3.  Dr. S.D. Singh, Additional Legislative Counsel
        Department of Legal Affairs
        Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
2.   *                                                *                                                      *
2.1   *                                                            *                                                                   *
3.     *                                                            *                                                                   *
4.     *                                                            *                                                                   *
4.1   *                                                            *                                                                   *
5.     The Chairman, thereafter, placed the Constitution (One-hundred and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State
of Delhi Bill, 2003 for discussion and clause-by-clause consideration thereof.
6.    At this point, a Member sought clarification from the Government with regard to the definition of the
area of the National Capital of the country once Article 239AA got deleted as per the Constitution (One-Hundred and
Second Amendment) Bill, 2003.
6.1The  Additional Secretary. Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed  legislation had not in

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
many words proclaimed that NDMC area would be the national capital territory of India and sought Committee’s advice
in the matter.
7.     Another Member demanded that a provision for representation of the tribal/hill people in
Delhi Legislative Assembly should be made in view of the substantial percentage of tribals/hill
people from different parts of the country residing in Delhi.
7.1 As per  the suggestion of the Member, the Committee agreed to recommend to the Government to
examine the position to make relevant provisions for representation of the tribal/hill people or to ensure that certain
directive in the matter be issued at the time of piloting the Bill in the Parliament.
8.       The Committee, thereafter, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Constitution (One-Hundred and Second
Amendment) Bill, 2003.
Clause 2
8.1      Clause 2 pertains to omission of the words "The National Capital Territory of Delhi and" appearing in the Explanation in article 54 of
the Constitution.
8.1.1    The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 3
8.2      Clause 3 pertains to deletion of articles 239AA and 239AB of the Constitution.
8.2.1    The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 4
8.3      Clause 4 pertains to insertion of article 371J after article 371I of the Constitution regarding special provisions with
respect to the State of Delhi.
8.3.1  The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
8.4      Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change.
9.       The Committee, then, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the State of Delhi Bill, 2003.
 
***Relates to other matters.
 
Clause 2
9.1      Clause 2 defines various expressions used in the proposed Legislation.
9.1.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 3
9.2      Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the new State of Delhi.
9.2.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 4
9.3      Clause 4 proposes to amend the First Schedule to  the Constitution by way of inserting “29.Delhl.  The
territories specified in Section 3 of the State of Delhi Act, 2003” after entry 28 under the heading “The States”.
Similarly, it seeks to omit “Delhi” from the heading “The Union Territories”.
9.3.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 5
9.4      Clause 5 proposes to empower the Government of the State  of Delhi to alter, after the appointed day, the
area or boundaries of any  district or other territorial division within the new State.
9.4.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 6 and 7
9.5      Clauses 6 and 7 provide for the allocation of three seats in the Council of States to the State of Delhi by
way of continuing the  representation of three seats in the Council for the existing Union Territory  of
NCT of Delhi for the new State also. The sitting Members from the State of Delhi in the Council of States will be

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
deemed to be duly elected and will represent in new State for the unexpired term.
9.5.1  The Committee adopted the Clauses without any change.
Clause 8
9.6       Clause 8 proposes to continue the representation of seven  seats in the House of the People for the
existing Union Territory of NCT of  Delhi for the new State also. The parliamentary constituencies of
the existing  Union Territory shall be deemed to be the parliamentary constituencies of the  State of
Delhi.
9.6.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 9
9.7       Clause 9 provides that the sitting members of the House of the People representing the constituencies on the
appointed day shall be  deemed to be elected and will represent the new State.
9.7.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 10
9.8       Clause 10 provides for a Legislative Assembly for  the State of Delhi consisting of a total number of 70
persons to be chosen by direct election and the consequent amendment to the Second Schedule to the Representation to
the People Act, 1950. Assembly Constituencies of the existing Union Territory of NCT of Delhi shall be deemed to be
the Assembly Constituencies of the new State of Delhi. The period of five years shall be deemed to have commenced
on the date on which  the duration of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union Territory commenced under
the National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
9.8.1   Subject to the recommendation to be made by the Committee in its Report for consideration of reservation of
seats for tribals/hill people in the Legislative Assembly of the new State of Delhi, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 11
9.9      Clause 11 provides that the existing Speaker and  the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the
existing Union Territory of NCT of Delhi shall be deemed to be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Delhi.
9.9.1     The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 12
9.10      Clause 12 proposes to provide for the continuance of the existing rules of procedure of the Legislature.
9.10.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 13 to 22
9.11     Clauses 13 to 22 provides that the existing High Court of Judicature at Delhi will be High Court of the new State
of Delhi. The detailed provision contained in the clauses follow broadly the relevant provisions of the previous
Reorganisation Acts and deal inter alia  with the powers, function and the procedure to be  followed by the new
High Court.
9.11.1   The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 23
9.12     Clause 23 provides for the authorisation of expenditure by the President before the appointed day and by the
Governor after the appointed day from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Delhi.
9.12.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 24
9.13     Clause 24 provides that the report of the  Comptroller and Auditor General of India for a period prior to
the appointed day should be submitted to the Governor of the State of Delhi.
9.13.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 25
9.14     Clause 25 provides that until Parliament makes law under article 158(3) of the Constitution to provide for allowances and
privileges to the  Governor of State of Delhi, he shall have the  same allowances and privileges as that of the
Administrator of the Union Territory of Delhi.
9.14.1At this point, the Secretary, Legislative Department pointed out that since a law, namely, the Governors
(Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982,  already existed, there was no need for keeping a separate

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
provision for Governor of Delhi in the present Bill.
9.14.2In view of the submission made by the Secretary, Legislative Department, the Committee felt that the clause was
redundant and hence, be omitted.
Clause 26
9.15     Clause 26 proposes to empower the President to determine, by order, the grants-in-aid to the State of Delhi and its share
in the Union duties and taxes.
9.15.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 27 to 43
9.16     Clauses 27 to 43 pertain to the apportionment of assets and liabilities between the existing Union Territory and
the State of Delhi including cash balances, arrears of taxes, right to  recover loans and advances, investments in the
loans, etc. assets and liabilities of State Undertakings, refund of taxes collected in excess, certain deposits, liabilities as
guarantor of co-operative societies, provident fund and pension accounts, Government contracts actionable wrong, items
in suspense, special provision for apportionment of benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability and finally the
power of the Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases of assets or liability.
9.16.1   The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 44
9.17     Clause 44 provides for continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electricity and water
and also the disposal  of sewage on the pattern of section 107 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
9.17.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 45
9.18     Clause 45 provides that a Co-operative Bank which  is newly formed on the appointed day or
within three months thereof in the State of Delhi, may commence and conduct banking business without obtaining license
from the Reserve Bank of  India provided that the bank makes an application for the license within three months of
its formation. Such a bank will continue to function without license until it is granted a license by the Reserve Bank or the
license refused.
9.18.1The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 46
9.19   Clause  46 proposes for a general provision to enable continuance of existing road transport permits and
follows the corresponding provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
9.19.1The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 47 and 48
9.20    Clauses 47 and 48 propose for special provisions relating to  retrenchment-compensation in certain cases
with regard to  registered co-operative societies, commercial or industrial undertakings and special provisions as
to income tax in the  pattern of similar provisions of the States Reorganisation Act,  1956.
9.20.1The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 49
9.21    Clause 49 deals with and provides for the continuance of existing  facilities in certain institutions or
universities to residents in the territories comprising the new State of Delhi.
9.21.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 50 to 53
9.22     Clauses 50 to 53 deal with the provisions relating  to services and generally follow similar provisions as
are provided under corresponding sections of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
9.22.1The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 54 to 59
9.23     Clauses 54 to 59 provide for consequential amendments in the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and also make usual provisions
regarding continuance of existing laws of the Union Territory of Delhi in the new State of Delhi subject to adaptations
of the laws and their interpretations by the Courts and Tribunals, continuance of  authorities exercising

106threport of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/106threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:03]
statutory  functions, legal proceedings, etc. in the pattern of similar provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
9.23.1The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 60
9.24     Clause 60 proposes to make the necessary consequential amendments in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950
and the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territory) Order, 1951.
9.24.1The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 61
9.25     Clause 61 provides that within three years from  the appointed day, the President may, by order, do
anything not inconsistent  with the provisions which appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the
purpose of removal of any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.
9.25.1The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 62
9.26     Clause 62 proposes to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
9.26.1The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 63
9.27     Clause 63 provides for the repeal of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
9.27.1   The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
The First Schedule
9.28     The First Schedule  provides for amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 by way of
substituting the figures “XXIV” appearing in paragraph 2 with the figures “XXV” and  inserting “Part XXV ----
Delhi” after Part XXIV in the Schedule.
9.28.1   The Committee adopted the Schedule without any change.
The Second Schedule
9.29     The Second Schedule  provides for amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order,
1951 by  way of substituting the words and figures “Parts I to III” appearing in paragraph 2 with the words and
figures “Parts I to II”.  It further provides for omission of the words “Any reference in this order to a
Union Territory  in Part I of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory  constituted
as a Union Territory as from the first day of November, 1956” appearing in paragraph 4, and substituting the
words and figures “Part II” and “Part III” with  the words and figures “Part I” and “Part II”, respectively. The
Schedule also provides for omission of the words and figures “Part I- Delhi” and renumbering Part II and Part III
in the Schedule  as Part I and Part II, respectively.
9.29.1The Committee adopted the schedule without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
9.30    Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change.
10.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11.      The Committee adjourned at 12.10 P.M.