I 
I 
I 
,J 
{ 
• 
I I 
I 
! 
C.S. (H.A. 89) 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME· AFFAIRS 
.,J ·~ 
• 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE LOKPAL BILL , 1998 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBR UARY, 1999) 
(LAID IN THE LOK S ASI!A ON TH E 25TH FEBRU ARY, 1999) 
RAJ YA SABIL\ SEC RETARIAT 
NEW D ELHI 
FEBRU A R Y, 1999/ FALGUN A , 1920 (SA KA) 
f 
I 

• 
[ 
~ 
t • . - ~ 
CONTE:-:TS 
l. CoMYOSITION OF THE CoMMn-ree 
2. Rt!PORT 
3. RliLEVANT MINUTEs oF THE M ei!T INOS Of' Tt1c CoMMnTEE 
4. i\NNUXURES 
1 Tho:: Lo kpal Bill, 1996 
11 The Lokpal Bill, 1998 
Ill ''Statement on the Lokpal Bill, 1998" received from the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions indicating there in the 
provisions in the 1996 Bill, recommendatio ns of the Committee 
made thereon and the decisions taken by the Government to accept/ 
reject/modify them . 
. --~ s. . - > " • 
------~.:....-_ . ....._.,.. 
PAGES 
(i)-{ii) 
1- 12 
13-26 
27-52 
53-74 
7~97 
• • ~ 
l ' l 
! 
t 
' . ,, 
i; 
............ 'r:i~-~ 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ha nsraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Sures h Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanth a ppa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiab Naid u 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri Prafull Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
11. Shri 1 aneshwar Misra 
12. Shr i Drupad Borgohain 
13. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
•14. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
••15. Shri Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19. Shri Vijuy Goel 
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidya V!Shnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar Hegdc 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrima ti Meira Kuma r 
27. Slui Rav i Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
29. Shri C. K. Jaffer Sharief 
30. ~ lui Nedu rumalli Janardhana Reddy 
31. Shri lshvarbha i Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shri Mo tilal Vora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar 9\Jbba 
34. Shri Sudhir Giri 
35. Shri Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivaas3n 
38. Mohd . Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
' Nominal«! wilh cffcc1 from lllb June, !998 
• ' Non1ina1ed wilh cffcc1 from lllh AuguSI. 1998 
(i) 

--
::. ..... 
$; -
I I I 
I. 
I. 
(ii) 
39. Shri La lu Prasad 
40. Sh.ri A bdul Ghnroor 
41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajin:~gi 
43. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
4-1. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
@45. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRET ARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint s~cretnry 
Shri Tapnn Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
@ Nominotcd with effect !rom 26th June. 1998 

r 
REPORT 
!, the Chairman of the Dcpartment -rel;.llcd Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs, having been authorised by the Comm inee to present the Report on its 
beha lf, present this Fiftieth Report of the Committee, wh.ich rel:ltes to the Lokpal Bill, 
19981• 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
referred! the Lokpal Bill 1998, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 3rd August, 1998 and 
pending therein, to the Committee for examination and Report by the 11th December, 1998. 
It was also desired by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha that the recom mendations of the 
Committee of Privileges (Eleventh Lok Sabha) as contained in its Report on "Ethics, 
Standards in Public Life, Privileges, facilities tO Members and other Related Matters," 
relating to Lokpal and the Lokpal Bill, 1996, may also be considered by the Standing 
Commillce. 
2.1 1l1c above reference was considered by thc Committee in its meeting held on 8th 
December, 1998. The Committee recalled that the Lokpal Bill, 19963 containing 35 clauses 
was referred to the earlier Committee on 25th September, 1996. It was noted that the earlier 
Committee considered- the Bill for seven and half months in twelve sit tings spread over 
nineteen hours. Hundred and ten Memoranda on the provisions of the Bill were received 
and sixteen witnesses were heard. The Committee presented its Fortieth Report on the Bill 
to Parliament on 9th May, 1997. 
2.2 After some discussion the Committee felt that it would not be possible for it to 
complete examination of provisions of the Lokpal Bill, 19984 and submit its Report within 
the stipulated time i.e. 11th Decembe r, 1998. Accordingly, Chairman, Rajya Sabha was 
requested to grant extension of time to the Committee, upto the last day of the first week of 
the 1999 Budget Session of Parliament, for presentation of its Report on the Bill. The 
request for extension of time was kindly granted and notified in the Rajya Sabha Bulletin 
Part II No. 37154 dated 18th Decemb er, 1998. 
3. The concept of having an institution like the Lokpal arises from the need for 
rcdressal of citizens' grievances. The term Lokp<ll is akin to tho Engl ish term 'Ombudsman' 
which has been described in Chamber's Diction ary as a 'grievance man'. Ombudsman means 
an official who is appointed to investigate complaints against the administration. In other 
words, Ombudsman is an officer who investigates complaints of citizens of unfair treatment 
meted out to them by·· Government Departments and suggests remedy thereof, if he finds 
that a complaint is justified. The institution of Ombudsman came into being in 1713 in 
Sweden when 01ancellor of Justice was appointed by the King to act as an invigilator to 
look into the functioning of the wnr time Govemment. In the year 1809, provision was made 
for the appointment of Ombudsman by the legislature. The institution remained mainly 
confined to the Scandinavian countries such as Finland and Denmark. In 1962, New Zealand 
I Publis..'Jcd in the G:uettc: of India Exlr:tordin3ry, Part 11 . Sc:ction 2. dated the 3rd August, 1998. 
~ ~:j:x;:eb~;) I.P:uti~mentary BuJJe:ain Pan 11. dated the 7rh December, 1998 . 
.. Annexure • n. 
1 
I 
~ 
' ' 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Department-re lated Parliamen tary Standing Commiuec on 
Home AffJ irs, having been authorise d by the Commiuee to prese nt t he Report on its 
behalf , prese nt this Fiftieth Repon of the Committee, which relat es to the Lokpal Bill, 
19981• 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Departme nt-re lated Parliame ntary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Spea ker, Lok Sabha, 
referred 2 the Lokpal Bill 1998, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 3rd August, 1998 and 
pending therein, to tbe Committee for examination and Report by the lltb December, 1998. 
Ir was also desired by the Chai rman, Rajya Sabha that the recommendations of the 
Committee of Privileges (Eleven th Lok Sabha) as conta ined in its Report on "Ethics, 
St andard~ in Public Life, Privileges, facilities t o Memb ers and other Related Matters, " 
relating to Lokpa l and the Lokpal Bill, 1996, may also be considered by the Standing 
Committee. 
2.1 The above reference was cons idered by the Comm ittee in its meeting held on 8th 
December, 1998. The Committee recalled that the Lokpal Bill, 19963 containing 35 clauses 
was referr ed to the earlier Committee on 25th September, 1996. lt was noted that the earlier 
Committee cons ide red the Bill for seven and half months in twe lve sittings spread over 
nineteen hours. Hundred and ten Memoran da on the provisions of the Bill were received 
and sixteen witnesses were beard. The Committee presented its Fortieth Report on the Bill 
to Parliament on 9th May, 1997. 
2.2 After some discussion the! Committee felt th3t it would not be possible for it to 
complete exam ination of provisions of the Lokp al Bill, 1998
4 
and subm it its Report within 
the stipulated time i.e. 11th December , 1998. Accord ingly, Chainnan , Rajya Sabha was 
requested to grant extension of time to the Committ ee, upto the last day of the first week of 
the 19.99 Budge t Session of Parliament, for presentation of its Report on the Bill. The 
request for extension of time was kindly granted and notified in the Rajya Sabha Bulletin 
Part ll No. 37154 dated 18th December, 1998. 
3. The concep t of having an institution like the Lokpal arises from the need for 
redrcssal of citizens' grievanc es. The term Lokp"l is akin to the English term 'Om budsman' 
which has been described in Chamber's Diction ary as a 'grievance man'. Ombudsman means 
an official who is appointed to investigate com pl3ints against the administra tion . In other 
words, Ombudsman is an officer who investigates complaints of citizens of unfair treatment 
meted out to them by·· Government Departments and suggests remedy the reof, if be finds 
that a complaint is justified. The institu tion of Ombuds man came into being in 1713 in 
Sweden when Chancello r or Justice was appointed by the King to act as an invigilator to 
look into the function ing of the war time Governm ent. In the year 1809, provision was made 
for the appo intment or Ombuusman by the lcgis luture. The insti tution remained mainly 
confined to the ScJndi navian countr ies such as Finland and Denmark. In 1962, New Zealand 
I Publish~d in the G::Jzc:tte of lndi;.t E:ur:sordinary, Pan n. Section 2. <bted lhc lrd August, 1998. 
: ~::x;r~b~a I.P~rli:amentary 8ulle1i.n P:~rt II, dated the 7th December. 1998. 
" Annex:urc: • fJ, 
1 
I 

!
Ill 
l
lo 
I, 
I. 
''• 
II 
I
I 
. I 
II 
2 
also adopted the system of Ombudsman. A slightly modified ver1ion of the institution in 1 
form of the office of P~rliamentary Commissioner was adopted by Great Britain through 
Act of Parliament in 1967. This was followed by other countries such as Canada, Austral 
U.S.A., France and several newly independent countries of Africa und Asia' 
4. A s tudy of the system of Ombudsman or similar institutions in Sweden, Un it· 
Kingdom, Zambia and Nigeria brings into focus the fact that they m'ainly looked in 
complaints of mal-administration there and Ministers etc. do not seem to have been broug 
within their purview. However, in Denmark all adminisu:ative mauers concerning aU units 
State administration including Ministers and in Norway administrative aspects of acts · 
Ministers have been brought within the purview of Ombudsman. ln Tanzania and Uga n< 
the areas of jurisd icarion for the institutions which are known as Anti Corruption Squad ar 
inspector General of Government, respective ly , are mainly targeted at corruption and abm 
of public office. The thrust of the system of Ombudsman as obtain ing in these countries 
mainly on red ressal of public grievances arising mainly out or their complaints of ma 
administ ration. 6 
5. ln so far as lndia is concerned, animated di$Cussions both inside Parliament as we 
as outside took place preceding examination of the issue by the Adm inistrative .Refvrm 
Commission on the need for setting up an Ombudsman like institution to investigate an• 
report on complaints perta ining to corruption. Coupled with this was the felt necessity ro 
the establishment of an independent authority for the redressal of public grievances. Th· 
idea, however, could not be formalised till the Admini strative Reforms Commission in it 
interim .Report submitted in 1966 suggested that: 
"The ::.peci:~l circumsta nces relating to our country can be fully met by providing fo1 
tw.: special institutions for the redress of citizens ' grievances. There should be on' 
authority dealing with complaints against the adm inistrative ucts of Ministers 01 
Secretaries to Government at the Centre and in the States. There should be anothc 1 
authority in each State and at the cenue for dealing with complaints against the 
administrative acts of other officia ls ..... The setting up of these authorities should not, 
however, be taken to be a complete nnswer to the problem of redress of citizens' 
grievances. They only provide the ultimate set-up for such redress as has not been 
available through the normal departmental or governmental mach inery and do not 
absolve the department from fulfilling its obligations to the citizen for administering 
its affairs without generat ing, as far as possible, any legitimate sense of grievance. 
Thus, the administration itself must play the major role in reducing the area of 
g.rievances and providing remedies whereve r necessa ry and feasible ..... when this 
mach inery (in-buih departmental machinery) functions effec tively, the number of 
cases wh ich will have to go to an amhority outside the Ministry or the Depa rtment 
should be comparative ly small in nurnber.'' 7 
6. Taking cue from the recommendations of the Administrative .Reforms Commission 
made in its interim .Report, attempts were made by previous Governments tO establish the 
institution of Lokpal by introducing Bills in the Lok Sabha in the years 1968, 1971, 1977, 
1985, 1989 and 1996. However, on each occasion, except in the year 1985, the Bilb lapsed 
' Fortieth Report ol Commiuec on Home Afbirs on the L<>kpal BiiJ, t996 prc;cnte~ <a the Rajya Sabh> on 
9.5.97 and !:tid in the I.Ak Sabha on the ..,me day , paro 4 
' Ibid, pora 5. 
7 Quoted from pl>I'O 6 op ell. 
• 

3 
due to dissolution of the concerned Lok Sabha before their e nactment . The Lok pal Bill, 
1985 was, however, withdrawn by the Gove mmem after its introduction. 
7. The objective for setting up of this institution as stated in the Stateme nt of Objects 
and Reas ons appe nded to the Bill, is to enabl e the citizen to have recour se to a convenient 
and e ffective forum for detennination of complaints and thereby save him from pursuing his 
remedy through the process of courts, which may prove expensive or dilat ory and may not 
facilitate in speedy determinat ion. 
8. The Lokpal Bill, 1996 as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 13th September, 1996. was 
referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home affairs for 
examination and report. The Commiltcc after careful consideration of the prov isions o f the 
Bill and taking into consideration the views/sug gestions recei ved by it from different 
quarters, had made recommendations in 31 clauses of the Bill. As already stated earlier. the 
Bill in all contained 35 clauses . 
9. Following arc the salien t featu res of the Lokpal Bill, 1998:-
(i) The institution of Lokpal will be a three member body conststtng of a 
Chairperson and two Members. The Chatrperson and the Members shall be 
drawn frorn the judiciary. 
(ii) The selection for appointmen t as Chairperson and other Members shall be made 
after obtaining the recommendations of a Comm ittee consisting of the vice· 
Pres ident of fndi3 as Chairman, the Prime Minister, the Spea ker of the House 
of the People, the Hom e Min ister, the Leader o f the House other than the 
House in which the Prime Minister is a Member or Parliament, the Leader of 
the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya 
Sabha, as members. 
(iii) The appointment of the Chairp e rson and Members of the Lokpal shall be made 
by the Pres ident by warnnt under his hand and se31. 
(iv) The following categori es o f person s have bee n brought within the purview of the 
Lokpal: -
(a) who holds or has held the office of the Prime Minister , Minister, Minister of 
· State o r Deputy Minister or the Union; 
(b) who is or bas been a member of either House of Parliament. 
(v) The Lokpal will deal with complaints against the public functio naries, as 
mentioned above, for commission of any offence punishable under tbc Preven­
tion of Corruption Act, 1988. 
(vi) The Chairperson or the Member, as th·e case may be, shall have to resign before 
entering upo n his office, if he is a Member of Parliament or of the Legislature 
of any State or Union Territory; or if he holds any office of trust or profi!. In 
case h e is connected with any political party he will huve to sever his connection 
therewith . 
(vii) The Chairperson and Member shall hold office for a term of 3 years from the 
dace on which eoch enters upon hos office or until anaining the age of 70 yc3rs, 
which.:ver is earl ier. On ceasing to hold office the Chairperson and every 
Memb~r shall be ineligible for reappo intment in the Lokpal as well as further 
employmcni to any office of profit under the Government of India or the 
Government of a State. 

I, 
, I 4 
(viii) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his office except by an 
order made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after in<!uiry made by a Committee as has been prescribed in Clause 7 
of the Bill. 
(Lx) The Lokpal can requisi tion the services of any officers or investigating agencies 
of the Government for conduct ing the inquiries. 
(x) The Lokpa l will not :ook into a compl3 int which has been referr ed for inqu iry 
under the Commissions of inquiry Act, 1952. 
(xi) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any compl aint if the complaint is made after 
the expiry of 10 years from the date on which the offences mentioned in such 
complaint is alleged to have been committed. 
(xii) Every inquiry shall be conducted by the Chairperson and the Members sitting 
jointly and the place in which such inqu iry is conducted shall be deemed tO be 
an open court. In exceptional circums tances and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, such inquiry may be conducte d in camera. 
(xiii) The Bill lays down a specific time frame of six months within which the Lokpal 
should complete th~ inquiry to ensure that action on the complaint is taken to 
its logical conclusion withou t much delay. This period of six months could be 
extended for a further period of six months for reasons to be recorded in writing 
to complete the inquiry. 
(xiv) The Lokpul sha ll present annually to the President a consolidated report on the 
administra tion of this Act and the President shall as soon as may be and in any 
CJSC not later than 90 days (rom the rece ipt of such report cause the same 
together with an explan3tory memoran dum to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
(xv) The Bill makes it mandatory for the Members of Parliament and their families 
to declJre their assets and liabilities annually. 
(xvi) The Bill has a provision to deal with situation where intentional insult or 
interrupt ion is caused 10 the Lokpal. It also conta ins provis io ns relating tO 
power of the Lokpal to try certain offences, to take action in case of false 
complaints and also conferment of additional functions on the Lokpal by the 
President. 
(xvii) It has been ensured that the Lokpal functions without fear or iavour . 
10. A comparison of the Lokpal Bill, 1998, and Lokpal Bill, 1996, in the background of 
recommendations of the previous Comminee on Home Nfairs on the 1996 Bill shows that 
the Lokpal Bill, 1998, incorporates severa l recommendations of the previous Committee. 
While the earlier Comm iuee made recommendat ion in 31 clauses of the 1996 Bill, in 21 
clauses, Government have fully accepted the recoallnendations of the Comm ittee. ln respect 
of 2 clauses recommendations of the Committee have been accepted with some modifications 
while in case of 3 clauses recommendations have not been accepted. ln respect of 3 clauses, 
provisions of t:wo Bills, are identical. 2 clauses in the 1998 Bill are new. 
• 54501 R.SI F-2·8 

• 
5 
11. A scrutiny of the clauses of the two Bills shows that: -
(i) Clauses 1,3,6,7,10 to 21,23 to 25, 28 and 32 of the Lokpal Bill, 1998, are exactly 
in accordance with the recommendations of the previous Committee on the 
corresponding clauses of the Lokpal Bill, 1996; 
(ii) Pro·•isions relating to clauses 2, 29 and 31 of the Lokpal Bill, 1998, are the same 
as they were in the Lokpal Bill, 1996; 
(iii) Clauses 8 and 26 are new provisions incorpo rated in t he 1998 Bill. Under clause 
5 of the 1998 Bill which pertains to provision regard ing ineligibility of 
Cha irpe rson and Members of Lokpal to hold other offices, membership of the 
Legislature of a U nion Territory has been added to the existi ng prov isions oi 
clause 5 of the Lokpa l Bill, !998. The provisio n r elating to hold ing the office of 
Lokpal by Cha irperson and Members upto the maximum age of seventy years is 
also a new provision under clause 6 of the Bill. 
(iv) As regard clauses 4 and 27 of the Lokpal Bill, 1998, recommendation of the 
predecesso r Commiuee in the matter have been accepted with some modifica· 
tions. ln clause 4, two more members besides those suggest~d by the previous 
Committee, viz. The Minister in charge of the ;l.linistry of Home Affairs in the 
Government of India and the Leader of the House other than the House in 
which the Prime Minister is a Member of Parliament have been includec:J in the 
Committee which is to recommend names of the Chairperson and ,Members of 
Lokpal. In clause 27, tho previous Committee had recommended deletion of 
sub-clause (2) of the corresponding clause 30 of the Lokpal Bill, 1996. In the 
1998 Bill, slight modification has been made in the sub-clause to the effect that 
instead of the provision "save as otherw ise provided in this Act, no proceedings 
o r decision of the Lokpal shall be liable to be challanged, reviewed , quashed or 
called in ques<ion in any court", the provision "Save as otherwise provided in 
this Act, no proceedings or decision of the Lokpal shall be cal!ed ' in question in 
any Court" has been made. 
(v) The recommendations of the previous CommiHee with regard to corresponding 
provisions of clauses 9, 22 and 30 of the Lokpal Bill, 1998 have not been 
accepted by Government and they stand as they existed in the Lokpal Bill, 1996. 
With regard to corresponding clause 9 of the 1998 Bill, the Committee had 
recommended that in order to remove any app rehension regarding delay in 
providing services of any officer from concerned Governments, steps may be 
taken to ensure that the services of officers, etc. to the Lokpal are provided with 
due promptness and necessary procedure in this regard may be provided in t he 
rules to be frame d under this Act. With regard to correspondi ng c lause 22 of the 
1998 Bill, t he previous Committee had recommen ded t hat the clause may be 
deleted and in respect of corresponding clause 30 of the present Bill, the 
Committee had recommended deletion of sub-clause {b) of that clause (i.e. 
cl-33). The Committee had recommended that powers may be given to Lokpal 
to take suo moco notice of cases of corruption by public functionaries. 
11.1 A statement captioned "Statement on the Lokpal Bill, 1998" received from the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions indicating therein the provisions in 
the 1996 Bill, recommendations of the Committee made thereon and the decisions taken bv 
the Government to accept/reject/modify the recommendations, may be perused ;t 
Annexure III. 3 
• Annexurc·ll! . 
' 

- , -- ~ 
I I 
•I 
6 
12. [n its meeting held on 5th January, 1999 the Committee set down to consider the 
Lokpal Bill, 1998 and also the recommendations of Commiue e of Privileges (Eleventh Lok 
Sabha) as contained in its Report on E thics, Standar ds in Public Life, Privileges, facilities to 
Members and Other Related Matters', relat ing to Lokpal, as desired by the Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha. 
12.1 The relevant recommendations of the Commi ttee of P riv i l ~ges (Eleve nth Lok 
Sabha) as contained in its report cited above, have been reproduced below: 
"It is the considered opinion of the Commirtee of Privileges that the Lokpa l may be 
empowerd to deal only with the complaints which fall under the provisions of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
The Committee recommends the following procedure for investigation of the above 
mentioned complaints under :he Prevention of Corruption Act.:-
(i) Lokpal may enqu ire into all cases against Members of Parliament falling under 
the provisio ns of the Prevention of Corrup tion Act; 
(ii) Comp laints may be fi led with the Lokpal either directly or through the 
Comm ittee on E thics and Privileges or may be refer red to the Committee by the 
Spea ker/House; 
(iii) Where complaints under the Prevention of Corruption Act are filed with the 
Commillee on Ethics and Privileges, the same may be straight away referred by 
the Chairman of the Committee to the Lokpal for investigation and report. 
(iv) After due investigation on all such com!'laints, the Lokpal may forward its report 
and findings to the Speaker. Lok Sabha; 
(v) The Speaker may refer all such reports to the Committee on Ethics and 
Privileges for suggesting requisite action; 
(vi) The Comrniuee on ethics and Privileges may report back to the Speaker with its 
suggestio ns for action on such m atters; and 
(vii) The Speaker may then cause the Report of the Lokpa l with due suggest ions for 
actio n made thereon by the Committee on Erhics and Privileges, on the Table of 
the House. 
In view of the foregoing the Committee of Privileges recommends that the Lokpal Bill, 
1996 may be suitably amended. 
The Committee of Privileges also recommends that all other ethics related complaints 
may be solely death with by the Committee on ethics and Privileges." 
12.2 The Commit tee then heard the Secreta ry, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions on the various provisions of the Bill. The Secretary infonned the Committee 
that all the recommenda tions of the previous Comm ittee have been taken into consideration 
while d rafting the Lokpa l Bill, 1998 and in fact tbe major ity of the recommendations hav e 
been accepted and incorpor ated in it. The Secretary then went on to make a brief 
presentation on various provisions of the Bill . 
• 

7 
13. In the said meeting of the Committee reference was also made to the observations 
and recommendations as con tained in the First Report of the Ethics Committee of the Rajya 
Sabha presented to the House on 8th December, 1998. The following observations/ 
recommendations of the Eth ics Committee were particularly cited in the Committee's 
meeting:-
"6. T he Committee does not favour rbe idea of subjecting the Members to the 
disciplinary authority of an agency outs ide the jurisdiction of the House. The 
Committee has noted the provisions e«isting in this regard in seve ral coounonwealth 
countries and in the U.S. Congress and is in favour of making the Ethics Committee a 
permanent institution in the Rajya Sabha. it is the considered view of the Committee 
that it should be made compulsory for the Me;,bc rs to declare their assets and 
liabilities and those of their immediate family which includes spouse', dependant 
daughters and dependant sons before the Committee . The Committee should place 
these statements on the Table of the House. The Committee would constantly guide 
and give advice to the Members on questio n of propriety and conduct." 
14. The Committee then drew the attention of the Secretary of the Ministry to the 
Supreme Court judgement dated 17th April, 1.998 in the case of P. V. Narashimha Rao vs. 
State wherein it has been pronounced as follows:-
"We have reached the conclusion that Members of Parliament and the State 
Legislature a re pub lic servants liable to be prosecuted for offences under the said Act 
(Prevent ion of Corruption Act, 1988) but thnt they cannot be prosecuted for o[fences 
under sections 7, 10, 11 and 13 thereof because of want of an aut hority competent to 
grant sanction thereto. We ente rtain the hope that Parliament will address itself to the 
task of removing this lacuna with due exped ition. " 
15. It was then stated in the meeting of Stb January, 1999 that since the presentation o f 
the Report of the previous Committee o n the Lokpal Bill , 1996, three important 
developments have taken place, namely:-
(a) Report of the Comminec of Privileges (Eleventh Lok Sabha) as cited above; 
(b) Supreme: Court judgement dated 17th April, 1998 adjudging the Men1bers of 
Parliamen t as public servants; and 
(c) The First Report of the Ethics Committee of the Rajya Sabha where in it had 
incer alia observed that it did not favou r the i de~ of subjecting the Member s to 
the disciplinary authority of any agency outside the jurisdiction of the House and 
that it was in favour of the Ethics Commi11ee as a perma nent institution in tbe 
Rajya Sabha . 
• 

L 
8 
15.1 The Committee was thus of the view that the Lokpal Bill, 1998 should be 
considered in the light of these developments and Government should formulate its views on 
each of the above items before proceeding further with the Bill. 
16. Committee then discussed and raised queries on various prov1s1ons of the Bill 
namely-establishment of Lokpal (Oause 3), appointment of Chairperson and Members of 
Lokpal (Oause 4), ineligibility of the Chairperson · and other Members for further 
employment on ceasing to hold office of Lokpa l [Clause 6(2)], staff of Lokpal (ce luse 9), 
jurisdiction of Lokpal (Clause 10), comp lain ts made to Lokpal (Clause 12), submission of 
Repo rt by Lokp al (Clause 17), punishment for failing to furnish returns of assets by 
Members (Clause 18), action in case of false complaints (clause 22) etc. 
16.1 The Secretary replied to the various queries. 
17. The Committee further considered the Bill in its meeting held on the 18th January, 
1999. The following three basic issues were raised therein:-
(i) Rationality of bringing Members of Parliament within the purview of Lokpal In 
view of the Supreme Court jud gernent dated 17th April, 1998 in the case of P.V. 
Narsimhn Rao vs. State adjudging the Members of Parliament and State 
Legislatures as Public Servants liable to be prosecuted under the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988; 
(ii) Views and recomm~ndations of the Committ ee of Privileges (Eleventh Lok Sabha) 
as contained in its Report on Ethic:s, Standa rds in Public Life, Privileges, Facilities 
to Members and other Related Matters' regarding procedure to be followed by 
Lokpal in investigating cases of corruption under the Prevention of Corr uption 
Act; and 
(iii) Views of ethics Committee of the Rajya Snbha as contained ln the First Report 
wherein it had not favoured the idea of subjecting the Memb ers to the disciplinary 
authority of an agency outside the jurisdiction of the Rouse. 
17.1 Members expressed differing views on these issues which inter alia included that:-
(a) in view of the Supreme Court judgement bringing the reby Membe rs of Parliament 
within the definition of Public Servant under the Prevention of Corruption Act 
there was no need for bring ing the Members of Parliament within the jurisdict ion 
of Lokpal as it would tantamount to double jeopardy; 
(b) Members of Parliam ent should not be subjecte d to the disciplinary authority of an 
agency outside the jurisdiction of the House in consonance with the views of 
E thics Committee which is a permanent institution of the House; 
(c) Subjecting Members of Parliament to an outside disciplinary authority would 
affect the suprem acy of Parliament; and 
(d) the re was need for establish ing the insritut ion of Lokpal as corruption had 
increased manifold in high places after independence and there bad been general 
perception that persons holding nigh offices were not being punished . 
• 
I 
I 
I 
! 
' j 
• 

r-
9 
(e) by establi shing the institution of Lokpal the supremacy of Parliament 
would not be eroded as it would be a creation of Parliament. The 
supremacy of Parliament would in effect be re-iterated with the 
establishment of Lokpal. 
18. The Commiuee, accordingly, recommends to the Govern ment t o examine the three 
basic issues mentioned in para 17 above and the views expressed by the Members thereon 
(para 17.1. Supra) before proceeding further with the Bill. 
18.1 "The Committee notes that the motions regarding consideration and adoption of the 
First Report of the Ethics Committ ee of the Rajya Sabha were moved in the House by the 
Chairm a n of that Committee on 17th December, 1998. However, the discussion thereon was 
deferred by the House. The Committee i.s of tl1e view that it will be appropriate to let the 
House first resume discussion on the Report of the Ethics Committee and arrive at n decision 
on the recommendations contuined therein before the Government proceeds further with the 
Bill." 
19. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 
1998. 
20. The Committe e considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on the 19th 
February, 1999. 
21. The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in 
the Bill arc given below:-
Cl3use 4 
21.1 Clause 4 p rovides tha t the Chairper son and other Member s of Lokpai shall be 
appointed after obtaini ng t he recomme ndations of a Commillee consisting of the Vice­
President of 1ndia, the Prime !Vtinister, the Speaker of the !-louse of the People, the Home 
Minister, the Leaders of the Opposition in the House of the People and the Council of 
States and the Leader of the House other than the H ouse in which the Prime Minister is a 
Member. 
21.2 The Committee, however, observed that in the last five decades there had been 
Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha only for eleven years. The Committee noted that 
according to rules, any party failing· to get less than ten percent of the total number of seats 
in the House could not be recognised as a party and the Leader of such single largest party 
in opposition to the Government could not be recognised as Leader of Opposition.The 
Committee further noted that there might arise a situation when there would be no Leader 
of Oppositio n in either of the Houses. The Committee, therefore , recommends thai an 
apropriate explanation should be add~d to this clause to suitably deal with such situation. The 
Committee feels that in such an eventuality the lender of the single lar gest group in opposition 
to the Gover nment in th~ concerned House could be included in th~ Comm ittee recommendi ng 
the names of Chairpe rson and Members of Lokpai. 
2l.3 Subject to this, the clnuse is adop ted. 
Clause 6 
21.4 Clause 6 inrer alia provides that on ceusing to hold office the chairperson and every 
other Member or Lokpal shall be ineligible for reappoin1111ent in the Lokpal and further 
employment to any office of profit under the Government of [ndia or the Government of a 
State. 
2L5 The Commit tee, however, recommends that along with these provisions, the 
chairpe rson and Members of Lokpa l should also be made ineligible for the gubernntori3 1 posts 
• 

10 
and diplomatic assignments, like Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Administrators of Union 
Territories etc. after ceasing to bold their respective of(ices. In other words U1ey should be 
debarred from holding any office under the Government of India. 
21.6 Subject to this, the clause is adopted. 
Cl:wse 8 
21.7 Clause 8 provides that due to occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or owing to his absence on leave or 
otherwise, the Pre sident may, by notification, authorise one of the Members to act as the 
Chairperson until the appointment of a new chairperson/resumption of duties by the 
Chairperson. 
21.8 The Committee feels that it will be better if some definite criterion be laid down for 
authorising a Member of Lokpal for acting as its Chairperson in the event of occurrence of 
vacancy therein. It recommends that in such a situation the senior most Member should be 
authorised to discharge tbe functions of the Cha irperson. 
21.9 Subject to this, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 9 
21.10 Clause 9 deals with the staff of the Lokpal and the powers of the Lokpal to utilise 
the services, inter alia, of any investigating _agencies of the Government and of any other 
agencies_ 
21.11 The Committee in its Fortieth Report on the Lokpal Bill, 1996 bad i11ter alia 
expressed the apprehension that the provision relating to seeking the concurrence of 
concerned Governments for securing services or any officer may delay the investigation. 
Hence, the Committee is of the view that in order to remove any apprehensions oo this score, 
steps may be taken to ensure that the services of officers etc. to the Lokpal are provided with 
due promptness and necessary procedure in this regard may be provided in the rules to be 
framed under this Act. 
21.12 The Committee noted that this recommend ation of the previous Committee had 
not been accepted by the Government on the ground that the existing provisions were found 
tO be more flexible . 
21-13 ln this context the representative of the Ministry submitted that the Lokpa l was a 
new institution and was in the evolutionary stage. New conventions would have to be built 
by the State Governments and the Centre vis·a-vis the Lokpal. 
21.14 The Committee, however, reiterates that necessary procedure in this regard mny be 
provided in the rules to be framed under this Act so as to ensure that the servic~ of 9fficers, 
etc. to the LokpaJ are provided wiU1 due promptness. 
21.15 Subject to this, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 18 
21.16 Clause 18 provides for declaration of assets and liabilities by Members of 
Parliament. Sub-clause (4) of the clause provides that if a Member of Parliament fnils to 
furnish a return of all assets owned by him and members of his family and all Ji~bilities 
incurred by him and members of his family before the Lokpal within the prescribed period 
he shall not sit or vote as a member of either House of Parliament until he furnishes such 
return and a written communication is received by the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case 
may be, from the Lokpal to that effect . 
• 

I 
11 
21.17 Doubts .were expressed about the constitutional validity of sub-clause (4). It bas 
been felt ihat the said provision will violate Article lOS of the Constitution dealing with 
powers, privileges and immunities of Parliament and its Members. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that this provision may be re-examined by the Government and opini ·on of 
Attorney General may also be obt ained . 
21.18 Subject to this, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 22 
21. 19 Clause 22 provides for action taken by the Lokpa l in the case of false complaints. 
Sub-clause (2) of the clause prov ides for Imp risonment for a term which shall not be Jess 
tha n one year but which may extend to three years and also to fine which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees to the complainant in case of a false comp lainc. 
21.20 Members exp ressed apprehensio n thm due to" the stringent provisions of 
pun ishment in case of a false comp laint , peop le would not come forwa rd to file complaints 
against pub lic functionar ies because the com pla inant would not be sure whether he would be 
able to prove the charges levelled against the publ ic f unctionary or not. In th is co ntext it was 
sta ted that as per clause 13 the Lokpal would d ismiss the complaint at the preliminary 
scru tiny stage if it was manifes tly false and vexatio us. If ttle complaint was· no t dismissed 
then ihe Lokpal would proceed with the enquiry and tuke evidence etc. Howeve r , if ihe 
com plai nant was not able to p roduce sufficient evide nce then his comp laint may be held as 
false and aurac t punishment unde r clause 22. 
21.21 l n this context, it wus also mentione d tha t the intention of clause 22 was to 
d iscourage frivolous comp laint agains t the highest pol itical funct ionaries like tne Prime 
Min ister and Members of the Council of Minist ers nnd that was why deterren t punishment 
had been provided. 
21.22 1n the light of the pr opositio n ahove , the Committee feels th3t there is a need for 
r eco ncilin g between discourag ing the people from lodging comp laint and protecting publ ic 
functio naries fro m frivolous complaint s . It is felt that the clause should attract punishment 
only in those cases where m ala fide intention of the complainant in fi lin g the comp lai n! is 
proved. Th e Comm ittee thus recomm ends that t.his clause may be suitably amended. 
21.23 S ubj ect to this, the clause is adopted . 
Clause 25 
21.24 Clause 25 provides for the d isposa l of depos its made by the comp lainants in 
pursuance of the provisi ons of clause 12 and puyrncnt of compensa t ion o r reward to the 
complainant in case all or any of the allegations made by him in the compla int have o r has 
been substant iated either who lly or partly and hav ing regard to the expenses incurre d by him 
in relation ·to the proceed ings in respect of such complai nt and all other relevant 
circum stances of the case the lokpa l feels sa tisfied that he deserve s to be compensated or 
rewarded. 
21.25 A point was r3ised by some Members whe ther the prov isions relat ing to criminal 
liabi lity under clause 22 of the Bill where the compl aina.ot was requ ired to pay fine if his 
complaint proved to be a b lse one an d the civ il liab ility under cla use 25 where Lokp al decide s 
to pny compensation to tho: compbinant when the c harges levelled by him aga inst the public 
functionary arc substan tiated wholly or partly, could be brought under one clause. At this , 
the repccseut~tiy e of the Min i~t ry submitted t h'H the Mini stry would consider whether the two 
clau ses could be brought together uuder one clause . The Com mittee directed the Ministry tc. 
exan tine the rnauer . 
21.26 Subject to this, the clau se is adop ted . 
54501 RS 1 F-l·.'\ 
' 

I 
12 
Clause 30 
21.27 Sul:K:lause (b) of clause 30 bars any inquiry suo moru by the Lokpal into cases of 
corruption by public functionaries coming to his notice through media or otherwise. It was 
brought out that the earlier Committee while exami ning the Lokpal Bill 1996 had felt on this 
issu e that the basic objective of the crea tion o f an institu tion of Lokpal was to 'clea nse public 
li fe from the scourge of corrupt ion and therefore , the Lok pa l sho uld not be fettered in being 
barred from jurisdiction to make inqu iry upon its own knowledge and information. The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Lokpal should be given powers to take 
suo moru notice of cases of corruption by public functionaries. The Government has, 
however, not accept ed that recommendation of the Committee. 
21.28 Citing rhe recommendatio n of the previous Comm ittee an opin ion was exp ressed 
that Lokpal should be given powers to make an inqu try suo mow. 
21.29 The repr esentative of the M inistry submitted that r.o court in the country could 
look Into anything suo moru and give a verdict on that. In case of a grievance connected 
with an executive action redressal could be sought only on the basis of an applicauon. Tne 
representative further explained that if some authority took cognizance of a case suo motu it 
would lead to the question of bias and other assoc iated problems. That was why though the 
earlier Committee had recommended de let ion of sub-cl ause (b), the Government retained 
the same. 
21.30 Alter hearing the explanation of the representative of the Ministry another view 
was expressed that if sub-clause (b) were to be deleted it would cause serious problems. It 
was further argued that if this provision was taken away it would be interpreted as if the 
Lokpal had suo mow powers and could use it. 
21.3 1 In view of the divergent viewp oints expr essed in rega rd to sub·clau se (b), the 
Committ ee is of the opinion that it will be better to leave t he ma tter for the Parli ament. 
22. Clauses 2, 3, 5, 7, 10 to 17, 19 to 21, 23, 24, 26 to 29, 31 =nd 32 are adopted by the 
Committee without any change . 
23. Clause 1, the E nacting Formula a nd the Title are adopted witb some changes which 
are of conseque ntial or draft ing nature , n<Jmely '1998' and 'Forty·nin tb' to be subs tituted by 
'1999' and 'Fift ieth', respect ively. 
24. Su bject to pnra s 18 and 18.1 supr:l the Committee reco nun ends that th e Bill be 
passed arter incorporatin g the amendments sugges ted by it. 
:-lEw DEt-Ht ; 
February 25, 1999 
• 
PRA . .'-1.-\.8 !vfUKHERJEE 
Cl!alfman, 
Commiuee on Home Affairs 
SASOI RSI F-3·8 

. . 
• 
RELEY Pu'1 MINUTES OF THE MEETI:-<'GS OF THE COMMITTEE 
' XV([ 
SEVENTEENTH t>lEETING 
The Commiltee met at 3.30 J'.M. on Tuesday, the 8th December, 1998, in Committee 
Room No. 'A' , Ground floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
l'v!EMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri Praful! Goradia 
5. Shri S. Yiduthalai Yirum bi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
8. Shri Yaidya Vishnu Datt 
9. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
10. Smt. Meira Kumar 
11. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
12. Shri Motilal Yora 
13. Shri Sudhir Giri 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
16. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
SECRE TARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, linder Secretary 
Shri Ma~esh C. Tiwari , Commiuce Officer 
• 
"Minuh!i of First to Six;eenth Meetings o! 1hc: Committee r~late to some: other matters. 
• • "0 1niued portion relate to some other matters. 
13 
' •"-__; . -:·· .... ··.-.· ... 
• 
• 

.· --
14 
2. At the outset the Chairman informed the Committee that he had received a letter 
dated the 7th December, 1998 [rom the Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha informing him that 
the Lokpal B ill, 1998 had been referred by Hon'ble Chairman in consult3!ion with Hon"bl~: 
Speaker, Lok Sabha, to the Committee for examination and report by llth December, 1998. 
The Chairman also informed the Committee that Hon 'ble Chairman had also desired that 
the recomme:~dations related to Lokpal made by the Committee of Privileges, Elevemh Lok 
Sabha, on 'Ethics, Standards in Public Life and Other Rela ted Matters' may also be 
considered by the Sta nding Committee. • 
2.1 The Cbainnan, then recalled that the Lokpal Bill, 1996 was refe rred to the 
Committee on 25th September, 1996. That Bill comai ned 35 clauses. lt was noted that the 
earlier Committe e considere d the Bill for seven and a half months·, in twelve sittings spread 
over nineteen hours. That Committee received 110 Memoranda on the provisions of the Bill 
and heard sixteen witnesses. The Committee presented its Fortieth Report on the 1996 Bill 
to Parliament on 9th May, 1997. The Commiuee also noted that out of the 35 clauses in the 
1996 Bill, amen dments w ere recommended in as many as 30 clauses. From a quick 
comparison of the pro visions of the 1996 and the !998 Bills, it had been found that out of 
the 30 recommendations of the Committee, 23 bad been fully accepted , 2 had been partially 
accepted and 5 recommendations had not been accepted by the Government. It had also 
been found that apart from the recommendatio ns of the Committee, certain new provisions. 
had been incorpora ted in the 1998 Bill which were of incidenta l and proced ural nature. 
2.2 M<'mbers, however, expressed their views on the subject. Reference in this context 
was made to the First Report of the Ethics Committee, Rajya Sabha presented to the House 
on 8th December, 1998. The Chairmu n, thereafte r, quot ed from Pura 6 of the Rep ort 
wherein the Ethics Committee did not favour the idea of subjtcting the Members to the 
disciplinary authority of an agency outSide the jurisdiction of the House and that it was in 
favour of making the Ethics Committee a permanen t institution in the House. 
2.3 After some discussion the Commi ttee felt that it w ould noi be possible for it to 
complete examination of the provisions of the Lokpal Bill, l998 and submit its report within 
the stipulated time, i.e ., 11th December, i998. Accordingly , the Comminee authorised the 
Chairman to convey its views to Hon' ble Chairma n, Rajya Sabha in this regard . 
3. • • • 
3.1 • • 
3.2 • • 
3.3 • • 
3.4 • 
3.5 • • 
3.6 • • • 
4. • 
5. • 
6. • 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M. 
• • •Omhccd portion rcl:ue to some other matters . 
• 

• 
·xx 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee mei at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 5th January, 1999, in Committee 
Room ·A·. Ground Aoor, Parliament House Anncxc, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwoj 
3. Shri Surcsh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanurnanthappa 
5. Shri M. Vcnkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Prafull Goradia 
7. Shri K.M. Saifulla 
8. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
9. Shri Drupad Borgoh ain 
10. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
11. De (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SADHA 
12. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
13. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
14. Shri La! Bihari Tiwari 
15. Shri Pushpadan Shambhuoan Gadnavi 
16. Shri Vaidya Vrshnu Datt 
17. Slui Aslant Kumar Hegde 
18. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
19. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
20. Smt. Mcira Kumar 
21. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
22. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
23. Shri !Sedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
24. Shri lshvarbhai Khodnb hai Chavda 
25. Shri Motilal Vora 
26. Shri Samar Choudhury 
27. Shri Chad a Suresh Redd~ 
28. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
29. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Commit tee Off icer 
•Minu:cs of Eighteenth and :Sinc:tccnth meetings or the Committee rel3te to s.omc other matters. 
15 

... -
-. ~~-------------
16 
R.EPRESE!'\TATIYES OF MINISTRY OF PERSOI\1\"EL, PUBLIC GRIEVAl'\CES A:'-1) 
PENSIO~S 
1. Shri B.B. Tan don, Secretary 
2. Shri Shankar Agganval, Director 
2. • • 
2.1 • 
3. • 
4. • • • 
4.1 • • 
5. The Chairman then apprised the Members about the extension of time granted by 
Hon'ble Chairman to submit reports of the Commiuee to Parliament on Lokpal Bill, 1998 
and Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 till the last day of the first week of the next 
Budget Session. 
6. • • 
7. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the Secretary and the ether officers of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grie vances and Pensions and asked him to make a 
presentation on the Lokpal Bill, 1998. The Secretary, accordingly made a brief presentation 
on the various provisions of the Bill. 
7.1 The Chairman and Members of the Committee referred to the observations and 
recommendations contained in the Report of the Commi ttee of Privileges (Eleventh Lok 
Sabha) on 'Ethics, Standards in Public Life, Privileges, Facilities to Members and other 
related matters' as also the First Report of the Eth ics Committee of Rajya Sabha. The 
Committee then wanted the Secre tary to apprise the Committee of the views of the 
Government on the observatio ns/recomm enda tions contai ned in the Report of Ethics 
Committee of Rajya Snbha. 
7.2 Some Members then stated that :since the presentation of the Report of the prev ious 
Committee on the Lokpal Bill, 1996, two important developments had taken place. namely, 
(a) the Supreme Court Order dated 18.4.1998 defining Members of Parliament as 'public 
servants' and directing the Government to amend the definition of 'public servant' in the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 so as to include MPs thereunder; and (b) the 
observation of the Ethic s Committee in its First Report wherein it had been stated inter alia 
that it did not favour the idea of subjecti ng the Members to the disciplinary authority of an 
agency outside the jurisdiction of the House and tha t it was in favour of making the Ethi cs 
Committee a permanent institution in the Rajya Sabba. Members were, thus, of the view 
that the Lokpal Bill, 1998 should be oonsidere d in the light of these developments. 
7.3 Several Members then raised a number of queries with regard to the various 
provisions of the Bill relating to jurisdiction of Lokpal, staff of Lokpal, complaints made to 
Lokpal, submission of repor ts by Lokpal, punishm ent for failing to furnish the return of 
assets by Members , frivolous com plaints etc. 
·· · omattcd portion relate to $0mc othe : matccl"$ . 
• 

• 
17 
8. The Secretary replied to various points raised by the Members. The Chairman also 
directed the Secretary to furnish written repl ies, on the points raised by the Members. The 
Chairman directed the Secretariat to circulate the copies of the report of the Committee on 
the Lokpal Bill, 1996 amongst the Members. 
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept . 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 Y.M. to meet again on Wednesday, 
the 6th January, 1999. 

-
• I 
-,-
" 
I
I ~I II 
f 
I 
'XXlll 
TWENTY·TIDRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 18th Janua ry, 1999, 1n Commiucc 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexc, New Delhi. 
ME!I-lDERS PRESENT 
!. Shri Pranab Mukherjec--Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hnnsraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
5. Shri Juneshar Misra 
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
7. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri tal Bihari Tiwari 
11. Shri Vijay Goel 
12. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dau 
13. Dr. Swa mi Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
14. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
15. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
16. Shri lshvarbhai Khoda bhai Chavd a 
17. Shri Motilal Vora 
18. Shri Mohan Singh 
19. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fat mi 
20. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
21. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satisb Kumar, Joint Secre tary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESEI'I'TATIVES OF THE MI.~1STRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSIONS 
1. Shri V. Lakshmi Rattan, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D .K. Samanraray, Director 
2. • 
'"Minutes a( Twcnly·Fjrst and Twc:nly Second meetings or the Committee: relate to S(lmc other matters . 
.. . Omiuc d portions reJau; 10, some other matttrs. 
18 
• 
• 

r 
) 
19 
3. Odore taking up Clause-by-Clause: consideration of the: Lokpal Dill, 1998, the 
Chairman observed that the earlier Committee had considered the Lokpal Bill, !996, in 
detail and presented a comprehensive Report to Parliament containing a large number of 
recommendations, most of whi<:h were accepted by the Government and incorporated in the 
1998 Dill. However. he raised the following three basic issues and sought the views of the 
Members thereon: -
(i) Rationality of bringing Members or Parliamen t within the purview of Lokpal in 
view of the Supreme Court judgement dated 17th Apr il, 1998, 1n the case of P.Y. 
Nars imha Rao vs. State adjudging the Members of Par liament 3nd State 
Legislatures as Pub lic Servants li:1blc to be prosecuted under tile Prevention or 
Corrupt ion Act, 1988; 
(ii) Views and recommendations of the Comm ittee of Privileges (Eleventh Lok 
Sabha) as contained in its Report on 'Ethics. Standards in Public Life, Privileges, 
F:1cilities to Members and other Related Matters· regardmg procedure to be 
followed by Lokpal in invcsttgating ca~cs of corruption under the Prevention oi 
Corruption Act; and 
(iii) Views of Ethics Commillcc of the Rujya S~bha as contained in the First Report 
wherein it had not favoured the idea of subjecting the Members to the 
disciplinary authority of an agency outside the jurisdiction of the House. 
3.1 Members expressed differing views on these issues which inter ulia included th:Jt-
(a) in view of the Supre me Court judgement bringing thereby Membe rs of Parli;uncrll 
with in the defi nition of Public Servant unde r the Prevenhon of Corrup tion Act 
there was no need for bringing the Members of Parliament within the jurisdiction 
of Lokpa l as it wou ld wntamount to doub le jeopardy; 
(b) members of Parliament should not br.: ~ubjct:led 10 the disciplinary authority of an 
agency outside the jurisdiction of the House in consonance with the v1ews of 
Eth1cs Comminee which is a pcrm .. nent institution of the Hou.~e: 
(c) subjecting Members of Parliament to an outside disciplinary authority would affect 
the supremacy of Parliament; 
(d) there was need for establishing the institution of Lokp<tl as corruption had 
increased man ifold in high places after indepe ndence and there ha() been gencr~ l 
P"r~o.: p t i o n tha t pr;rson~ holthng high offices we re noi being pun ished; and 
(e) by eswblis hing the institution of Lokpal the sup remacy of Parl iamc.:nt would not 
be eroded as it wou ld be a creation of Parli~ment. The supremacy of Parliament 
would in effec t be re- iterated with the establishment of Lokpal. 
3.2 The Committee, thcreilftcr. decided to recommend to the Government to c~amine 
these three basic issues as mentioned in para 3(l)-(ii) above and the view~ exprcs,c:d by the: 
members thereon before proceeding further with the Bill. 
4. The Committee then took up Clause·by-Clau>e consideration of the Lokpal Bill. 
1998. 
'-.. .. 

• 
20 
Cl:wses 2 & J 
4.1 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
CJ:wse 4 
4.2 Clause 4 provides that the Chairperson and. other Members of Lokpal shal l be 
appointed after obtaining the recommendations of a Committee consisting of the Vice· 
President of india, the Prime Minister, the Speaker o f the House of rhe People. the !lome 
Minister, the Leaders of the Opposition in the House of the People and the Council of 
States and the leader of the !lous e other tha n the House in which the Prime Minist<.:r is a 
Member. 
4.3 The Committee, however, observed that in the last rive decades there had been 
Leader of Oppositio n in the Lok S~bha o nly Cor eleve n years. The Commiuee noted that 
accord ing to rules, any party failing to get less than ten per cent of the total number of seats 
in the House could not be recognised as a p.arty and the Leader of such single larges t party 
in oppos ition to the Government could not be recognised us Leader of OppoSition. The 
Commiuce further noted that there might arise a situation when there is no Leader of 
Opposit ion in either of the Houses. The Committee, therefore, recommended that an 
~ppropria t e explanation should be added to this clau~c to suitably deal with such o situation. 
·n1c Comm ittee felt that in such a situation the leader of the single largest group in 
opposition to the Government in the concerned House could be included in the Comm ittee 
recommending the names of Chairperson and Members of Lokpal 
4.4 Subje ct tO this, the c lause was adopted . 
Clause 5 
4.5 Clause 5 was adopted witho ut any cha nge. 
Clause 6 
4.6 Clause 6 inter alia provides that on ceasing to hold office the Chairperson and every 
other Member of Lo kpol shall be ine ligible for reappo intme nt in the Lokpal and further 
employment to any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of a 
Swte. 
4.7 The Committee, however, recom mended that alongwith these provisio ns. the 
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal should also be made ineligible for the gubernatorial 
posts and diplomatic assignment, like Ambas sadors, High Commissione rs e1c. after ceasing 
to hold offices. In other words they should be debarred from holding any office under the 
Governme nt of India . 
4.8 Subject tO this, the clause was adopted . 
Clause 7 
4.9 Clause 7 was adopted wuhout nny change. 
5<501 RS I F_,·B 
• 
• 
I 
I 

- .. 
i 
21 
Clause 8 
4.10 Ch&use 8 provides that d ue to occ urrence of an y vaca ncy in the office of the 
Ch~irperson by reason of his dc:uh, re:.ignation or owing to his absence on leave or 
otherwise. the President may, by notification. authorise one of the Members tO act as the 
Chairperson until the appoinllnent o f a new Ch:&irperson/resumption of duties by the 
Cha irpers o n. 
4.11 The CommiHcc felt that it would be better if som" definite criteri on be la id down 
fo r :~utho ri si n g a Member of Lokp: 1l fo r a cting us its Chairperso n in the eve nt of occ urrence 
of vacuncy therein . lt recommended that in such a situation the senior most Member should 
b<: authorised to discharge the functions of the Chair'person. 
4.12 Subjec t to this, the clause was :1d0pted. 
C/Duse 9 
4.13 Clause 9 deals with the >taff of the Lokpal and the powers of the Lokpal to utilise 
the services, inrer alia of any investigat ing agencies of the Governme nt and of any other 
agencies . 
-1.14 The Committee in its Fortieth Report on the Lokpal Bill, 1996, had inter alia 
expressed the a pprehensio n that the provis ion re lating to seek ing the con~u rrence o f 
concerned Governments for securing services of any officer may dt:lay the investigation. 
Hence, the Commirtee was of the view that in order to remove any app rehen>Jons on this 
score, steps may be taken to ensure that the services o f officers etc. to the Lokpal :1rc 
p rovided with d ue promptn ess anti necessary p rocetlu rc in th is regard may be provi ded in 
the rul~s to be framed under Lhis ACI. 
4.15 The Com mi ttee not ed th<H this reco mmenda tio n of the prev io us Com mi ttee had 
not bee n accepted by the Governr•ent on t he ground thal the exist ing provisions were found 
to b<! more flexible. 
4.16 [n this context the represen tative of the tvhni" ry 'ubmiucd that the Lokpal was a 
new institution and was in the evolutionary stage. New convention~ woul d have to be built 
by the State Governments and the Centre vis-a-vis the Lokpai. 
4.l7 The Committee, however. reiterated that nccc ssary procedure in this regard may 
be provided in the rules to be framed under thts Act so a> to ensure that the services of 
o fficers, e tc. to the Lokpal are p rovided with due pro mptness. 
4 .l8 Subject to this, the clause was adopted . 
Cl:w~es 10 to 17 
4_l9 These clauses were adopted withou t any cha nge. 

- • 
22 
Clause Ui 
4.20 Cl3use 18 provides for declaratiOn of assel!> and l•ab•li:te> b~ .\lc:mbers of 
Parliilmcn t. Sub·dause (-1) of the clause provides lhat if a Member of Parl •~ mem falls to 
furn"h a return of all assets owned by him and members of his fam1 l ~ and all 1iab11ilics 
incurred by him and members of his family before the Lokpal within the prescribed period 
he shall not sit or vote as a member of either Ho"use of Parliament until he furnishes such 
retum and a writt en communicat ion is received by the Speaker or the Chairman, :ts the case 
may be, {rom the Lokpal to that effect. 
4.21 Doubts were expressed about the constitullonal validity of sub-clause (-1). lt was 
fch that the said provision would v,oi;Jte Article 105 of the Constitution dealing with Powers, 
Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its :'>kmbers . The Commillce, therefore, 
recomme nded that th is provis1on may be re-ex:Jm1ncd by :he Government and opinion of 
Anorney General may also be otlta&ned. 
4.22 Subject to th is the clause was adopted. 
Clauses 19 to 21 
4.23 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
C/:JUse 22 
4.24 Clau se 22 provides for action taken by the Lokpal in the case of false compla ints. 
Sub-clause (2) of the clause provides for imprisonment for a term which sll;~ll not be less 
than one yea r but which may extend to three years and also to fine which may e.xtend to 
fiity thousand rupees to the complainant 10 case of a false complaint 
4.15 ~! embers expressed apprehens ion that due to the stringent provisions of 
punishment in case of a false compla int, people would not come: forward to file complamts 
against public functionaries because the complainant would not be sure whether he would be 
able to p.rove the charges levelled against the public function:&ry or not. In d:is context it was 
stated that as per clause 13 the Lokpal would dtsm1ss the complaint at the preliminary 
scrutiny stage if it was mnn1festly false and vex:~tious . If the compla1nt was not dismissed 
then the Lokpal would proceed with the enquiry and take evidence etc. However, if the 
complamam was not able to produce sufficie nt evidence then his compla1nt may be held as 
[alse and allract punishment under clause 21. 
4.26 In this context. it was also mentioned that the Intention of cbu.'c 22 was to 
discourJge frivolous complaint agamst the highest political functionaries like the Prime 
Minister and Members of the Coundl of Minister\ and that was why deterrent pun"hmcn t 
had been provided. 
4.27 In the light of the propositions above, the Commi!lee felt that there was a need fllr 
reconciling between discouraging the people from lodging complaint and prmecring public 
functionaries rrom frivolous complaints. It was rdt that the clau"~ should attract puni~hrnent 
only in those cases where malafide intention of the complainant m fili:tg the ~:ompl;unt was 
proved. The Committee thus recommended th~t this clau,~ may be 'uiwbly ;•mc:ndcd. 
4.28 Subject to this the clause was ado p ted. 
Clauses 23 & 24 
.:t 29 These clauses were adopted without any change . 
• 

:>f 
:o 
;e 
JS 
s, 
s. 
>S 
0 
IS 
'V 
' d 
e 
" 
0 
lt 
•r 
c 
1l 
IS 
• 
23 
Cluuse 25 
4.30 Clause 25 provides for the disposal of deposits made by the complainants in 
pursuance of the provisions of clause 12 and payment of compensation or reward to the 
compl~tn:lnt in case all or any of the allegJtions made by him in the complaint have or has 
been sl'bstanli3ted either wholly or partly and having regard to the expenses incurred by him 
10 rdation to the proceedings in respect of such complaint and all other relevant circumstances 
of the c~se the Lokpal feels satisfied that he deserves to be compensated or rew~rded. 
4.31 A point wos raised by some Members whethe r the provisions relat ing to crim inal 
!iJbility under clause 22 of the Dill where the complainant wus requ ired tO pay fine if his 
complaint proved to be a false one and tho:: civil liab ility under clause 25 where Lokpal decides 
to pay compensat ion lO the complainant whe1L the charges levelle d by him aga inst the publ ic 
fulll:tiortary are substantiated wholly or partly, could be brought under on~ ~lause. At this, tht: 
rcprc~cnt;ttiv~ of the Ministry submitted that the Ministry would consider whether the two 
cllt!Ses could be brought together under one clause . The Committee direct<::d the Ministry to 
enmint: the matter. 
-1.3::! Subject to this, the clause was adopted 
Clauses Z6 to Z9 
4.33 These dauses were adopted withouL any change. 
CJ:Juse JO 
4.34 Sub-clause (b) of clause 30 b:us any inquiry suo moru by the Lokpal into cases of 
corrup tion by public func ti.onaries coming to his notice through mediu or otherwise. It was 
brought out that the earl ier Committee while examining the Lokpal Bill, 1996 had felt on this 
issue that the b~sic objective of the creation of on institution of Lokpal was tO cleanse public 
life from the scourge of corruption :1nd, thcrefme. the Lokpa l should not be fettered in being 
b;~rrcu from jurisdiction to makc tnquiry upon its own know leuge and information. The 
Comnuttce had, therefore, recommended that the Lokpal should be given powers tO take suo 
moltt notice of cases of corruption by public functionaries. The Government has, however, 
no; acccptcll that recommend~llon of the Commiuee. 
-l.35 Citing the recommendation of tht: previous Cotr.mi:tee an opinion was expressed 
that Lokpal should be given powers tO rnak.c an inquiry suo mow. 
4.36 The representative of the Ministry submitted that no court in the country could took 
into anyttung stto motu and give a verdict on that. In case of a grievance connected with an 
executive a~:tion redre~sal could be >Ought only o n the basis of an application. The 
representative further explainc<.l that if some a<uthority took cognizance of :1 case suo motu it 
wo11id lead tO the question of biol> an<.! other <>ssociuted prob lems. That was why though the 
earltcr Comm ittee had recommenueu <.ldetion of sub-dau se (b) the Govcrnn!clll retained the 
same 
4.37 After h.:anng the expl<ulJtiOn of the representative of the Ministry unother view was 
(Xprc"ed that if sub-cl:wse (b) were to be de leted it wou:d cause serious problems. It was 
further ~tared that if thi, provision \\aS taken away it would be: interpreted as if the Lokp;tl had 
Stw muftt powers and could use it. 
-1 .3S In view of the divergent viewpoints expressed in regard to sub-clause (b), the 
Committee arrived at the condusion that 11 would be better to leave: the mattt:r for the 
Parli.tmcnt. 
• 
-

t 
! 
II 
" . I 
-· 
24 
Cl:wses 31 & 32 
4.39 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause I, the Enacting Formula and tile Title 
4.40 The Comm ittee ado pted Clause 1, the Enacting formula and che Title with some 
changes which were of consequen tial o r drafting nature , namely '1998' and 'Forty-ninth ' to 
be substituted by '1999' and 'Fiftieth'. respectively . • 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. 
• 

r 
I 
'XXVII 
TWENTY·SEVEI'iTH MEETL'IG 
The Commi ttee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, February 19, 1999 in Comminec Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament !louse Anncxc, New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj-in the Chrdr 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
5. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABRA 
6. Shri Kri~hna Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sa tya Pal Jain 
8. Shr i Lal Bihar i Tiwur i 
9. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
10. Muj. G~n. B.C. Khanduri 
ll. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
12. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
13. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
1-1. Shri Motilal Vora 
15. Shri Samur Choudhury 
16. Shri Mohan Singh 
17. Shri C. Sreenivaasaa 
18. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tupan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shn Muhesh C. Tiwari, Committee Orricer 
• • 
2. In the ahsencc of the Chairman, Shri I Iansraj Bhardwaj wus voted to be in the Chair. 
.Minutes o ( Twcnty-fou.tth to Twenty-Si'(lh MceiU1&S or the Commiuc:-e rc:lO!tC to sornc other matters. 
··· omiuc.d ponions relate: ro some other m:mcr:s. 
25 
~ 

I 
I, 
I' 
' I 
I 
26 
3. 
4 . • • • 
5 . . • 
6 . • • ' 
7 . • • 
8. • 
9 • • • 
10 . • • 
11. • • • 
12. The Committee decided 10 present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same 
in the Lok Sabha in the first week of ~he forthcoming Session, on a date to be decided by 
the Chairman. The Committee also decided to lay the Evidences tende red before it in 
connection with the said Bills, on the Table of the two Houses. Accordingly. the Committ~e 
authorised its Cha irman to presenv1ay tbe Rcpom/Evidences in the Rajya Sabha. The 
Comm inee also authorised its Chai rma n to choose another Member of the Committee from 
the Rajya Sabha (besides him) and two Members of the Comm inee from the Lok S<1bha for 
presentation/laying of the Repo rts and Eviden ces in the two Houses. 
13. The Comrninee then adjourned at 12.40 ~.M . 
.. Omitted portions relate 10 some~ other mauers . 
• 

I 
Ml'<"EXUR£-I 
(See para 2.1 of !he Report ) 
A$ .,~em IN l..oK $Al!IIA 
0t1 l3nt S~BER, \996. 
Rm No. 101 of19'Xi 
TilE LOKPAL BILL, 1996 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CL.NJSES 
I. Short title and commencement. 
2. [XtintUOI\S. 
M..cHL'<ERY fOR tNQ<JIRIES 
3. Establ,.hmenl of Lokpal. 
4. Appotntmcnt of Ch .. mun and olhcr member$. 
5. Members to be tnellgible to hold olher offices. 
0. T~r m Qf pfficc and olher condiuons of service of Members. 
7. Removal of a Mcmber. 
8. Staff of Lolcpal. 
J URISDit,ON .-.'m PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OP !NQ\JIRIES 
9. Junsdiction of Lokpal. 
10. Matters not subject to junsdtction of Lokpal. 
II. Compllints. 
1'2. Preliminary s<.'f\ltiny of complaints by Lokpal. 
13. Procedure in respeCt of inquincs. 
14. Power of Lokpal to issue. in certain circumstances. directions foe defett\ng or 
suspending investigation into an offence. 
15. £,idencc. 
16. Search a.'ld set1Ul'C. 
17. Reports. 
0ECI.A1Vo:JO:I OF Ass or.> Al'tl UADII.tn ES 
18. Declaration of a:ss<:ts by ~lembcn of Parliamcnt. 
21 
• -

• 
ll • d I 
•• 
-· . 
. .;.. 
28 
Cuvses 
19. Expendirure on Members to oe charged on the Cnnsolidattd Fund of India. 
20. Secrecy of information. 
21. lmentionalln sult. or inttrruption to. or bringing into disrepute, Lokpal. 
22. Power:!l!_LokpaJ to try certain offences sununarily. 
~., ,.., 
23. D1scJ.9sure of information and publication of false tnformation in respect of 
complaints and procetdings under Lhis Act. 
24. Action in case of false complaints. 
25. Application of Act2 of 1974 . 
26. Bar or prosecution on allegations for proved or not subsunua!td. 
27. Confennent of additional functions or Lokpal. 
28. Disposal of deposit. 
29. Compensation or reward. or bolh. payable in certain C3.SeS to complain3AI. 
30. Proll:Ction of action ~ ill good failb. 
31 . Power to delegate. 
32. Power 10 make rules. 
33. Removal of doubts. 
34. Saving. 
35. Consequential amendment of Act 60 of 1952. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
$450/ RS/ F-S·Il 
• 

• 
Sl F-S·B 
'. 
Bill No. 10 I o ( 1996 
THE LOKPAL Bll..L, 1996 
Bill 
to provu!e for tM <stahlishn-.Lnt oft~ irwitutio n of Lokpa/ to i nquirt into all~ga­
rions of corruption against public jUrlctionariu and for mmurs con~crtd t~rr­with. 
Be It enacted by P:u-Uament in lhe Forty-Seventh Year of the Republic of lnd1a as follows:-
~y 
I. (I) This Act ru~y be called the Lolcpa.l Act, 1996. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Ccnttal Governmcn1 may, by 
noulication in lhc Official GilUite, appoint. 
29 
• 
' .. 
··~ 

• 
30 
2. In lhls Act. ~nless lhc context olherwise requires,­
(a) "Chaimun" me:llls me Ch:urm2ll of lhe Lol::pal; 
(b) "competent aulhori ty'', In reh.uon to--
(i) the Prime Minister, means lhe House of lhc People; 
(ii)a Member of Council ofMini mn. olhc:r lh>n lhePnme Mi o iS~e:. means s 
lhe Prime Minaster; 
(iii ) • Member of Parh>mcnt, other tlun a Minister, me3Jls Lhe Coo neil of 
Sutes In the c:ue of a Mem ber M that Council and the House of the People in 
the case of a Member of Lhat House; 
(c) "complaint" means a complaint alleging that a public funcuooary h:lS 10 
committed any oll'cnce punishable under lbe Pr.....,nlioo of Corruption Act 1988; • 9 olt?IL 
(d) "Lokpa l" means the institutio n establi shed under secti on 3; 
(e). "Member" means a Member of the Lolcpal and ancludes the Chairman 
or lbe Lolcpal; 
(/j "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(t) "public functio nary" means a person who,-
(i) holds. or bas held. tbc office of the Prime Min is:er, Minister. 
l\ltinister of State or Deputy Minister. of lhe Unaoo; 
(jj} is. or bas been, a Member of either House of Patl iamenl. 
IS 
20 
& u blubtnc ot 3. (I} As from tbc comm ence m ent or this Act, tbe"' shaU be esbbti.sbcd , for the 
ofLokp.J purpose o( m:tking lnq • iries in respoct of com plaints under this.,ct, a n Institution 
to be call ed the " Lokpnl". 
Appeinuneat 
ol a..inn.uo 
..d c<h« 
Mc.mbeu. 
(2) The Lokpal shall consist of-
(a) a Chairman who is OJ has been a Chief Justice or Judge of lhc Suprem e 25 
Court; 
~ 
(b} two Members who are, or have been . or qualified to be. a Judge of the. 
· Supreme Coun . 
(J} Every Member shall. before enterin g upon bis offic e, mU.e and subs cribe 
before the Pres ident, or a person appoiatcd in lbat behalf by lhc Prcsadenl. an oath or 30 
•fftr mattoo in the form set out in the Schedul e. 
4. (I) The Chairman a,nd other Members shalr be :tppointed by lbe President by 
w;uranl under his h:md and seal: 
Provtded that every :tppoi~trnent under this sub-se~:tioo sball be made a.fter obtaini og 
the recommendauons of a Commntee consisting of-
(a) the Prime Minister 
(b) Speaker of th~ House of the People 
' 
Chair nun: 
member: 
35 

s 
10 
or19U. 
IS 
20 
) 
2S 
s 
30 
0 
35 
.s 
31 
(c) Minister in-charge of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs in the Government or India 
(d) Minister in-charge of the Ministry o~ 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
in the Government of India 
(e) Leader of the Oppos ition in the 
House of the People 
(!)Leader of the Opposition in the 
Council of States 
(g) Deputy Chauman of the Council 
of Swcs 
member: 
member; 
member; 
member ; 
member: 
Provided further that no sittmg Judge of the Supreme Court or sitting Chief Justi ce 
of a High Court shall be appomted except after eonsultauon with the Chief Justice or 
Lndia. 
(2) No appointment t>f a Chairm3JI or a Member shall be iovalid merely by reason 
of any vacancy in the Commmee. 
S. A Member shall not be a Member of Parliament or a Member of the Legislature 
of any State and shall not hold 3JIY office or tnlst or profit (other than h1s office as 
Memb<r), or be con nected with 311Y political party, or carry on any business, or prac tise 
any profe ssi on and accordingly, before he enters upon his office, a person appoin ted 
as the Member shall, -
(a ) if he is a Membe r of PIIIIiament or of the Legis lature or any State, shall 
resign such membership; or 
(b) if he holds any office or trust, or profit. resign from such office; or 
(c) if he is connutcd with any poliucal patty, sever bis connect1on with 11; 
or 
(d) if he is carrying on :u~y business. sever bis connection (sho rt of divesting 
himself uf ownership) with the conduct and management of such bus1ness; or 
(e) if he is pmctising any profession, cease to practise such profess ion. 
6. (I) Every Member shall bold office for a term of five ye:us from lhe date on 
Which he enters upon h iS office : 
Provided thai he may-
(a) by writing under his hand addressed to the Presid ont, resign his office; 
(b) be remo ·;cd from his office in the manner provided in section 7. 
(2) On ceasing to bold office, a Member sba.Ll be ineligible for further employment 
to any office of profit under lhe Government or India or the Governm ent of a State. 
(J) The salory, allowonees ond other eon.dition.• of servico of-
(i) tbe Chairmon sb all be the some as chose of Cbe Chief Justic.e or 
India; 
• 
Mcmbc:u lQ be: 
melipbk .. hold 
ocher oO"lCt.t. 
Tamoloffiee 
ami Qf.hcr 
c:oodi bOIU of 
XCV><O o( 
Me ........ 

l I 
-· 
32 
(il) other Members shall he the same u those or a Judge or the Supreme 
Court: 
ProYided that such salary shall he In addition to any pension to which 
the Member may be entitled in respect or any P"'ViO"!' service under the 
G<>vemment of India or und er the Government of a State and no deduction 1 
shall be made from such salary on the ground or bis ·bavtng "'<elved any 
retirement gratuity, or on the ground that be received the commuted nlue 
of a portion of the pension, In respect or biJ previoas service: 
Provided further that the salary, allowances and pension payable to, and 
other conditions of service of, a Member Mlall not be varied to his disadvantage 
after his appointment. 
ltoiDOv>l o( , 7, A Member sball not be removed from his office except by an order made by 
Manbor. the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry 
made by the Chief Justice of India or, as the case may be, by such other Judge of 
the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of India may nominate in this behalf. in 
wblch the Member bad been informed of the charges against him and given a 
re:uonable opportunity of being heard in respect or those charges. 
Su.tfal'l..oq>ol 8. (1) Tho Lokpal shall, for the purpose of as.sl.sting II In the dl.scharge of Its 
functions (including verification aod Inquiries In respect or complaints) under 
this Act, appoint a Secretary and such other omcors and employees as the 
President may determine, from time to time, in consul tation wltb tbe Lokpal. 
(:Z) Without prejudice to tbe provisions or sub-se,tlon (1), the Lokpal may, 
ror tho purpose or dealing with any complaints or any classu or complaints, 
se-cor.,_ 
(I) the services of any omcer or employee or Investigating agency of 
the Central.Government or a State Government with the concurr ence or 
that G<> .. rnment, or 
(II) tho nrvlccs or any other person or agency. 
(J) The terms and condiUons otacrvlce or tho omcors and employees referred 
to In JDb·aectlon ( 1) and of the o!fteors, employees, agencies and persons rcfernd 
to in aub-sedlon (2) (lnclud lna nch SjMclal condltlons as may be considered 
necessary Cor eDJibUng them to act without rear in tho discharge of their functi ons) 
shall be such as tbt Pruld.cnt may determine, from tlme to time, In consultation 
with tho Lokpal. 
(4) in the discharge of their fwlctlons under this Act. the Officen aod employ= 
referred to in sub·sectlon (I) and the officers, employees, agencies and persons 
referred to in sub-section (2) shall be subject to the exclusive administrative control 
and direction of the tokpal. 
JtruS D!CTlO!I J..>;D PliOC!I>UltB IS IUtSPIICT 01' INQlo'IJ.IES 
hW<Iiaioo at' 9. (I} Subject to the other provisi ons of this Act, the Lol:pal may·inquire into tny 
t.oq>&l. matter Involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any allegation made in a 
complaint. 
(2) The. Lol::pal may inquire into any act or conduct of any person other than a 
pub tic fw!ctiooary in so far as 11 considers it necessary so to do Cor the PIUJIOSC of its 
inquiry into any sucb allegation: 
• 
60 ol 
60< 
•• 
1 < 
•' 
,. 

I 
60 ort9l2. 
33 
Provided that the Loltpal shall give such person a reasonable opponUDity 
of being heard and to produce evidence in his defence. 
I J) No rn3tter In respect of which a complaint !D•Y be made under this Act sball 
be referred for i nquir~· under the Com111issions of Inquiry Act, 1952, except on the 
5 recommendation. or with the concurrence, of the Lolcpal. 
10. (I) The Lokpal shall not inquire Into any matter concerning any person If any 
Member has any bias in respect of such maner or person and if any dispute arises in 
thi~ behalf, the Presidentshaii; on an application made by the party aggrieved, obtain, 
in such manner as may be prescnbed. the optnion of the Chief Justice or India and 
10 decide the dtspute In conformity with such op1nion. 
12) The LokpaJ shall not inquire into any matter whiCh has bun referred for 
60ol t9l2. inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. on it.s recommendation or with 
its prior concurrence. 
(J) The Lolcpal shall not inquire into any complaint if the compi:Unt is made 
15 after the expiry of live years from the date on which the offence mentioned in sucb 
complaint is alleged to b>ve bun committed. 
M.anct' oot 
tub]Ut LG 
jwVdictioa or 
Lolcpol 
11. 1 I) Any person other than a public servant may make a complauu under this ~"""· 
Act to :he Lokpal. 
Erplar.ation.-For the purpose of this sub·sectlon, "public servant" means-
20 (a) any person who is a member df a Defence service or of a civll service of 
the Union or a State or of an all·lndia service or holds any post co!Uiected with 
Defence or any civil post UDder the Union or a Sta.te; 
(b) any person in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation 
established by or Wider a Centnl, Provincial or Sta.te Act or a Government 
tctl9!6. 25 company, as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
(2) Tbe complaint shall be in the prescribed form and shall set forth particulars 
of the offence alleged and shall be accompanied by fees prescribed, if any, an affidavit 
in support of such putlcu lars and a certificate in· the prescribed form in respect of the 
deposit under sub·sectlon (3) or, if the complaini1Dt is unable to make the deposit, an 
30 application for exemption from the requirement as to such deposit. 
(J ) Tbe complainant sball deposit in such manner and with such authority or 
agency as may be pre.scnbed a sum of one thousand rupee$ tO be available for disposal 
under section 28: 
Provided that the Lokpal may. for sufficient cause to be recorded in writing, 
35 exempt a complainant from the requirement under this sub·sectlon. 
(4)Notwithstanding anything contained In the foregoing sub-sections, any letter 
wriuen to the Lolcpal or, as L~e case may be, the appropriate authority by a person in 
any jail or other place of custody or in any asylum or other place for insane persons 
may, if the Lol<pal or, as the case may~. the appropriate authority is satisfied thatll 
40 is neces.sary so 10 do, be treated :;sa compl>int made in accord.'\!!ce wtth the provisions 
of this section. 

• 
. ' , I 
I 
I 
PTd i m.i nacy 
.Jcruliny of 
compa ...... by 
~ 
P['(.)«dwe io 
rc.$pCC1 of 
inqu~nu. 
,, .i. 
34 
( 5) Notwiwtanding anylhiog coot;uncd in any other enactmen~ it sl\all be the duty of a 
potice officer or olher person in charge of any jail or olher place of custody or of any 
:uylum or olher place for Insane persons to forward, without opcnin,, any letter addressed 
to the Lolcpal or the appropriate au thorny by a petson imprisoned or detained in such jail, 
place of custody, .Sylum or other place. to the Lokpill or lhc appropnate aulhomy wtthout 
delay. 
E.tplanarion-"appr_opriate authority" means any of the authorities which lhc Lokpal 
may, by general or sp<!<:ial order, in writin,. deu:rmine to be appropriate authonues for the 
purposes of this section. 
12. (1) If the Lolcpal is satisfied, after considering a complaint and after malting such 
verification as it dtems appropriate.-
(a) lhat the complaont is not made within the period of live yeats specofied in sub­
scctton (J) of section 1 0; or 
(b) that it cannot make an inquory in respect of the complaint by reason of the 
s 
10 
proviSJons of sub-section ( 1} or sub-section (1 ) of section I 0 or any other provision 1 S 
of this Act; or 
(c) that lhe complrunt is frivolous or vexatious or is not made in good faith; or 
(d) that then: are no sufficient grounds for inquiring into Ole complatnt. 
the Lolcpal shall dismiss thecomptaint after recording i l~ reasons therefor and communicate 
the same-to the complainant and LO the competenr authoriry. 2il 
(1) The procedure for verification in respect of a complaint under sub-~cuon (/) 
shall be such as the Lokpal deems appropriate in the circumsunccs o( lhe case and in 
panicula: the Lokp31 may, tf it deems it necessary so to do, call for Ole comments of the 
public functionary concerned. 
13. (1) If, after the consideration and verification under section 12 in respect of a 25 
complaint, the LokpaJ proposes to conduct any inquiry, it-
(a) shall fonbwith forw31'<1 a copy of the complaint to the competent authonty; 
{b) may make such orders as to the safe CU.Itody of documents relevant to the 
inquiry as it deems lit; 
(c) shall, >1 such time as it-considers appropriate, forward a copy of lhe complaint 30 
to the public fuitctionary concerned and afl'ord him an opponunity to represent his 
case. 
(2) E''tfY such inquiry shall beconductedin ~ra bytheCllairman and the Members 
sitting jointly. 
(3) The Lolcpal shall hold every such in_quiry a.s expeditiously as possible and tn any 35 
c= complete the inquiry within a period of six·monllls from the date of rec<:ipt or the 
complaint: 
Provided that lhc Lokpal may for re~ns to be recorded in writing may complete 
the inquiry within a further period of six monw. 
(4) Save as aforesaid. the procedure for conducttng any such inquiry shall be such 40 
as the Lolcpal considers appropriate in the circumstances of lhe case . 
• 
•m 

• 
[ 
Zoll974 
s 
35 
14. (/)Where the Lokpal is satisfied-
(a} thaliovcsugation by any pohcc officer under !he Code of Cnmin>l Procedure, 
1973, into any offence In rcspeca df wh1ch a complaint ts made or into any mauers 
cor.ntctcd the:eWlth m•y pre;ud1ci>lly affect the ccnduc~ of inquiry undtr tlus Act 
with respect to such complamt; :Lnd 
(I>) L'lat having regard to all the circumstances of the case it would be proper to 
defer sucb mvesugation pend1ng the completion of such inquiry, 
II may, hy order 10 wnting and for rea.son~ to be reco(ded lherein, direct that till !he compleuon 
of such Inquiry or for s11th shorter period as may be specified in the order. any such 
10 investigation sh:lll be deferred or, as Lhc case may be. shall be suspended: 
Provided lhat no such duecuon shall apply with respect to any investigation required to 
be made in pursua.oce of an order ot any court. 
2 ol197• (2) Notw11hsatld1ng anythmg conta1ncd in the Code of Cnmin:ll Procedure. 1973. 1n 
computing. for the: purposes of Chapter XXXVI of that Code. the pc:nod of hm1tauon for 
IS tll<mg cogn1zanceof any_ offence. be1ng an offence the invesugauon'" respea of wh1ch has 
been deferred or suspended by reason of an order under sub-section (I), the date on wh1ch 
such order was made, the penod.duruig whiCh lhe 1nvesugation rema.med deferred. or as Lhe 
case may be, SU$pended by rei~bn of !he order and the d31e on which the order ceased to 
have effec~ shall be excluded_. 
Powc:ol 
l.Dicpal1o 
UJU.c, iC 
«:n.,. 
C\tcum.s'~. 
c!ucalccu for 
dc!t:mcs ex 
nupcadtos 
UI'~UUga.boo 
Ulto All 
otfcGCc 
20 I 5. (!)Subjec t to the provisions of this section, for t.he purpose of any i nqulry (including Ev;<koe.. 
2S 
s oll901 
30 
the verification under section 12), Lhe Lokpal-
(a) may require any public servant or any other person. who. in its opinion is able 
to fumJsh informatiOn or produce documents relevant to such inquiry. to f'u.rnilh any 
such information or produce any such document; 
(I>) shall have all the powers or a civil court while trying a suit under t.he Code or 
Civil Procedure, 1908, ID respect or the following mauers. namely:-
(r) summon111g and enforcmg the attendance of any person an euiTIInmg 
him on oath; 
(ii) requ1t1ng the discovery and producuon of any document; 
(iii) recelvlng evidence on affid:tvits; 
(M requisitioning any public rccord or copy thereof from any court or office; 
( v) is>uing corruntssions for the <!Xaminauon of witnesses or documents: :Lnd 
(vi) such otllcr matters as may be: prescribed 
(2) A ?roaedmg before the Lokpal sh:lll be deemed to be a j!K!ICial proceed lOg with1o 
H ol 1160. 3$ the munmg of s.:ctioo 193 of the lnd1an Pen>! Code. 
(3)Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4).-
·.,._ 
(a) no obligation to m:unt:lin secrecy or orr.er restriction upon UJC disclosure or 
infcrmauon obt:lined by or furnished to Government or any public servant. whether 
• 

•I 
36 
imposed by any enacllllent or by any prOVISion cf law whatevt:t •hall apply to the 
disclosure of information for the purposes of any inquiry (including the veriticatton 
under section 12) under this Act; illld 
(b) lhe Govt:tnment or >ny public servant shall not be entitled, 1n relation to any 
such ver1!ication or inqutry, to any such privit.ge In respect of the producuon of 5 
documents or._!he giving of evidence a.><s allowc<J by<~ n y enactment or by any prOVISIOn 
of Jaw whatever in legal procec:dings. 
(4) !'o person shall be rcquirc:d or aulhonsed by virtt:e oflh1s Ac~oto fwnish any such 
Information or answer any such qucstio~ or pro<Juce so much of any document-
(a) as might prejudice the sccwity, or defence. or international relatloM of India 10 
(including India's relations with tl'.e Government of any other country or wtth any 
international organisation). or the investigation or detection of crime: or 
(b) as might involve the disclosure of procec:dings of the Cabinet of the Union 
Government or of any Committee of such Cabonet: Cabinet of the State Government 
or of any Committee of such Cabinet; and for the purpose of this sub-section, a IS 
certificate issued by a Secretary to the Government of India or Chief SecretilC)' of the 
State Government. as the case may be, certifying that lilly informauon, answer,' or 
ponlon of a document. is of the nature specilied in clause (a) or clause (b) shall be 
binding and conclustve: 
Provided lh:u the Lokpal may require any information or answer or portion of a document 20· 
in respect or which a cerlilicate is issued under this sub-sectlon to lhe effect that It is of the 
nature speeitied in clause (a) to be duclosed to it 1n private for scr~uny and if on such 
scrutiny the Lokpal is utisfied that such certificate ought not to have been lssuc:d, it shall 
doclare the certificate to be of no effect. 
EJ;p!tJntJtior:.- For the pu.-poses or this section, "pubtic servant" shall have the same 2.5 
meaning as in section 21 of the !ndillll Penal Code. •s or 1860. 
Searcl! and 16. (/)If the Lokpal has reason 10 believe that any documents which, in its opinion, will 
xizure. be useful for, or relovant to, any inquiry under this Act. are secreted in any place, lt may 
authorise ii!IY officer subon.onau: to 1t, or any officer of an invesugaling agency referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 8, to search for and to seize such documenu. 30 
(2) If the Lokpalls satisfied that any documents seized under sub-section (J) would 
be evidence for the purpose of any 1nqu1ry under tll1s Act and that it would be necessary to 
retain the document in it.s custody, it may so retain the said docwnent till the completion or 
st>ch inquiry: 
Provided that where such document is se•zed before lherommencement or such inquiry, 35 
the Lokpal shall return the document before lhe exp1ration of a penod of one ye3f from the 
date on which it is seized Wlless such Inquiry has been commenced before such expiration. 
F..xplanasion.-For the purposes of this sub-section. an inquiry in respe"t or a complaint-
(a) shall be deemed to have commenced on the date on which the Lokpal forwards 
a copy of the complaint to the competent authority under clause(a) o_( SJb-section (I) 40 
of section 13; 
(b) shall be deemed to have been completed on thedsteo~ wbicb the Lokpalclo= 
the case under clause'( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 17 or where the Lokpal makes 
• 

37 
a report 10 lhe competent authumy untlcr ciJuse (b) of !hat sub-section, on lhe expiry 
of !he period mcnounetl 1n luh-~c...:hun (JJ of !hat sccllon. 
2 or 197<. (J) The prov1sions of !he Colle of Cnnunol Proceduro, 19i3. rclattng to s.:archcs shall, 
so far as may be, apply to searches under th1s section sulijo:a 10 lhe modilic3uon !hat sub· 
5 section (.5) ofseqion 165 of the said Colle shall have e!Tcct as 1f. for !he word "Magisttate", 
wherever 11 occurs. the words "Lokpol or any officer aulhonsed by it" were subsU!Uled. 
17. (/)If, aller anqwry In respect of a <:omplaint.lhe Lokpal is sat:sfied that-
(a) no allcgahon matlc m the complomt bas been substantiated either wholly or 
partly, >t shall close the ease and antimale the complainant, lhe public functionary and 
I 0 !he competent aulhonty accordingly; 
(b)aJI or any of the alkgauons made in the complaint have or has been substantiated 
e1ther wholly or partly, 11 shall by report in writing, communicate its findings and 
recommendations to the competent aulhority and intimate the complainant and !he 
public functionary about its huving made the report. 
15 (2) The competent aulhorlty in the c~se of a public functionary, other than the Prime 
Minister, shall exam me the report forwarded to it under clause (b) of sub-section (I) and 
communicate to lhe Lokpal, wuhinlh ree months of lhe date of receipt or report, the action 
taken or proposed 10 be taken on the basis of the report. 
(J) The Speaker, in the case of the Pdme Minister or a Member of the House of the 
20 People and the Chairman of the Council of States in the case of a Member of that Council 
Sh3lr7 as soon as may be after and in anycase not later th\Ul ninety days from the receipt of 
report under clause (b) of sub-section(/), cause the same to be l3ld before the House of the 
People or the Council of Stales, as the case may be. 
Explanation.-ln compu11n~ the period of ninety days reforred to in this sub-section, any 
25 period during which the House of the PeopJe or the Council of States, as !he case may be is 
not in session shall be excluded. 
(4) The Lolcpal shall present annually to the P!l:stdeot a consolidated repon on lhe 
admlni~tration of this Act and the Prest dent shall, as sooo as may be after, and in any case 
not later than ninety days from the rece;pt of such report, cause the same, together wtth an 
30 explanatory memorandum. to be laid before each Hcuse of Parliament. 
35 
Explanation.-ln compuung the period of ninety days referred to in this sub-section, any 
period during which Parliament or, as the case may be, either House of Parliament. is no tan 
ses.sion, st.U be excluded. 
0ECLAA.<I10~ OF AsSE.'r$ AND tJABn.mEs 
Reporu. 
18. Every Member of Parliament shall furnish a return of all assets owned by him and 
members of his fnmJ!y and all liabilities incurred by him and the members of his family 
before Lolcpal every year In such form as may be prescribed. 
Oacluuloa. 
.U.tc.tl hy 
Mcmbcuo 
Puli t.ITicot . 
• 

I I 
£~pcadirur~ 
oa. Memb«.r 
to b. chat&ed 
on the 
COQJOtid•tc.d 
Fuod or 
lod1a. 
Scc:rc.cy of 
inform• lioa.. 
Jn~ti¢nl.l 
lniUit, or 
ialemuptioa 
LO, ar bnogiug 
t.oLO 1\Wftputc. 
t..olq>ol. 
Powuo/ 
t..o iq>UIO U)' 
CUUia 
otfcM"e.t 
NJ'MWily. 
19. The s:al2rie:s, aUoW2n<es 2nd pensions payabl e to, or in rupect of, tho Members, 
shall be expenditure charged on th• Consolidated Fund or lndi•. 
ZO. (1) AIIy information obtained by the Lokp:U. or by any orticer, employee, agency 
or person referred to in section 8. In the cours~ of, or for the purposes of, any verification 5 
or inquiry under this Act, and any evidence re;:orded or colle;:ted in connection therewith 
shall be treated as confidential and. nolhwill\standing an)'lhing contained in the lodian 
Evidence Act, 1872, no court shall be entitled tO compel the Lokp:U, or any such orticer, I ol tsn. 
employee, agency or person, to give evidence relating to such information or to produce 
the evidence so recorded or collected. 10 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (I) shall apply to the disclosure of the infotm3tion or evidence 
referred to therean-
(a) for the plllJloses of this Act or for the plllJloses of any action or proceedings 
to be taken on any repon under se.ction 17; or 
(b) for the plll]loses of any proceedangs. for an offence of giving or fabncating 15 
false evidence, under the Indian Penal Code; or ~5 or t860. 
(c) for sucb other purposes as may be prescn'bed. 
21. (I) Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption, to the Lokpal 
while !be Lo~-pa l or any of Its Members is making any verificauon or conducting any 
inquiry under this Ac~ shall ~e punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with line, or with both. 
(2) Whoever, by words spoken or intended to be read, makes or publishes any statement, 
or does any other ac~ which Is c:Uculated to bring the Lokpal into dlsrepute, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term wbich may extend to six months. or with 
line, or with both. 
(J) The provisions of sub-section (21 of secuon 199 or the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, shall apply in relation to an offence under sub-section (I) or sub-section 
(2) as they apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (2) of the said section 
199, subject to the modification that nocomplamttn respect of sucb offence shall be made 
by tne Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Lol:pal. 
Zl. (/) li, at any stage of a proceeding before the Lokpal, it appears to the Lokpal that 
any person appearing in such proceedings had knowingly or wtlfuUy given false evidence 
or had fabricated false evidence with the intenuon that such evtdence should be used in 
such proceedings. the Lokpal may, if s~tisfied that it is necessary and expedaent io the 
20 
l ofl974. 
30 
Interests of justice that the person should be tried summarily for giving or fabricating, as 35 
the case may be, false evidence, take cogniz.ance of the offence and may. ai\cr giving the 
offender a reasonable oppol1l1Jiity of showing cause why he should not be punished for 
such offence, try such olfencler summanly. so far as may be, tn acconhnce wath the 
procedure prescribed for summary trials under the Code ofCnminal Procedure, 1973, and 1 or t974. 
• 

'• 
,<! 
4. 
'•. 
sentence him to imprisonlhent for a term which may extend to three months, or to fine 
which may extend to five ·hundred rupees, or to both. 
(2) When any such offence as is described in section 175, section 178, section 179 
•l or t &60. or section 180 of the Iqdi an Penal Code is committed in the view or presence of the 
5 Lolcpal. the Lokpal may cause the offender to be detai led in custody and may. at any 
time on the same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving the offender 
a reasonable opporrunity of showing cause why lle sbould not be punished under this 
sec~ion, try such offender summarily so far as may be in accordance with the procedure 
l of 197•. prescribed for summary trials unde r the Code oCCriminal· Procedure. 1973 and 
10 sentence him to simple imprisonment for a term wbicb may extend tO one month. or 
to fine which may extend to n ve hundred rupees . or to both. 
(J) In every case tried under this. section. !he Lokpai shall record the facts 
constituting the offence with Lhe statement (if any) made by the offender as well as 
the finding and lhe sentence. 
15 (4) Any person convicted on a trial hel d unde r this sectio n may appeal to lhe High 
1974. Court and the provis ions of Chapter XXIX of the Code of Crimina l Pr~cedure, 1973, 
shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals under this sect ion and the High Court may 
alter or reverse the finding , or reduce or reverse the sen tenoe appealed against. 
E:cptaJtation.-For the purposes of Lhis sub-section, "High Court" means the High 
20 Court within lhe jurisdiction of which the person convicte d ordinarily resides or. carries 
on business or personally . works for gain or lhe High Court within whose juris diction 
lhe order of conviction bas bee n passed. 
(5) The provisions of this section shall have effec t notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
25 23. (I) If any pt:rson prints or publishes any information with ri!S]lcct to any complaint 
under lhis Act (including the identit y of the person making the complaint . the public 
functionary against whom the complaint bas been made and lhe particulars contained 
in the complaint) or with respect to a.ny proceeding, act or thing taken or done or 
purported to have been Ween or done under this Act in relation to such complaint,-
30 (a) where lhe Lolcpal dismisses such compla int under section 12. at any time 
before such dismissal~ or 
(b) where the Lokpal closes the case with respect to such complaint under 
clause (a} of sub-sect ion (I) of se<:tion 17, at any time before such closure; or 
(c) where theLokpal forwards to the competent authority a report of its findings 
35 and recommendations with respect to sucb complain t u.nder clause (b) of Sl!b· 
section (1) of section 17, at any ti.me before the expiry oflhree months from the 
date of receip t of the report by lhe competent authority. or as the case may be, at 
any time before the r~pon is laid before Lhe House of the People or the Council 
of States under sub -section (3) of section 17, 
4Q<>uch person shall be guilty of an offence u.nder Lhis sub-section. 
(2) If any person prints or publishes any information alleging or suggesting that a 
complaint has bee n made under this Act against any public functionary and such 
Information is false, such person shall be guilty Of an offence under this sub-section. 
(3) When >ny offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) is committed, the 
45 Lokpal may take cognizance of the offence and, after giving the offender reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause why he shO\IId not be punished for such offence, try such 
offender summarily so far as may be in accordance with the p;ocedure prescribed for 
• 
Dudo.nh of 
iof~oo 
&.o.d p.~blica.· 
tiOG of bJ..te 
io!orm.3.tloo in 
rcspect·of 
c.ompl.aintJ -.tid 
pcoce.cdi o.gs 
under thu Ac.. 

A.ctioo. io <:::uc 
o( false 
c:oUtpi&inls. 
Appliarioa of 
~'1.2 o( 1974. 
a .. ot 
prUSeCUtioQ oo 
allcga.Liow for 
proved (){ ooc 
tu.bstantiated. 
40 
summary ·trials under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and sentence him to 2oCI9U. 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months. or to ftne which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees .. or to both. 
(4) ln every case tried under this section, the Lokpal shall record the facts constituting 
the offence with the state.ment (if any) made by the offender as well as the findings .llld ~ 
the sentence. • 
(5) Any person convicted in a trial under this section may with the leave of the 
Supreme Court, prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court within thirty days of such 
conviction or within such further period as the Supreme Court may for sufficient cause 
allow and, save as aforesaid, no appeal or revision silalllie In any court against such 10 
conviction. 
(6) the provisions of this section shall have effect notwilhstandmg anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 or t974. 
24. (J) Every person who makes any complaint which is held by the Lokpal to be 
false shall be punishable as provided in sub-section (2). 15 
(2) When an.y offence under sub-section(/) is committed . tho Lokpal may take 
cognizance of the offence and after giving the offernder a reasonable opportunity of 
showing cause why he should not be punished for s uch offence, try such offender 
summarily, so far as may be, in accord•nce with the procedure prescribed for summary 
trials under the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 and sentence him to imprisonment 20 2 oe t 9H. 
for a term which shall not be Jess than one year but whicll may extend to three years 
and also to flne which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and may illso award, out of 
tbe amount .of fine, to the public functionary against whom such false complaint has 
been made, such amount of compensation as the.Lokpallhinks fit. 
(3) In every case tried under lhis section, the Lokpal shall record the facts constituting 25 
the offence with the statement (if any) made by lhe offender as well as the findings and 
the sentence . 
(4) Any person convicted on a uiol under this section may. with the leave of the 
Supreme Court. prMer an appeal to the Supreme Court within thirty days of such 
conviction or wilhin such further period as the Supreme Court may for sufficient cause 30 
auow and, save as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie in any court against such 
conviction. 
(5) TI1e provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2oC !974. 
25. Subject to the other provisions of lhis Act and subject to the modification that 35 
for purpose of tr~nsfer of any case under section 23 or section 24. tllc provisions of 
section 406 of the Code of.Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall alone apply. the provisions 
of the said Code shall •!Jply to proceedings before a l..okpal under section 22. 23 and 
24 and for the purposes of the said provisions of that Code and the said proceedings 
lhe Lokpal shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and shall have all the powers of a 40 
Court of Session. 
26. Notwithstanding anything comained in any otht:r law for lhe time being in force, 
where on an inquiry in respect of a cOmplaiJlt against a public functionary the Lokpal 
or the competent authority has held that any allegations made in the complaint have not 
been proved or substantiated, no prosecution shall lie on any complaint. report, ·15 
info.rmatioo or otherwise and no court shall take cognil:ance of any offence on the basis 
of the same or substantially the same allegations as in the complaint. 
• 
' . .. 

5 
4! 
27. (I) The President may, by order in wriLlng and subjec t to such conditi ons or 
HO>itations as may be specified in the order, require the LokpaJ to inquire into any 
aii~gation (being an allegation in respec t of which a compl aint may be made) specified 
in the order in respect of a public functi onary and, notwithstan ding anythipg contai ned 
iri this Act, the Lokpal shall comply with such order. 
(2) When the Lokpai is to make any inqui ry under sub-section (/}, the Lokpal 
shall exercise lite same powers and dischar ge the same functions as it would in the 
case of any inquiry made on a complaint unde r this Act and the provisions of this Act 
(exce pt sec.tion 24) shall apply accordi ngly. 
10 28. The sum deposited by a complainant under section II sh:UI,-
(a) in a case where the compla int js dismissed under clause (c} of sub-sect ion 
(I) of section 12, stand forfeited to the Central Government; 
(b) if the Lnlcpal, for reasons to be recorded in writing so directs, be utilised 
for comper.sating the public functionary complained agaillst; and 
15 (c) in any other case, be refunded to lbe complainant. 
29. 11 the Lokpal is S3tisfied-
(a) that all or ·any of the allgations rnade in a complaint have or has been 
subst.antiated either wholly or partly; and 
(b) that hav,ing regard to tbe expenses Incu rred by the compl•inant In 
20 relation to the proceedings in re,;pee t or such complaint and all other n:levant 
circum.d.ances of tb~ case the c;omplainant deserves t.o be compensated or 
reward ed, 
the Lokpal shall d<t<rmint tht •mount which shall b• paid to tbt compl~in2nt by 
w:ty of such comptn.~ation or J"ew2rd and the Central Government shall pay, the 
25 amount or :.1mou·nts so determined, to the complainant. 
30. (/) No suit, prosecutjon or other leg.al proceedings shall lie agai nst !.be Lnkpal 
or against any ofiicc r, employee, agency or person referred to in secti on 8, in respect 
of anything which is in good faith done , or ill(ended to be done, under thi$ Act. 
(2} Save as olberwise provided ln this Act, no proceedings or decision of tbe Lokpal 
30 shall be liable to be challenged. re,•iewed, quashed or called in question in any Court . 
.. 
31. The Lokpal may. by general or special order in writing, and subject to sucb 
conditions and limiutions as may be specified therein, direct that any powers conferred 
or duties rmposed on it by or under this Act (except the powers under the proviso to 
sub·section (3) of section 11, tbe power to dis miss a complaillt under sub-section(/) of 
35 section 12, lbe powers to close cases and make reports under section 17 and lbe 
powers under s~tions i2, 23 and 24] may also be exercised or discharged by such of 
the officers . employee s or ·agenc ies referred to •n sub-section(/) or sub-sec tion (2) of 
section 8, as may be specified in the order. 
J! 32 .. (1) The President may, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, make rules for 
40 the purpose of carJJ:ing into effect the-provisions oi this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisio ns, 
such rules may prov ide for-
(a) the manner in which tbe President shall obtain tbe opinion of the Chief 
Justice of lndia under sub-section (I} Of section 10; 
• 
Confumroto( 
additional 
fu.actiGn.'l o( 
L<>l:p<l. 
C-.00. 
or ccw&rd. foc 
b<:<h. p& yabte 
jo c::ertaln case-3 
tQ ecxnpWn· 
""" 
Prot.eetion o( 
&Cti¢u ta.lcct~. ill: 
good foilh. 
r 

f' 
't 
lr 
, I 
•,I '• 
JkmovaJ of 
doubu. 
S•vtng . 
Coc.sccr~ad.a.J 
~ .amcndmc.nt of 
A« 60o'r 
1952. 
~ -····-· _..,_._..,_~....-.. -,._~ ........ , .. "' . '~ ... 
42 
(b) the form in which complalnas may be made under sub-section (2) of section 11 
and the fees, if any, whach may be charged in rC$pect thereof; 
(c) the maJlnet in which and U1e •uthorities or agencies with whom deposits s...,all 
be madeundersub·section (J) of section II and the fonn in which ce:tif~<:atesshall be 
t'urnished in respect of such deposits; 5 
(d) the matters referred to in sub-clause (v•J of clause (b) of sub·se.:lion (/) of 
section 15; 
(e) !he form in which return has to be furnished under section 18; 
(/)!he purposes referred to in cl1use (c) of sub-section (2) of secuon 20; 
(g) any other .matter which is to be or may be pn:scribed. 
(])Every rule made under lhts Act shall be laid. as soon as may be aner it is made. before 
each House of Parliament; while 11 is Ln session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or m two or more successive sessioM. and if, before the expiry 
of !he session immediately follow10g thc-sessic.n or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
10 
Houses agree in makmg any modific~tion in the rule, or bolh Houses agree that the rule 15 
should not be made, the rulesha.ll lhercaftcr have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no cffec~ as the case may be; so. however. that any such modsfication or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to !he validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
33. For the removal ol doubas, it is llercby declared !hat nolhing sn !his Act shall operate 
to confer or enable !he con ierttng of any jurisdiction on the Lolcpal to make any inquiry- 20 
(a) into any allegation against or any act or conduct of-
(i) !he Presid e n ~ t.he Vice-President or the Speaker of the House of the People; 
(ii) the Chief jusuct or any olhcr Judge of the Supreme Court or India; 
(iii) tlle Compuoller and Auditor-General of lndsa, tlle Chief EJection 
Commissioner or other Election Commissioner or !he Chwman or any other '25 
Member of the Union Pubhc Service ComJIUssion; 
(!>)upon its own lmowlcdse or information. 
34. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as affecting the CQnstirution of. or 
the continu:lllce of functioning or exc:re>se or powcn; by, any Comnusslon of inquiry wpoinu:d 
under !he Commissions of Inquiry Ac~ 1952 before the commencement of this Act and no 30 60 ol 1~52. 
complaint shall be made under !his Act 1n respect of any maw::-referred for inquiry to such 
Commission beforesucb commeneemeoL 
35. lo section 3 of the Commissions or Inquiry Act, 195'2, in sub-section {1), for the 
words "'The appropriate Government rnay", the'words, brackets and figures "Subject to the 
proyisions of sub-section (J j of section 9 of the Lokpa.l Act. 1996, !he appropriate Government 35 
may" shoJI be substituted . 
• 
-

I 
• -~ 
• .,. 
~4;! 
~~J 
i "' ;t~ 
~ 
" -~ 
,,~ 
··~~~~ 
:hf~ 
I·· '51" 
~ :t 
' 
.' 
S:t. 
s 
lliE SCHEDULE 
[Stt $L-ctiun 3(1)1 
I, havon& hc<n appoontcd Cna~rma n/M embcr 
of the Lokpal do swear 1n !he name ul God/solemn ly aflirm that I w 11l bear true fallh 
and allegiance to the conStiiUIIOD of lnt.lia as l>y law cstal>hshcd. that I will duly and 
[allhfully and tO the best of my abthty . knowlcdcc and judcrncnl pertorm the dulleS of 
my orlice without fear or favo ur, affection or ill·will. 
43 
• 

STATEMENT OF OB;ECTS M'D REASONS 
tn ItS iterim reporl on lhc "Probkrr. of Redress 'of Citizens' Orieva~~ces" submin~d 1n 
1966. lhe Adminis~rative Rd"crms Co:nr.tis.\lon recomme nded. 1/Ua alia, lhc: selling up of 
an institution of L okpal. 
2 To give enccttu this rccumr..<:lll!.~~· olll:e Adrr•nistrau•e Reforms CommiSSIOn, a 
Bill called the "Lo~pal <11d the U..k1)1Uktas Bill. 1~6&" w:..; Introduced 1n the Founl> Lok 
Sabha io t9Col!. The Boll "'~s CoJnSodc:rtd by~ loon! Co,.miuee of the two HoU>oeS ilf Parliament 
and lhc Bill, as reported by lhe loant Ccrr,nuuec. was passed by lhe Lok Sabha '" 1969. 
While L'lis s:ll was pcndins in Rajya Sahh&. L'l= Fourtn Lok Sabba was dissolved ond 
cunsequenlly. th<' Biil l.~psod. !n 1'171, the s;a passed by the prcvoous Lok Sabha was rc· 
introduced in the Lok Sabha J.S the "lo~pJI and Lol:ayuktas llill. 1971", 'This Bill aslo 
lapsed on the dissolution ofll:e Fi1U1 Lok Sabh•. 
3, A fresh Bill called llle "Lokp.t Bill, i 977" wu.; introduced an the Lok Sabha in 1 ~77 . 
This Bill wa,;; rt!t'erred 10 a l oin! Commiucco! both thl.: Houses ofP..r hamen! whlc~. submitted 
ilS report in Ju ly. 1978. When !he Bill. as reponeJ by the Joint Commiuee . was under 
consideration of the Lok Sabha.lhc: Lok SJhh• was prorogu«J anJ w:u subS<qucOitlyd.s<alvtd. 
Consequently th;lt Bill also lapsed. 
4. The i..okp<il Bill, I 985 was antroduced in lhe LokSablla and subscqueatly walhdrawn. 
The Lo\.:pal Ball, 1989 wluch suugh!to mclude tile office of Prar.1e Mant"cr also walhm the 
jurisdiction of the Lclq>ol whoch w:u 10 be a three Member body l•ps.:J wtth llle dissolution 
of the Lok Sabha. 
5. The Lokpal Sill. 1996 provodcs for seuing up Loc office oflokpal with a Chairman and 
1wo Members for a nxed tenure. With a view to ensuring tha!!he Lokpal is able 10 ac! 
inllcpendenlly and tlischaq:e ils fullCtiC>ns without feat or favour, the Bill provides !hatlhe 
ChainnliJ'I!Member of L<lkpal shaH ntll be removed from his office except by an order made 
by Lhe President on lllc groun~ of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an 1nquiry made 
by Lhe Chief hstice or India or by a.ny other Judge of !he Supreme Cour t nommated by the 
Chief Justi..:c of lndi~ !or thas purp~sc. It is also provided that !he Ch:urman a.nd oll1cr Mcmb<:rs 
shall be appointed l>y lh.: Prcstdcnl by w:\1Tant under his hand and seal on the recommendations 
of a Comnuttee consistin~ or Prame Mmis:cr as Ch3.lmlan. Speoker Lok Sabha, Deputy 
Ch:tirman Rajy• Sabha, LcJ~~rs of the Opposmon in the lok Sabh:a!Rajya Sabha. Minister 
m-ch1!Ig<: of the Ministr~ of Home Aff:Urs and Minista of Sme, Mlntstry of Personnel :u~d 
Pub!ic G~ievanc<'s a~~d Pensions >S Memlx:rs. Under the scheme of tile Bill. the Lo((pal woll 
io~~ire into complamLS allc&ong lha! a pubhc functionary as defined an the Bill has 
commiuctl an ofknce punashablc under lhe Prcvenuon of CorrupGon Ac!. 1988 and lhe 
expression "public functionlr)'" covers. PrimeMinaster, Ministers. Ministers of State. Deputy 
MiniSiers and Memb<:rs of P:uhamenL II seeks to carry out in Lhis respect the object and 
purpose of the r"commendJIIons of lhc Adnunistrative Reforms Ct>mm,ssion for enabli ng 
Lhl! citizen to have recourse to a convenient and effecLive forum for determination or 
complaints and thereby save him from pursuing his remedy through the process ofCouns , 
which may prove expenSl\'e or dilatory and may not [acilita!e In speedy dc!etmanation. 
The Bill also seeks LO make speco31 provisoons for discou raging frivolous, vexauous and 
false compla!n!s. The bill alSo provides for declaration of asselS and liabilities by Members 
44 
$.<$11/,RS/ 
• 
: 

111 ?"'harr."nl and lhe1r lamlly memhers. annually. The Notes on clau<os explain lhc 
prov1$ions CMiaincd In lhe Bll:. 
6. The Bill sc.:l<.\ 10 •cni"vc lhe abc.v: ot>jecu 
NEWDwo; S. R. BALASUBRAMON!YAN. 
ThL I Olh Stpttmbtr. 1996 . 
• 
il 
IJ 
I~ 
I 
I 
I 

'f1 
I ,I 
.. 
___ .......;'...,.• 1c ·m '"vf ;g; .. ~·m<R&¢-!@ iAfN¥§fdr\ .i 
Nurcs on clouu s 
Clause 2 d~ti n (S the various expressiOns used in 1hc 8111. 
Clause 3 prOVIdes for the (SI.thl!sbmenl or Lokpal consisting or a Chairman and 
two Members. The p(rson to be appo~nted as Chalfman w1ll be a person who is or has 
been the Chief Jusuce of lndu or • Judg( of the Supreme Court. Member shall be a 
person who is, or has been or is qu>lilied to be a Judge or lhal Court. 
Clause ~ provodes lhat the Chaorman and Other Members shall be appointed after 
ohtaon1ng lhe rccommendauon~ or a Comrnouce cons1sung of the Pro me Mimster. 
Speaker of the House of the People. Home Min~ster. Leaders of lhc Opposition In the 
House of lhe People and Lhe Council of Slates. lhe Deputy Chairman or lhe Council of 
States and the Monostcr in-charge of Ministry of Personnel. 
Clause 5 is self-explanatory 
Clause 6 p ro vides for lhe term -or oflice and other condilions or service of the 
Chaorman or Members or Lokpal. His conditions of service, salary, allowances and 
pension of !he Cha11man will be the same as thoseofChocf Jusuce of India. The salary 
of the member w11l he in addition 10 any pensoon whoch he m1sh1 be entuled to in 
respect of any provious service under lhe Government or Jnd1a or under the Government 
or • State. and no d<ductior. will also be made in regard to' any retirement gratuity or 
commuted value or pension on respect ofhos previousservoce. After a person is appointed 
as Member, h1s conditions of serv1ce. allowances and pension payable 10 him shall not 
be vaned to his disadvantages. 
Clause 7 deals with the removal or a Member. 
Clause 8 deals woth lhe staff of the Lokpal and lhe powers of the Lokpal to uuhse 
the servoces. inter ulia, of any Investigating agencies or Government and or ony Olher 
agencrcs. 
Clause 9 deals wuh the JUnSdlcuon of the Lokpal. Sub-clause (I) provodes lhat the 
Lokpal may inqu1re mto any matter involved 1n, or arising from, or connected wolh any 
allegation made in a complaint. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Lokpal may conduct 
an inquiry onto any act or conduct oi any person other than the pubhc functionary 
concerned ii it consoders necessary to do so far the purposes of hrs rnquory mto any 
allegation . Sub-clause (3) provides that an 1nquory under the Commosstons of lnqulty 
,A,ct. 1952 cannot be made In respect of a maHer in respect of whoch a complaint has 
been made 10 the Lokpal except on the recommendation or wit.h the concurrence of the 
Lokpal 
Cl3use 10 provo des that Lokpal shall not1nquire onto any mauer 1n respect of any 
person 1 f he has any bias in respect of such person or matter, or into any matter which 
ha.< been referred for onquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, on its 
recommendltion or woth Its pnor concurrence. h also provides that Lokpal sball not 
mquorc 1010 any compl:unt made a iter a perood of five years from the date or the 
Commission oi tho offence mcnuoncd '" the complaint. 
Clause 11 provides that any person other than a pubhc servant as de!ioed t.herem 
can tile a compi3Jnl whoch shall be m lhe prescribed Corm and snail be actompanred by 
an affidAvit. This clause also provides for a dcposu or Rs. 1,000 by the complainant. 
Clause 12 provodes for preliminary scruuny of complaints by lhc Lokpal. 
Cl•use 13 prov1des for the procedure for m>!<mg inqu111es into the complaints by 
46 
• 

,;. 
•• 
!,.,, • 
1~ ' .. ·ri\:,, ·:.. 
·~ ' 
.~ ~ 
' 
;,· 
·'·. 
41 
the Lolcpal II also provides that the Lokpal shall complete the onqmry within sox months 
from the date of the receopt of the complaont 
Clause 14 provides for deferment or ft>r sus~ens1o n for a specified period or till the 
completion orinquory by the Lokpal of any onvestigatlon or inquiry by any pollee ofricer 
under the Code of Cnmonal Procedure, 1973, Ln respect oi mailers connected woth a 
complaint bein& inquorcd int<>-by lhe Lokpal by •n order and for the reasons 10 be 
recorded . However. the Lokpal can.,ot gove such a direcuon on respect of any 
invesugauon to be made in pursuance of an order of any Coun. Sub-clause (2) of this 
clause also provo des that for the purposes or Chapter XXXV! of the Code or Cnminal 
Procedure, 1913. the period of deferment or suspension of any onvesugacion into an 
offence will be excluded from the period of llmotation for "takong cognizance of the 
offence. 
Sub-clause ( I) of claus.: 15 deals with the powers of the Lokpalto re4uire •ny public 
servant to furnish any wformation or produce any documenL Sub-clause (2) provides 
that the proctodongs before the Lokpal shall 'be deemed to be judicial proceedings 
Within the meaning Of section 193 of the Code or Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Clause 16 seeks to confer powers of search and seizure on the Lokpal. 
Clause 17 relatesto rcpotts of the Lokpal and actton thereon. Sub-clause (I) provides 
that when after Inquiry no allegation made in the complaint is substantiated. the Lokpal 
shall close the case and inumate the compl~i nanl, the public functionary and the 
competent authority accordingly. When all or ony of the allegations made In the compl· 
a inc are substantiated. the Lokpal will made a report communicating its findings and 
recommendations to the competent authority and will also intimate the complaonanl as 
well as the public functionary about his hJving made the report. Sub-clause (2) provides 
that the competent authonty will inform tho Lokpal of the action taken or proposed to 
be taken on the report wuhin a penod of three months. Sub-clause (3) provides fer the 
presentation by the Lokpal of annual repons un the admonostrauon of the Act to the 
President and rorthe laying of such reporu be lore the Houses of Parliament. 
Clause l S provides for declaration of assets by Members of Parliament. 
Clause 19 provides that the salaries, allowances and pension payable to the Members 
of Lokpal shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Clause 20 provodes for secrecy of information and eviden<e collected during any 
inquiry by Lokpal. 
Clause 21 pro111des for punishment for intenuona! lnsult oramerrupuon to, or bnngong 
into disrepute the Lokpal. 
Clause 22 seeks to confer powers on the Lokpalto IIy summarily aud punish persons 
giving false evodence, etc, .in any proc"edings before the Lokpal or cornmouing off.:nces 
under section 175, 178, 179 or 180 of the Indo an Penal Code in the view orthe presence 
of the member, The clause also provides thal3 p-erson convicted thereunder may prefer 
an appeal to the High Court within the jurosdoction of which the person convoctcd 
ordinarily resides or carri ~s on bu.~aness or personally works for gain or the Hi'h Court 
wilh:n w~osc jumdicu on the order of convac:lon h•s been passed. 
Clause 23 provides for the dis<!osure of mformation on rcs;;ect oi complaints against 
pubhc funcuon'ary or proceedings relating thereto causes irrepa:able dam•se to the 
pcblic funcuonary In those case< where the public functionary has been absolved of 
• 
.I 
• ' I 
I 
'· 
• 

I 
, ~ I 
I .f l!~~·l 
II·~. • 
I ~~; 
. ·r' 
fi 
li 
·, 
14 "# S' •c:ga• 6·'· GW€r ;c.wf.WJI·Mt;: .. W\f.:ffri@ijt•efr¥1 
48 
the charges against him. This cl.ause accordmgly makc:s printing or publication of any 
such information in relation to any complaint bdorc the inquiry under the Act has 
reached a definitive stage an ofrence uiable summar1ly by the Lokpal. The clause also 
seeks 10 make !he pnnting or publishing of any false lnformauon alleging or suggesung 
thai a complaint has been made against a p~blic functionary an offence Lriable summanly 
by the Loicpal. The clause also provides that an appeal against any conv1ct•on for any 
offence thereunder may be made to lhc Supr~me Court of lndi• with the leave of thai 
Court. 
Clause 24 provides for the punishment which may be awarded by the Lokpal to a 
person making a complaint wh1ch is found by the Lokpalto be false. The clause also 
provides thdl any person convicted thereunder rna}. with lhc leave of the Supreme 
Coun. prefer an appeal to that Court. 
Clause 25 provides for the modified applieatiOn of the provisions or the code or 
Criminal Procedure for the 1r1al of offcncc:s under sections 22, 23 and 24. 
Clause 26 provides for bar of prosecution o n allegations not proved or not 
substantiated before the Lokpai. 
Clause 27 relates 10 conferment of certain additional functions on the Lokpal. 
Clause 28 provides for the disposal of dcposiu made by the complainants. 
Clause 29 provides for compensation or reward or both payable to complainant in 
the event of all or any of the allesations made in a complaint beins substantiated. 
Clause 30 provide~ for protect;on from legal proceedjpgs. etc. 
Clause 31 provides for delegation of powers by the Loicpalto iu staff, etc. 
Ciau$C 32 provides for lhe power of the President to make rulc.s. 
Clause 33 seeks 10 make il eleat lhat the Lokpal shall not have any juriSdiCtion tO 
conduct any inquiJy into any allegation against or any act or conduct of the President, 
the vice-President or the Speaker of the House oflhc People. the Chief Justice or any 
other judge of the Supreme Court of India. the Compuoller and Auditor-General of 
India, the Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commiss1oners or the 
Chairman or any other Member of the Unton Public Service Commission or to make 
any inquiry suo-moto. 
Clause 34 proVIdes that the provisions of this BHI shall not affect the constitution or 
the cont10uance of any Commission of Inquiry appointed under the Commissions of 
Inquiry Act, 1952 before the com<ng Into force of the provisions of this Bill. 
Clause 35 seeks 10 make a consequential amendment in the Commissions of lnqu1ry 
Ac~ 1952 . 
• 

FlNA..NCIAL MEMORA..'I'DUM 
Clause 3 {I) of the Boll provides for the appointment of the Lokpal consisting of • 
Chairman and two other Members. Clause 6(3) of the B ill cnvrsages that the salary, 
allowances and :Ill other condluons of service of. the Chairman .hall be the same as those 
the Chrcf jusuce of lndta and the Members as those of thc.Judgc o( the Supreme Court. 
also proYJdes that the sal<~ty payable to th< Members shall be rn addition to any pens ron 
and pension equrvalent of other pensionary benefits to which the Member may be enutled 
10 In respect of atly prevrous scrvrc. undo< the Government of India 01'Under the Government 
of a State. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 provides that the Lokpal shall appornt a Secretary and such 
other ofricers and employees as the President may dcte<mrne. from time to time, in 
consultation with Lokpal to assrst hom on the discharge of his functions. Sub-clause (2) or 
clause f empowers t' eLokpal 10 secur< for the purpose of deahng with any complaints or 
any classes of complarnts, the servrccs of any officer or <:mployee or wvestigating agency 
of the Central Government or a State Government or the service of any other person or 
>gcncy Sub-dause (3) or dausc: 8 provrdes that the terms and conditions of service of the 
offic.crs and employer:s of the Lokpal and of the officers. employees. agencrt5 and persons 
referred 10 in-sub<lause (2) of that clause shall be such as the President may determine in 
consultation wrth the Lokpal. 
3. Cause 19 of the Bill provides that the expenditure on the salanes. allowance5 and 
pensions payable to Members shall be ch:ugcd on or in respect of the Consolidated Fund of 
lndta. 
4. Clause 29 of the Bill provides for payment or compensation or rew!rd to a complilnant 
as determined by the Lokpal, by the Centul Govc:tnment. 
5. At this stage, it is not possible to give precise details of the expenditure to be incurred 
on the Lokpal, It is howervcr. expected that the Bill, when enacted. will i~volve a non­
redmng expenditure of Rs. 25 lakhs and a rccurnng expenditure of Rs. I crore a year. In 
Ci!Se it become~ nece.sary 10 construe! a burldrng to bouse the establishment of the Lokpal. 
additional exponditure of a non-re.:wrlng nature of the order of Rs. 1 crore may :Uso be 
involved 
The Bill if enacted wtll not incur any other recurnng or non-recurring expenditure. 
49 
• 

~ 
I 
t 
' 'I d 
l 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3;2. of the Bill cmpow<rs Lhe President lO m~ke rule:$ for the purpose Of carrying 
into effect lhe provisions or propo.,e~ cnacuncnL The vanous matters in relation to which 
such rules may be made have bc:cn enumerated 10 detail undtr vanous items or sub-clause 
(2) of th;u clause and rclall: matnly to the form •n which complaints may he made and lhc 
fees. if any which may be char&cd 1n respect thereof; the manner in whoch and lhc authorities 
or agenc1es ...;th whom dtposus shall be made under sub-clause (3) of clause II and the 
fonn in whtcb cit\Jficatc shall be furnished in ft$pect Of SUch dtpOSI!S under Sub-clause (2) 
of clause II; and the additional matters in respect of which powers of a civil coun may be 
exercised by the Lokpal. These are matt<rs of detail necessary for ciTccuve admimstration 
of the provisions of the Bill and it is difficult 10 prov1de forall the SJtuauons in the B•lluself. 
The delegation or lcgislaovc power h. therefore. of a normal character. 
50 
• 
... 
~---:..,_ ~ 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE COMMlSSION Of' INQUIRY ACf, l95i 
(60 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
3. (f) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinio~ that it is necessary so to do. 
and shall, if a resolution io this behalf is passed by the House of the People or, as the case 
may be, the Legislative Assembly of the State, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint a Commission of lnquiry far the purpose of making an inquiry into any definite 
matter of public importance and performing such functions and within such time as may 
be specified in the notification. and the CommissiOn St' appointed shall make the inquiry 
and perfonn the functions accordingly: 
Provided that where any such Commissio:n has been appointed to inquire into any 
matter-
• 
(a) by the Cenual Government, no State Goverrnment shall, except with the 
approval of the Central Government, appoint another Commission to inquire into 
the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed by the Central Gover n m.en~ 
is functioning; 
(b) by a State Governmen~ the Cent!al Government shall not appoint another 
Commission to inquire into the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed 
by the State Government is functioning, unless the Central Government is of opinion 
that the scope of the inquiry should be c:xtJ:nded to two or more States . 
• • • • 
51 
• 
AppoiAltneiU 
ofC~­
rioa. 

' 
~·. 
r · 1'1 
I. 
I . 
•• 
• 
LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for tllc establishment of the institution of Lokpalto inquire into allegations or 
corrupuon against pubhc functionaries and for mau.ers connected therewith . 
(Shri S.R. Balasubratnl/niyan, Mininer of State in the Mininry of Ptrsonntl, 
Public Grievanets and Pensions) 
52 
• 

ANNEXURE- ll 
(See onra 2.2 of Report) 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SA aHA 
Bill No. 9Q of 1998 
THELOKPALBILL, 1998 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PR.WMU"ARY 
I. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTERD 
MACHINERY FOR INQUIRIES 
3. Establishment of Lokpal. 
4. Appointment of Chairperson and !)ther Members. 
5. Chairperson and Members lo be i01eligible to hold other offices. 
6. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. 
7. Removal of Chairperson or Members. 
8. Member lo act as Chairperson Or· to dis.chasge his functions in certain 
circumstances. 
9. Staff of LokpaL 
CHAPTER l1l 
JVRJSOicnON" AND PStOCEOUR£ IN RESPECT OF :NQUUU£S 
10. Jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
II. Matters not subject to jurisdiction of Lokpnl. 
12. Complaints. 
13. Preliminary scrutiny of complaint:s by Lokpal. 
14. Procedure in respect of inquiries. 
15. Evidence. 
16. Search and seizure. 
17. Reports. 
CHAPTER IV 
DEO.ARATION OF ASSETS AND UABttmES 
18. Declaration of assets by Members of Parliament. 
CHAPTERV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
19. Expenditure on Chairperson and Members to be charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
20. Intentional insult or interruption to Lokpal. 
21. Power of Lokpal to try certain offences. 
22. Action in case of false complaints. 
23. Application of Act 2 of 1974. 
24. Conferment of additional functions on Lokpal. 
25. Disposal of deposit and payment of compensation or reward. 
26, Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard. 
27. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
28. Power to delegate. 
29. Pl'>wer to malce rules. 
30. Removal of doubts. 
31. Saving. 
32. Consequential amendments of Act 60 of 1952. 
53 
• 

- ·- --- ··-- ---
Bill No. 90 of 1998 
THE LOKPAL Bn.L. 1998 
A 
Bn.J.. 
to provide for the establisiunent of the irtstitution of l.akpa/to inquifl! into all<gations of 
corruption. agai.n.st public junctlonaries and for maners connecud therew;rh. 
BE 11 enacted by Parliament m the Forty-ninth Yc~ of the Republic of India as 
foUows:-
CHAPTER l 
PttEUMtNARY 
1. (I) This Act m3y be c:.llcd the Lokpal Act 1998. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the untml Gove=nt may, by notification 
s in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
55 
Sboctndeand 
--
., 
I 
• 
~~~--------------------J --

I ' 
Defit\ldons. 
56 
2.. In this Act. unless !he context otherwise requires,-
(a) .. Ciuirperson" means the Chairperson of !he Lokpal; 
(b) "competent authonty", in rei3110n to-
(i) the Pnme Minoster, means the House of the People: 
.(ii) a member of the Council o( Mmisters, other than the Prime Minister. 5 
me3n.s the Prime Minister: 
(iii ) a member of Parliament, other 1han a Mmisler, ~ncans the Counc1l 
of States in the case of o member of that Council ond the House of the People 
m the case of a membe r of th ot House: 
(c) "complnmt" means a complain t alleging that a pubhc functionary hos 10 
committed any offence punishable under !he Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; A9<)(t988 
(di"Lokpal" means the tnstituuon established under section 3: 
(ci"Membe(' means a Member of the Lokpal: 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules mode under thts Act; 
(g) "public functionary" means a person who-
(i) holds or has held the office of the Prime Mimstcr, Minister, MtniS!er 
of State or Deputy Minister of the Union: 
(ii) ts or hus been o Mem ber Of either House o( Parliamen•. 
CHAPTER fl 
MAC!<I/'IERY FOR !NQVIRie$ 
15 
20 
e.ablisNrc nu>l 3. (I) As from the com menceme nt of this Act, there shoJI be establ ish ed , for the 
t..ok-po.J. purpose of making inquiries in ~pect of <am plaints under this A~l, an institution to 
be <ailed the "Lok poJ" . 
Appoumnenl o( 
Ch>iq>en4<1 
ondotbct 
MetrO:N:, 
• (2)1be Lokpal shall consist of-
(a) a Clu!Jrperson who is or has heen • Ch1cf Justice or a Judge of the Supreme 25 
Court; 
(b) two MembeN who are or have been the Judges of the Supreme Coun or the 
Chief Justices of the High Couns 
(J) The Chatrpcrso n and every other Member shall . before entering upon his offico. 
make and subscribe before the Prestdent. or a person appotnted 1n that behalf by the 30 
President . an oath or utlmna uon In !he fonn set out in the Sehedule. 
4. (I) The Chairperson and other Members shall be oppointed by the PreS<dent by 
warrant under his lund and seal: 
Provided !hat every appointment under this suiHcctio n shall be made after obtatning 
• 
.. 
-~ 
·~ .. 

• 
57 
the recommendatio ns of o Commiucc consisti ng of-
(a) the Vice-President of lndi~ 
(b) 1hc Pnm~ Minister 
(C) the Speaker of the House of the People 
5 (d) the Mmister '"~~rge or the ~IIOISit} of 
Home Affairs m the Government of India. 
(c) the Leader of the House other than the House 
in which. the Prime Minister IS a rnernber 
of ParH~nlt: nt 
JO (f) the Leader of the Opposition in the H0use of 
the Pccple 
(g) the Lcoder of the Opposition in the Council 
of States 
Chairman; 
member~ 
member: 
member. 
membe r; 
member: 
member: 
Provided furtlter that no Slltin$ Judge of the Supreme Court or sllllng Ch1ef Justice 
1 s of a H1gh CQurt •hall be appointed except aftc:consuha tion wirh the Ch1ef Justice of India. 
(2) No nppoin lmcnl of a Ch31rperson or a Member sha ll be inva lid merely by reason 
of any vac3ncy m Lhc Committee:. 
S. The Chairperson or a Member shall not be a member of Parliament or a member 
of the LesiSlature of an~ Stale or Union territory and shall not hold any office of trust or 
20 profit (other than his office as the Chllrperson or a Member ) or be connected with any 
poliuc~l p:>rty or carry on any business or pracuse any profession and ~ceondingly. before 
he enters upon his office. • person appo1ntod as tht Chairperson or a Member, as :h< case 
may be. shall. If-
( a) he is a member of P~rli4ment or of the L~gislature of ony Stale or Union 
25 rerruory . resign such membersh1p, or 
(b) he holds any office of tr'llst or profit. resign from such office: or 
(c) he is connec ted with any politica l pany, seve r hi$ connection with it; or 
(d) he is c-arrying on ~ny business, sever his connection (shol1 of divesting 
h1msclf of ownershrp) with the conduct and management of such business; or 
30 (<}he is practising any profcnic:-n. cease 10 practise such profession. 
35 
6. (I) The Chairperson and evory other Membe r sh:tll hold office as such for a ttl'Tll 
of throe ye:~rs trom the date on wh1ch he enters upon his office or until he nllains the age of 
seventy years. whichever is earlier: 
Provided that he may-
( a) by writing under his hand addressed to the Pres1den1, rcs1gn his office; or 
(b) be removod from his office in the manner provided in section 7. 
(2) On ccasmg to bold office, the Chairperson and every other Member shall be 
inehg1ble for-
(1) reappointmonl in the Lokpal; and 
40 (ii) ful1her employment 10 nny office of profit under the Government or India 
or tHe Government of a Stote. 
(J) The salary , allowances ond other cooditions of service or-
( i) the Chrurperson shaWbe thesamc as those o( the Chic( ))!Stice of India; 
(ii) other Members shall be the same as those o( a Judge of the Supremo 
45 Coun: 
• 
Ch.rurpers;an 
31\d Members 
lObe Lne!!Jiblc 
to hold ocher 
cilia: 
Tcrmoromcc 
~tt~d ocher 
cu~i1ionsor 
ser.ic.""t: o( 
Oulrperwn 
11nd Mcmbcl'l 

!l 
l 
I 
' " I 
* 
I 
I 
II 
• 
' 
l 
. I 
l, I 
! 
I 
Oefi.nirions:. 
8$mbli.mmentof 
Loq>oL 
Appotn:snc:N ol 
0\llil}XnOn 
and other 
Merl"'' · 
--............ ~,...; 
56 
2. In this Act, unless the con text otherwi se requires,-
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Lokpal; 
(b) "cornpe<ent authority", in relauon to-
(i) the Prime Minister, means the House or the People; 
,(ii) o member of the Council ofMiniS tcrs, other than the Prune Min ister, 5 
means the Prime Minister: 
(iii) a member of Parliament. other than a Monisrer. means the Councol 
of States m the c>Sc of a member of that Council and the House of the People 
'n the case of n member of thnf HcuJ.se; 
(c) "complain t" means 3 eompl amt alleging that a pubhc functionary has 10 
commoned any offence punishable under the Prevention of CorTUption Act, 1988, <9 or t988. 
(d) "Lokpal" meons the instirorion esrablished under section 3. 
(t) "Member" means a Member of rhc Lokpal; 
(j) "prescribed" meons prcoeribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "public functionary" means a person who- IS 
(i) holds or has held the office of the Prime Minister, Minister. Mimstcr 
of State or Deputy Minister of the Union; 
(ii) is or has been a Member of either House of Parhamcnt. 
CHAPn:R ll 
3. (I) As from the commencement of this Act, there shaU be est.ablished, for the 
purpose of m~king inquiries in res-p«.l or complaints under this Act, an institution to 
be <'I lied the "Lokpnl". 
I 
(2) Tne Lokpal shall consist of-
(a) a Chairpc...on who IS or has been 3 Choef Justice or 3 Judge of the Supreme 
Court; 
(b) two Members who are or have been the Judges of the Supreme Court or the 
Chief Jusriccs of the High Courts 
(J) The Chairperso n and every other Member shall, before entering upon hos office. 
make and subscribe before the Presidenr. or a person oppointed in that behalf by the 
President. an o::uh or affimtation In the ronn set out In !he Scht:.dule. 
4. (I) The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by the Prest dent by 
warrant under his hand and seal: 
Provided that every appointment under lhis sub-section shall be made oftcr obtaining 
• 
20 
25 
JO 
.. 
,, 
.• 

)' 
' 1 1 
Member 10 ICI 
u Chairperson 
Oftodi.K~ 
hb~nsia 
c:.J'aiA circu.m-­
""""'-
)~o( 
I.Dkpol. 
58 
Provided that such sali11')1 shall be in addition to ony pension 10 which the Cha11pc:rson 
or a Member may be entitled in respect of any prevoous service under the Government of 
fndia or under the Governmen t of a State and no deduction shall be made from such sali11')1 
on the ground of hos bavong receoved any retirement gratuity, or on the ground that he 
n:c~ived the commuted value of a portion of the prnsion in respect of his previous service: 5 
Provided further that the salary. allowances and pension payable to, and other 
conditions of service of. the Chairperson and other Members shall not be varied to his 
disadvontnge after his appoin tment. 
7. Tbe Chaorpcrson or a Member shall not be removed from his office except by an 
order made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or Incapacity after an 10 
inquiry made by a Committee consisting of the Chief Justia: of India and two other Judges 
of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice in senionty, in whoch the Chaorpcrson or 
the Member had bee n infonn ed of the charges agai nst hun and given a reas onab le 
opportunity of being he:ord on respect of those charges. 
8. (I) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Choirpcrson 
by reason of his deoth, resignation or otherwise,lhe President may, by notification. authorise 
one of the Members to aet as the Chairperson until the appointment of a new Chatrpcrst>n 
to fill such vacancy. 
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discb:>rge his functions owing to absence on 
leove or otherwise, such one of the Members as the President may, by noufication. authonse 
in tltis behalf, shall disch:>rge the (unctions of the Chairperson until the date on which the 
Ch:lirpcrson resumes his duties. 
9. {/)The LokpaJ shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the discharge of its 
functions (iodudiog verilic~tioo and inquiries in respect o( compl2int.s) under this 
Act, app oint a Scc ... t.ary and such oth er officet"S and empl oyees as tht President may 
dttenn.int, from time to time, in consultation with the LokpaJ. 
(2) With out prejudice to tht provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Lokpal may, for 
the purpose of doaling with any complaints or any tla.~SC$ of complaints, sec ure-
IS 
20 
25 
(i} th• serv ices of any officer or empl oyee or invostigating agency of t.bt 
Ce.otral Government or :a Sta te Gove rnm ent with the c:oncurn:nce or that 30 
Govcmmentt or 
(ii) the servicos of any other person or agency. 
(3) The tcnns and conditions of service of the officers ~ nd emp loyees referred to 
In sub·soction (/)and of the officers, employees, agencies and persons rofernd to in 
sub·soction (2) (including such special condi tions os may be considered necessary for 3S 
enabling them to act without fear or favour in the disch,.r ge or tbcir fun ctions) sbal l 
be such as the President m2y dttcnnine, from time to time, io consultation with the 
LokpaJ. 
(4) In the discharge of their functions under this Act, the officers and employees 
referred to in sub-secuon ( I) and the offic<!rS. employees, agencies and persons referred to 40 
on sub-sectio n (2) shall be subject tt> the exclusive odministr:Hovc control aod direction of 
the Lokpal. 
CHAPTER ill 
JURtsDtC'ltON AI'O PI!OC!!OUR£ IN RESPECT OF ll<QVJIUE.S 
10. ( I) Subject to the other provisions of tlus Act, the Lokpal shall inquore into any 45 
mauc:r involved in , or arising from, or connected w~th. any alleg:uion made in :1 comphtint. 
(2) The Lokpal may inquire intc any oct or conduct of any person other ~ a 
public func11onary in so f:>r as it Ct>nsiders if neces\;"')' so to do for the puipos.: of iu 
inquiry into any such allegation: 
Provodcd that the Lokpal shall give such person a reasonable opportunny of being 50 
heard and to produce 'eviden ce in his defence . 
• 

59 
(J) No maller in respec1 of which a complatnl may be made under lhis Acl shall be 
rcfcm:d for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Acl, I952. 
11. (I) The Lokpal shall no1 mquire inlo any mallcr concerning any person if 1he 
Cha irperson or any o1her Member has any bias in rcspec1 of such mauer or person and if 
5 any dispulc arises in lhis behalf. !he Prcs idcnl shall, on an application made by lhc party 
aggmved. ob~ain, m such manner as may be prcscribed.lhe opinion of the Chief Justice of 
India and dcc1de the dispute in coofonnuy wilh such opin1on. • 
(2J The Lokpal shall nol inquire 1nto any complain! if lhe compla1n1 is made afler 
the expiry or ten years from the date on which Lhe offence mentioned in such complaint IS 
I 0 alleged lo have been commiucd. 
M..rtenaa 
SUb)C"CtiQ 
JUris<fict:on O( 
l<><poi. 
12. (I) Any person 01her !han a public servanl moy moke a compla1n1 under !his Act ~ 
lo lhe Lokpal. 
Explanation.-For lhe purpose of !his sub-scclion. "public servanl'' means-
(a) any person who is a member of a Defence service or of a c1vil service of !he 
15 Union or a State or of an all-India service or holds ony post connecced with Defence 
or any civil post under the Union or a State; 
(b) any person 1n the service or pay oi a Iocaiaulhomy. a corporal ion established 
by or under a Central. Provincial or S1a1e Acl or a Govern men! company, as defined 
in sec lion 6 I 7 of !he Compani es Acl. 1'956: 
20 (c) any person in the service of any other insciwcion. concern or undenaking 
which is eSiablished by or under a Cen1ral. Provincial or Stale Acl o r which is 
con1r0lled. or financed wholly or subslantially by funds provided, d1rectly or indirectly. 
by !he Central Governmenl or a Sule GovcrmnenL 
(2 } ,,e compl ain! shall be in lhc prescribe d form and shall sel f011h particulars of 
25 1he offence alleged and shall be accompanied by feos prescribed, if any. an aflidavil in 
support of such particulaN and a ce.rtilica~e '" I he prcscnbed form in respect of lhe deposu 
under sub·seclion (J} or. if the complamanl is unable 10 m•kc lhe depo>ll. an applicauon 
for e-xemption from the requirement as to such deposit. 
I 3} ·n,c comp lainanl sha ll depos i1 such sum of money'" such manner and with such 
JO aulhorily or agency as may be prescnbed for dispo sal under section 25. 
(4/ No1wi1hstanding anylhing contained in lhe foregoing sub-secuons. any teller 
writlcn IO the Lo kpal or. as lhc case moy be, 1he appr opr.ale aUlhOflly. by a person in any 
jail or a liter place of cus1ody or in any asylum or other place for msane persons may. if !he 
Lokpal or. •• lhe case may be. !he approprinle autho rily is Sal1sfied lhal i1 IS necessary so 10 
35 do. be treated as a complOJnl made 1n accorcbnce wilh the provisions of th1s section. 
(5) Notwithstandin& onythmg conumc d in any other enactment. it sha ll be the duly 
of • police officer or o1her person in-charge of any jail or 01her place of custody or of any 
asy lum o r ol.Qer plo::e for msane perso ns 10 forward, wilhoul opening. any lener addres sed 
to the Lokpal or the appropriate authon1y by a person impnsoncd oc de1a1ned in such JOII. 
40 platt of cuslody. asylum or olhcr place. to !he Lokpal or the oppropriate authorily wi1hou1 
delay. 
Explanation.- For lhe purpose s of this section. "!he appropriole aulhoricy" means 
any of the ouchorities which lhe Lokpai may. by general or special order, in writins. 
de~ermine 10 be the app<opnate aulhonucs . 
• 

' 
I; r 
I 
?:-dJI"''.tAMY 
sc::MIII)'Of 
complaints by 
Lokp&l 
Prooec:hnin 
~pa;to( 
mqu-. 
60 
13. (I) If t~ Lokp•l is satisfied. after coMidering a complaint and after making such 
verification as It deems :lppropr::ue thnt-
(a) the compl:unt IS not made withon a period of ten ye;u, as specified in sub 
section (2} of section II: or 
(b) the complamt IS manifestly false ond veuuous, 
the Lokpal shall dismiss the complaint after recording its reasons therefor and communicote 
the sanne to the complainant and to the competent authonty. 
(2) The procedure for verolication on ' respect of a complaint under sub-section (1) 
5 
slull be such as the Lol:pal deems appropriau: in !he csrcumstonces of the case and in 
p:uticular. the Lokpal may. if Lt deems 11 necessary so to do, call for the comment.s of the 10 
pul>lic functionary concerned. 
14. (/} If, after the consi derltion ond verification under section 13 in respect of a 
complaint. the Loltpal propose$ to conduct any onquiry. it-
(a) shall forthwith forwatd a copy of the complointto the competent authority: 
(b) may make such orde rs as to the s~fe custody of documents relevant to the 15 
inquiry as it deems fit: 
(c) sh:lll. at such tim<:._, it considers appropriate. forward a copy of the complai nt 
10 the public functionary concerned and afford hom an opponunity to repre:scnt his 
case. 
(2) Every inquiry sh:ill be conducted by the Chairperson and the Members sitting 20 
joondy and the place in which such inquory is conducted shall be deemed 10 be an open 
coun 10 which the public genernlly may have access so Car as the same cnn convcnoently 
contajn them: 
Provid~d that in exceptio nal circumstances and for reasons to be recorded on writing, 
such inquiry may be conducted in camera. 25 
(3) The Lokpal sha ll hold every such inquiry as expediuously as possible and in 3ny 
ease complete the onquiry withon • period of six months from the date of receipt of the 
complaint : 
Provided that the Loltpal may. for reasons to be recorded in writing, complete the 
inquiry within n funher period o ( six tliOnths. 30 
(4) Save as •forcsaid. the procedure for conducting any such onquiry shall be such as 
the Lok p•l considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case . 
15. (/) SUbJCCl to the provisio ns of this section , for the purpose of any inquiry 
(including the verification under $ection 13), the Lok:pal-
(a) may require any publ ic servant or nny other pcr.;on who, in it.s oponion, is 35 
lble to furnis h information or produce documents relevant to such inquiry. to furnish 
any such information or produce any such document; 
(b) shall have •II the powers of a civil coun while ttying a suit under the Code 
of Civil Procedure. 1908, in respect of the following mau.en;, namely:- 5 or t90&. 
l 
I 
>4-'>•/PS/F-J-8 
• 

• 
~~~~-- · ·· ·- . .. 
61 
(i) summ oning and enfor<:ing the atten dance of any person and euntini•l 
him on oath: 
(ii) requiring the discovery and produelion of any document; 
{iii) =eiving evidenee on affidavits ; 
{iv) requ isitioni ng any public recotd or eopy thereofjrom any coutt or o«iee; 
{v) issuing commissions for the cx:un ination of will'lesses or documents; and 
(vi) such other mattGrs as may be pn:.scribed . 
(2) A proceeding before the l.ol:pal shall be deemed to be a judici3J proccedioa 
within lhe meaning of section 193 of the IJKiian Penal Code. 
{J) No obligauon to maintain secrecy or ocher restriction upon the cfuclosw.: of 
ioformation ob~'\ined by or furnished to Govcmmcnt or any public sc:rYant. whether imposed 
by any en:u:tment or by any provision of law whatever stwl apply to the disc:losw.: of 
information for the purposes of any inquiry (inehwing lhe verificat.iOil uadcr section 13} 
under ~~is Act. 
(4) The Government or any public .servant shall not be entitled. in relation to ""Y 
such inquiry or verilit.1tion under section 13 to any such privtlege in respect of the production 
of documenu or the giving of evidence as is allowed by &ny enactment or by any proviaioa 
of law whatever in legal proceedings. 
E.rplaMrion.-For the purposes of this section. "public scrvan~· shall ha,.. die'"""' 
meaning as in section 21 of the Indi an Penal Code. 
16. {I) If the Lokpal has reason to believe thaL any dOC\Jment which, in iu opinion, Scorcb-.1 
will be usefu l for. or relevant to, any inq uiry under this Act, arc secreted in 3Jly place , it ........._ 
may authorise any office r subo rdinate to it. or lillY officer of 1111 investiga ting agency refcm;d 
to in sub-sec tion (2) of section 9, to search for and to seize such documenll . 
.• 25 {2) If the Lolc:pal ir satisfied that any document scit.ed under sub-....:tion {I) would 
l1~it_ be evidence for the purpose of any inquiry under this Act and that it would be necessary 10 
retain the document in u.s cwtody, it may so retain lhe said document till tile completion of 
such inquiry: 
Provided that where any document is required to be returned, the Lokpal sh:l.ll raun 
30 the same after retaining copie• of such document duly authenticated thereof . 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, rela ting 10 searcl>es 
shall, so far as may be. apply to sean:hes under this .soc:tion subject to the rnodi.tication 
that sub-sec uon (5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if for tho 
word "Ma&istrate", wherever it occurs, the wonis "Lol:pal or any officer auth orucd by it" 
3S WeTC substituted. 
17. (I) After the conclusion of inquiry, the Lokpal shall determine whether all or R<po<u. 
any of the offences alleged in the complaint have or has been proved to it.< satisfacuon and 
by report in writing shall communicate its findinp to the complainan~ the public functionary · 
and the competent oulhority . 
40 {2) The Speaker. in the use of the Prime Minister or a member of the Howe of the 
People and the ChlltTIWI of the Council of Sw.es 1n the ase of a mcmher of that Council 
• 

• I 
I' 
,. ,. 
'L 
''• !I' !" • if l I 
' 
II ,. r 
• 
I 
I 
I 
~ 
l 
J 
I 
I 
?rdun:~· 
$CNitnyof 
"""''WOU by 
!Akpal. 
ProoedUR 1A 
ra-pcct or 
inquiries.. 
-ze··• :mz·~ ~1"7J·~:-- z ;(:;: :f ·ifl' #$;# (4'$i&J.?if#£¥1@$ 
60 
13. (I} If tht: Lokpal is satisl'ied. after considering a complaint and aflcr making such 
verification as it deems aypropritltc lh.lt-
(a) the complaint is not made withtn a i>"nod of ten years as SP"Cifled in sui> 
section (2} of section II ; or 
(b) the compl3lnt is manifestly false and vexatious, 
the Lok.pal shall dismiss the complaint after recordi ng tls reasons therefor and communic>te 
the snmc to the complainant and to the comi>"tent outhonty. 
(2) The procedure for venticatton in resp<.Ct of a complaint under sub-section ( I} 
shall be such as the Lokp>l deems >ppropriatc in the C~t<:umstanees of the case and in 
5 
particular . the Lokpal may. 1f it deems it necessary so to do, call for the comments of the 10 
public functionary concerned. 
14. (I} If, :ofter the considenti on and verificotton under sec tion 13 1n respect of a 
comphun t, the Lokpal pro poses to conduct ony inqutry, it-
(a) slull forthwith forward a copy of the compbintto the comi>"tCI\t authority; 
(b) may make such order> as tot~ safe custody of documents relevant to the 15 
inqu1ry as tt deems lit; 
(c) shall. at such time as it considers appropri ote, forward a copy of the complaint 
10 the publi<: functionary concerned >nd afford him an o pportunity to represent his 
case . 
(2} Every inquiry shall he conducted by the Chairperson and the Members siuing '20 
jointly and the place 1n which such tnqutry is conducted shall be deemed 10 be. nn open 
court to which the public j~encrnlly may have access so far as the same con convemencly 
contain them: 
Provid<"d that m cxccptionnl circumstances and for reasons tO be recorded in writing. 
such inquiry may be conducted in camua. 25 
(3} The Lokpol shall hold every such inqutry as exl"'ditiously as possible and in ony 
case comple:e the inquiry within a P"rind of six months from the date of r=ipc of the 
complaint: 
Provided that the Lokpal may, for reasons co be recorded in writing. complete the 
inquiry within a further period of six months . 30 
( 4) Save as aforesa id, the procedure for conducting any such inquiry sh•ll he such as 
the Lokpal cons1ders nppropri alc in the circumstances of the case. 
15. (I) Sub;ec l co the provisi ons of this section, for the purpose of ony inquiry 
(including the verificauon under secuon 13), the Lokpal-
(a} m>y require any pubhc scrv>nl or •ny ot~r person who, in its opinion, is 35 
'lble to furnish informacion or produce docum ents relevant tO such inquiry. 10 furnish 
any such inform>lion or produce any such document; 
(b) shall have all the powers of a civil coun while crying a suit under the Code 
of Civil Procedure. !90S, in respect of the followi ng mauers, namely :- S of I 90S. 
>¥>•/P.S/F- 1-o 
• 

' 
I tl 
·r. 
Ill ' it 
I i ··~ 
I r ~! 
I' t ' If;, 
1· .I r : 
jl 
• 
~ 
• 
i 
DcdatNion or 
...... by 
mc:mbcno/ 
h rbamei'IL. 
ExJ'Cnddtrn: on 
Ch~rp«son 
andMcmbcn 
to be c:h:l.rgcd 
oolhc 
Consolidalcd 
Fuado( tndio. 
lntenOONI 
uu.v;ll or 
rncetNJXic:-to 
l.Ditpl. 
-
s- a, :Y.t ••·+ .. MkWM¥ttMW4i!i 
62 
shall, as soon as may be afte r the rcce1pt of report undcrsub-sccti on ( 1}, cause the same to 
be laid before the House of the People, or the Council of States . as the case m>y be, while 
it is in scs.<ion, ond if lht House o f the People or the Coun cil of States, as the case moy be. 
is not in session. ~th1n a period of one week from the reasse mbly of !he s;ud House or the 
Council, as the case may be. s 
·i 
(3) The compete nt authority shnll exa monc the report forwarded to u under suJ:>. 
sec tion (I) and communicate to the Lokpal, withon a period of ninc1y d>ys from !he dale of 
receipt of the repon. 1he ac lion lake·n or proposed to be 1aken on t'-< basis of the report. 
(4) The Lokpal shal l present an nua lly 10 the Prcside nl a cons c.lida ted rcpon on the 
adminisuauon of this Act and the Presodcnl shall, as soon as may be after and in any case I 0 
nOllaler Lh3n mnety days rrom the recei pt of such rcpon.. cause the same, together with :1n 
explanatory memorandum. 10 be laid before each House of Parliame nt. 
Explanat•on.-ln corn puling the period of ntncty days referred to in this sui> section , 
any penod dun ng which Parliament or. as the case may be. either House of Porliarnent, is 
not in session, sh>ll be excluded . IS 
CHAPTER IV 
0£Cl.ARATION OF ASSETS AND U A8llm£:S 
18. (I) Every member of Parliament shall furnish a return o( all assets owned by him 
and members of his f~mo l y and all liabili1ies inc urred by h im and the members o f his 
family before the Lokpal wi!hin a period of nincty days, from the dale he enters upon hiS 20 
office and thereafte r every yeor wiohin a period of nioety days from the commencemen t of 
each linancoal yeor in such fonn as may be prcscnbcd. 
Exp/cmaJion.-Fo r tloe purpose of this suJ:>.scction. the family shallonclude the spouse 
and de pendent"childrcn of such Member . 
(2! The Lokpal shall rcpor! the details of returns filed under suo-section (I) to the 25 
Spea ker of the House of the People or the Ch:unnliJI of the Council of States, as the case 
may be . 
( 3) If a member of P3rliarncnl does not furnish a return under sub·secuon (/) or 
furnishes a return which is false in material particulars or furnishes a return after the 
expiry of the period specified in that ~ub·section , lhc Lokpal shall make a comp laont in 30 
writing to the Spea ker in the case of a member of the Hou>e of the People or lO theChoinnan 
of the Council of States in the case of • membe r of the Coundl of St>:cs . 
(4) If a member of Parl iament fatls to fum •sh a retui'T' under suJ:>.scction (/) . he 
shall not sit or voce as a member of either House of J.'.l.!liamc:nt until he furnishes such 
return and a wnucn communication is rece1ved by the SpcJker or the Chainn:m, as 1hc 35 
case may be, frorn the Lokpal co thO! effect. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCliJ.J,J..NEOUS 
19. The s:.Jiarics, allo wan ces und p ens ions pay able to, or in respe ct of, tbe: 
Chairperson and Members of tht Lokpol, shall be expenditurt charge<! on the 
Cons olidat ed Fund ofl ndia. 
20. (I) Whoever Intentionally orrers any insult. or ""uses any interrupuon. to the 
Lol<pal while the Lokpal or any of its Members is mokong any verificatio n or conducting 
any inqu iry unde r this Act. shall be punished with simple irnpnson tnc11t for a leTm which 
40 
may ut<:lld to~~~ months, or wi1h fine. or w ith boch. 45 
• 

63 
(2) The provisio ns ofsub-=tion (2) of section 199 ofth<: Code ofCriminol Procedure, 
1973, shall apply in relation to an offence referred tq in sub-section o[,ts they apply on 
relauon to an offence referred to in sul>-Jection (2[ of the S31d sectio n. sub;ect to the 
modi fication thot no comp laint in respect of such ofle ncc sholf be made by the Public 
5 Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Lokpal . 
21. (I) When any such offence as ts descnbed 1n sub·SCCIIon ( /) of section 20 " 
comm itted in the view or presence of the Lokpal. the Lokpal may cause the offender to be 
detained in custody and may. at any time on the same day. take cogm ~an ce of the offence 
and. after giving the offender a reasonable opponunny of showong cause why he should 
10 ·not be punished under this section, try such oficnde r summartly, so far as may be. in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed for summary trials under the Code of Crim inal 
Procedure. 19?3. and sentence him to .stmple impdsonmcnt for :1 tcmt which may ex.tcnd 
to one month. or with fin-e which may excend to five hundred rupees. or with both. 
(2) In every cnse tried under this section. the Lokpal shnll record the facts consmut ing 
15 the offence with the Sl'ltcment (if any) made by the offender as well as the finding and the 
sentence. 
(3} Any person convicted on a triol held under this section rnay appeal to the Supreme 
Court. 
(4) Tne provisions of thiS section shall have effect 1\0twlthstanding anythin g contained 
in the Code of Crim inal Procedu re. 1973. 
22. (I} Every person who makes any compla1nt wh1ch IS held by the Lokpalto be 
false sha ll be puniShable as provided 1n sub·s ection (2). 
(2) When any offence under sub·sectio n (/) IS c:ommmcd, the Lokpal may "'ke 
cogn1tonce of the offence and after giving the offender • reasonable opponunny of sbow1ng 
cause why he should not be punished for such offence, try such offe nder summarily, so far 
as may be. in ~ ccorda ncc with the procedure prescrtbed for summary trials under the Code 
of Crtmmnl Procedure. 1973 and sentence him to imprisonment for a term wh1ch shall not 
be less than one year but wh1ch may extend to three ye:>rS and also to fine which may 
c~ten d to fifty thousa nd rupees and may also award. out of the amount of fine. to the pubhc 
functi Onary aga 1nst whom suc h fa lse complaint has been made . such amount of 
compensation as the Lokpa.l thinks fiL 
2J. Subjec t to the other provis ions of this Act and s ubject to the modifi cation that for 
the purpose of transfe r of any case under section 22. the proviSIOns of section 406 of the 
Code of Cnmina l Procedure, 1973, shall alone apply. the provis1ons of the s:ud Code shall 
apply tO the proceedings before the Lokp•l under section 22 and for the purposes of the 
said provis ions of that Code and the said proccedi ngs. the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a 
Coun of Session and shall hove all the powers of a Coun of Semo n. 
24. (/)The President may. by orde r in wnting and SUbJect to such conditions or 
limitations as may be specified in the order. require the Lokpalto inquire into any allegations 
·(being an allegation in respect or which a comp laint may be madc}$pecified in the ordcrtn 
respect of> pubhc functionary and subject to the provasions of section 13. the Lokpal shall 
comply wull such order. 
12} When the Lokpal is to make any inquiry under sub-section (I). the Lokpal shall 
exercise the same powers and discharge the same functinns as ll would in the ease of any 
mqu1ry made on a complaint under this Act and the proviSions of tllts Act (exce pt section 
22) sh:lll apply accord ingly. 
• 
Applic:.lfiOft M 
Acl lo(l97 .t 
ConJ tnn:nr of 
llddihontJ 
functi.ocu o. 
LDtpol 

-likely 
10k~jv4i· 
Oally olfeci<A 
.. be bani. 
' ' . 
1 .. , 
.~ 
( 
~~ 
~ ~o( ~ 
t 
KUOtl ukc:ra ia 
I ~ p><~r..u,. 
oj 
~ 
..._,. 
~ 
64 
15. (I) The s•m deposited by • complrunant in pursuance of the provisions of 
.sectio" 12 shall.-
(a) in a ea.se where the complaintos dosmosse<~ under sub-section (I) of sectoon 
I 3, stan d forfeited to the Central Government: 
(b) if the LolcpaJ. for reasons to be recorded in writing so directs. be utilised fO< 5 
compensating the public funct ionary <O<npl:>oned against. an<! 
(c) in any other <:a.se, be refunded to the complaonant. 
(2) Jt the Lokpal u SJltis:tlcd th.at.!... 
(a) all or any <X tho allogations nudo in a complaint han or has bef:o 
substantiated clthor wholly or panly , ...:I 10 
(b) bavin' roga.rd to th« CXp<ll5 tS lncurr<d by the cpmpl•inant in r<latioo 
to tho proceedings in resp<et or such complaint and all other relevant 
circumstances of th~ t.asc the co·mplainant d~rvu to he compensated or 
"'"'ardcd, 
the LokpaJ shnll dtlermi~te the amount wbkh shall be paid to thHomplainont by way 15 
o( ruch compensation or rewa rd ond the Lokplll shall detennine the person by whom 
the said compensatioa or nwsard shall ~ p;,_id a~r g_ivinc that ~rsoo a ~a.soaab~ 
oppor1uniry or beinc beard. 
26. II, nt any stage of the inquiry, the Lokpa l-
(a) cons iders it oe<;ess:uy to inquire into the conduct of any person: or 20 
(b) 1S of op1nion 'that the rcpu r..uon of any pers on IS likely to be pr<Judic•~lly 
affec ted by the inquiry, 
the Lokpal shall give to lhM person a rcli.Sonabk Opponunity of being he:ard in the inquiry 
and to produ ce evidence in h.is cJerc:nec: 
Provide d ths.t nothing in this sec tion shall apply where the credit of a witneos Is 25 
being impea ched. · 
21. (I) No suit. pro.secu tion or ocher lega l proceedings shoJI lit agatnst the Lo kpal or 
ogainst any officer. empl oyee. agenc y or pc:rson referred to in section 9, on rupcct of anything 
which is in good faith done or in1ended to be done under thiS Act. 
(2) Save as oth~ise prov ided in this Act. no proceedings or decision of the Lokpo.l 30 
shall be called in question in any Court. 
28. The Loi:pal may. by general or spccoal ord~r in wnung. and subject to such 
conditions :).nd limitalions a.s may be specified therein, direct tho.( any powers conferred or 
dut ies 1mposed on it by or u~der this Act (exce pt the powers under the provoso to sub­
sec tion (J) of s.:etioo 12. the power to dismiss a complaint undor sub-section ( I ) of sect ton 35 
13, the powers to close cases and make reports under section 18 and the powers under 
sec uon 23 J may .I so be exercised or disch arged by the officers, employees and agencoes 
referred 10m section 9, us ma.y be spec1ftcd in the order. 
29. (I ) The President may. by notitic;otioo in the Official Gazcue, mah rule.< for the 
pwrpo.se of carrying out the proviSions of this Act. 
(2) In particul ar. and without prejud ice to the genera lity of the forcgotng power . such 
rules may provide for-
• 
(a) the maMCr in whoch the Preside nt sh:ill obta10 the opinion of the Chu:f 
Justice of india under sub-se ction (I I of section I I: 
(b) the fonn in which compl aints may be made under l'llirse<:tian (2) of sc:<:tiun 45 
12 and the fees, if any, which may be charged in respect thereof: 

65 
(c) thC ,_. In which and the autho n tics or agenci es with whom clopooiu 
shall be made under sul>-scction (J) of section 12 and the form in which <:cntfiC.US 
shall be furnisbcd in respect of such deposits; 
(d) the rnauer. referred to in sub-do use (vi) of clau-'<' (b) of sub- sectio n (/)of 
sec tio n 15; 
( <) the rom~ on which return has tO be furnished ·under sub-section (/) o( 
sec tion 18; 
(j) • ny odl<r matter which is to be or msy be presc.ribcd. 
(3) Every rule maclc under this Act shall be laid. as soon as may be after it is mode. 
10 before each Howe of Parli ame nt. whole it is in session. for • total period of thtny day• 
which may be comprised in o ne sess ion o r in two or more successive sessions. and if, 
befor e the expiry of the S<:.Siion imrr.cdiau:ly followillg the session or the successive scssioru 
aforesaid. both Houses agree in muin& any modification in the rule. or both Hou>es agree 
that the rule should not be made. the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
1 S fonn or be o( no effect, u the ca.se may be; so, however, th:ll any such modification ot 
annulm ent shall be wilhout prejudice to the valid ity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 
30. For the removal of doubtS. it is hereby declared that nothi ng in this Aot shall 
opera te to confer or enable the conferring of any jurisdicllon on the Lokpal to mal:e any 
20 inquiry -
(a) into any olleg ation aJoinst or any act or conduct of-
(i) the Preside nt. the Vito -President or the Spc.3ker of the House of the 
People; 
(ii) the Chi ef Justice or any other Judgc ,of the Supreme Coun; 
(iU) the Comptroller and Auditor-G eneral of India. the Chief Electi oa 
Commissioner or other Election Comm issioncr or the Cha1nnan or any ocher 
Member of the Union Publio Service Commtssion; or 
(b) upon iu own knowledge or informatio n. 
3 1. Nothing contained in this Act shall be consuued as affcctin& the COI\StitutiOfl of. 
or the continwiitce of functionin& or exercise of power. by. any Commission of Inqu iry 
appoi nted under the Qommissio ns of Inquiry Act. 1952 before the commenc eme nt of this 
Act and no complaint shall be made under this Act in respect of any matter referred for 
inquiry to such Cornrnisiion before such commenccmenL 
32. In sectio n 3 of the Com missio ns of Inquiry Act. 1952, in sub-section ( 1), for lhc 
words ''lllc 3pp<0priat<: Oovcmmcnt may"._ the words. brxkcts and figures .. Subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (J} o4 section 10 of the Lokpal Act. 1998. the appropri­
Govemment may .. sbalt be substituted. 
• 
I 
'I 
-o( -
'I 
II 
'I 
I. 
i 

r 
l. 
TilE SCHEDULE 
[Set section 3{3)) 
N i£Jifi§W%Wi:U·WI'St#$ 
I .................................. ....... - .......... having beea appointed Chairpc:rson!Membc< of 
!he Lokpal. do twcar in !he name of Godlsolemaly affirm !hat I will bear 1n1c faith and 
allegiance 10 !he Constitution of lndi" as by law cslablishcd. !hat I will duly and failhfully 
and lO !he best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform !he duties of my OII"ICC 
without fear or favour, alfecuon or ill-will. 
- 66 
• 

i~ 
·• ~ 
·• ~-
~~ 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In its interim rePQrt on the "Problem of Redress of Citizens' Grievances" 
submitted in !966 . the Administrative Reforms Commission recommended, inter 
alia, the setting up of an insti~ution of Lokpal. 
2. To give effect to this recomm endat ion .of the Administrntive Reforms 
Commission. a Bill called the ''Lokpaland the Lokayul.:tas Bill. 1968" was introduced 
in the Fourth Lok Sabha in 1968. The Bill was considered by a Joint Committee of 
the two Houses o f Parliament and the Bill, as reported by the Joint Committee, was 
passed by the Lok Sabha in 1969. While this Bill was pending in Rajya Sabhn, the 
Fourth Lok Sabha was dissolved and consequently, the BiU lopsed. ln 1971, the Bill 
passed by the previous Lok Sabha was re-introduced in the Lok Sabha as the ''Lokpal 
and Lokayuktas Bill. 1971". This Bill also lapsed on the dissolution of the Fifth Lok 
Sabha . ' 
3. A fresh Bill called the "Lokpnl Bill. 1977'' was introduced b the LokS'abha 
in 1977. This Bill was referred to a Joint Committee of both the Houses ofPacliament 
which submitted its repon in July. 1978. When the Bill. as reported by the Joint 
Committee , was under consideration of the Lok Sabha, the Lok Sabha was prorogued 
and was subseque ntly dissolved. Consequently that Bill also lapsed. 
4. The Lokpal Bill, 1985 was introduced in the Lok Sabha and su\)sequent ly 
withdrawn. The Lokpal Bill. 1989 which sought to include the office of Prime Minister 
also within the juri,diction of the Lokpal which was to be a three Member body 
lapsed with the dissolution of th·e Lok Sabha . 
5. The Lokpal Bill. J 996 was introduced in the. Lok Sabha on 13-9-1996. 
There after . it wo.s referred to the Department -related Parliamentary Standi ng 
Comm ittee on Home Affairs for examination and report. The Standi ng Commi ttee 
presented its report to the Parliame nt on 9-5-1997. Before the Government cou ld 
finalise its stalld on the various recommendations of the Committee. the Lok Sabha 
was disso lved on 4-12-1997 and the B ill also lapsed . 
6. The Lokp al Bill, 1998 provides for setting up the oflicc of Lokpal w ith a 
Chairperson and two Membe rs foro rued tenur e. With a view to ensuring that the 
Lokpal is able to act independently and discharge its functio ns witho ut fear or favour, 
the B i 11 provides that the Chairperson/Member of LokpaJ shall not be removed from 
his office, except by an order made by the President on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacily after an inquiry made by a Committee cons isting of the 
Chief Justice of India and two other Judges of the Supreme Court nex.t to the Chief 
Justice in seniority in which the M~mOCi ~add been :nfonned of lhc charges against 
him and give:: a reasonabl~ opport unity of being heard in respect of those chargc3. !\ 
is a lso provided that the Cncirpcrson and other Members shal l be appointed by the 
President by warnml under his hand and seal on the recommendations of a Committee 
cons isting of the Vice-President o f India. as Chairman. Prime Ministe r, Speaker of 
Lok Sabha, Minister o f Home Affairs . Leader of the House to which the Prim e 
Minis ter docs not belong. Leade r of OppOsition in Lok Sabhn and Leader of Opposition 
in Rajya Sabh a as members . Under the Scheme qf the Bill, the Lokpal will inqu ire 
into compl ainL5 al lcging that a public functionary '!$.defined in the Eill has committe d 
an offence punis hable under the Prevent ion ofCon:uption Act. 1988 and the expression 
"public functio nary" covers . Prime Minister. Ministers, Ministers of State, Deputy 
Nfinis ters a_nd Membe rs of Parliamenc It seeks to car.ry out in this respect the object 
and purpose o f the recommendations of the Admi nistrative Refonns Conunission for 
enabting the Citi1.en to have recourse to a conven ient and effective fof\lm for 
determinat ion of complaints and thereby save him from pursuing his remedy through 
the proccs.s of Couru. which may prove expensiv e ocdilatory and may not facilitate 
- 67 
I 
• 
==~--------~----------------------------------------

' I, • 
"' 
I 
I. 
in speedy detenni nat ion. The Bill also seelcs to mab: special provisi ons for 
diJCO<Jr:~ging frivolous. vexatiOU$ and fal.w: complainu. n.. Bill also provides for 
dzclar:uion of a.sseu and liabilities by Members of~~ .ond their family 
-.nbers. anru•~lly. n.. Noles "" clauxs explain the provis;.,.,. coou.aincd in the Bill. 
7. n.. Bill seeks 10 ~hievc the above objccu. 
NewOnJ.; 
1M 23<rl Jl#ly. 1998. 
• 

."'!'.-, .. . 
Notts on douses 
CIDUJ< 2 defines the various express ions used in the Bill. 
CIDI<Jc 3 provide$ for the establishment of Lokpal conJisltng of a ChBJrperson and 
two Members . The Ch:urperson "''"be • penon who is or has been the Chief JuStice or • 
Judge of the Supreme Court. The Member shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge 
of the Supreme Coun or the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
CIDUJc 4 provides that the Chatrperson >nd other Members shall be oppointed ofter 
obtaining c.hc: r~commc:ndallOnS or 3 Cornrnmee conSI.Sllng or the Vice·Preside.nl or 
India, the Prime Minister. the Speoker of the House of the People. the Home Mtnister, the 
Leaders of the Opposition in the House of the People and the Council of St.otcs, and the 
Lc3dct of the House in which the Pnmc MiniSter is not a member of Parllamenl 
CIDuSt 5 provides that the Chatrperson >nd the Members shall be tneltgible to hold 
other offices. 
Clause 6 provides for the term of off:ice and other cond itions of service of the Chair· 
person and Members of the Lokp>l. The: conditions of service, salary, allow>nces and 
pens ion of the Chairperson shall be che same as those of the Chief Jusuce of India. The 
salary of other Membe" shall be the same as those of a Judge of the Supreme Court. After 
a person is appo inted a.s the Chairperson or a Member, hiS conditions of serv ice, allow. 
anees and pension payable to him shall not be varied to his disadvantages . 
CIDuSt 1 deals wuh the removal of Chairperson or Members. 
Cloure 8 provides that one of the Members shall act as the Chairpe,on or dis· 
charge his funclions In ecrtain circums tances. 
CIDusc 9 deals With the staff or the Lokpal and l.be powers of the Lokpal to utilise 
lh.e services, inter alia. of :any invesugating agenctes of the Government and or any other 
agencies. 
CIDurt 10 deals with the jurisdiction of the Lolc.pal. Sub·clause (/) provides that the 
Lok:paJ m:ay inquire into any mauer involved 1n, or arising from. or connected with 3.1\y 
allegation made in a complaint. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Lolc.pal moy conduce on 
inquiry into any act or conduct of any per:son other than the public functionary concerned 
if it considers necessary to do so for the purposes of his inquiry into any allegation. Sub· 
clause (J) provides that no maucr in respec t of which • complaint may be made under this 
Bill shall be referred for tnquiry under the CommtS$ions of Inquiry Ace. 1952. 
CIDI<J< II provides chat the l..okpal shall not inquire Into any mauer concemmg 
any person if the Chairperso n or any Othe·r Member has any bios in respect of such mauer 
or person. 11 also provides that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any complamt made after 
the exptry of a pc:nod of ten years from the date of the commtS$ion of the offence men· 
tioned in the complaint . 
Claurt 12 provides !bat any person other than a public s•rvant as defined therein 
may file a complaint whtch shall be in the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by 
an affidavit. This clause :also provides for a depoSit by the complainant. 
CLause 13 provides for prelimtnary scrutmy of complainu by the Lokpal. 
CIDI<Je 14 provides for the proced ure. for making inquiries into the complain ts by 
the Lokpal. h also provides th3l the Lokpal shall comple te the tnquiry within six months 
from the dote of the rcceip1 of the complaict. whtch could be extended for • funher period 
of six months by the Lokpa l for reasons to be recorded in wnong . 
CIDI<J< 15 provides that the Lokpal shall have all the powe" of civil cou n for 
summoning and enforcing the attendance . rccc:tving evidence and issuing commissions 
for the examination of wunesses or documents. It also provides the proceedings before 
the Lo'kpal shall be deemed to be judtc1al ~rocecdings within the meaning of section 193 
.of the India n Penal Code. 
69 
• 
f 

70 
Clause 16 suks to confer powers of s=h and sei~ure on the Lok.pal. 
Clauu 17 relates to rcpons of lhc Lokpal and acuon taken thereon. Sub-clause (// 
provides that when after onquiry the Lokpal shall communicate its findings to the com­
plainan~ .the pubhc function>ry and the compet<nl autboril)'. It also provides that the 
annual consolidated repon shall be presented by the Lokpalto lhc PresidenL 
Clouse 18 provodes for declar.nion of assets and liabihties by Members of Parha-
mcnt. 
Clouse 19 provides that the salaries. allowances and pensions payable to the 
Ch:urperson and Members of the Lolcpal shall be ch31ged on lhc Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
Clouse 20 provides for punishment for intentional insult or interruption to the 
Lokpal. 
Clau.st 21 seeks to confer powers on the Lokpal to try summanly and punish those 
persons who intenuonally offers any insult. or causes any interrup:ion. to the Loi<pal. 
CI<Ju.se 22 provides for action tO be taken by the Lokpal in the case of fal!e corn­
plaints. 
Clause 23 provodes for application of ceruin provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure , 1973 tO the proccc~i ngs before the Lolcpal. 
Clau.st 24 provides for the conferment of additional fu nctions by the President on 
the Lokpul. 
Claust 25 provides for the disposal of deposits made by the complainants. 
Clause 26 provides that if at any stage of inquiry, any person is likely to be prejudi· 
cinlly affected should be afforded an opportunity of being hcasd. 
Clouse 27 provides for protection from legal proceedings. etc., for the action taken 
in good fruth. 
Clause 28 provides for delegation of powers by the Lokpa!. 
CU:zuse 29 provides for the power of the Presrdent to make rules. 
Clause 30 seeks to make Jt clear that the Lokpal sh:~ll not liave any jurisdiction to 
conduol lDY inquiry II< tO >ny alleg:uion ag:.inst or any act or cooduc: of the President, the 
Vice-President or the Speaker of rhe Hou~e of the People. the Chief Justice cr any other 
Judge of the Suprewe Coun, the Comptroller and ,\ uditor-General of India. the Chief 
Elecuon <.:ommisstoner or Olhcr Elccuon Commissioners or the Chairman or any ot1-.er 
Member of the Unron Public Service Commission. 
Clauu 3 I provides that the provisions of this Bill shall not a/Tea lhc consti!Ution of 
the conrinu>nce of >nv Commission of Inquiry appointed under t.he Commissions of 
lnquory Act, 1952 hero:.: the coming into force of lhc provisions of this BilL 
Claus~ 3:! Seeks 10 m<~ke a consequ~nli al a:nendmer:t in the Comm1SStOn~ of 
lnqurry Act. 1952. 
• 

FINA.'ICIAL ME."'ORANDUM 
Sub-cl ause (/l of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Lokpal 
consisting of a Chairperson and 1wo other Members. Sub-clause (3) of clause 6 of the Bill 
env isages that the salary. allowances and all other conditions of service of. the Chairper­
son shall be the same as those of the Ch•cf Jus11cr..of India and the Members ·as those of 
the Judge of the Supreme CourL ll also provides thai the salary payable to the Members 
shall be in addition Ia any pensi~n and pension equivalent of other pensionary benefi ts to 
which the Member moy be entitled to in respect of any P,revious service under the Gov­
ernment of India or under the Government of a State. 
2. Sub-clause(/) of clause 9 provides that the Lokpal shall appoint a Socretary and 
such other officers and employees as the Prestdenl may determine. from time 10 ttme, in 
consultation with Lokpalto assist h~n> in the discharge of his function.. Sub-clause (2) of 
clause 9 empowers the Lokpallo secure for the purpose of deahng with any compl3Jnts or 
any classes of comp laints, the serv1ce~ of nny oflice r or employee or investigating agency 
of the Centr.U Government or a Sute Government or the service of the officers and em­
ployoes of the Lokpal ond of the officers. employees, age ncies and persons referred Ia in 
sub-c lause {2) of that clauu shall be such as the President m~y determine on consul~tion 
wolh the Lol:.pal. 
3. Clause 19 of the llill provides lhatlhe expenditure on the salaries, allowances 
and penSIOns poyable 10 Members shall be charged on or in respect of the Consolida ted 
Fund of India. 
4. Sub-clouse {2) of claus e 25 of the Bill provides for payment of compensation or 
rewar d 10 a compl:linanl as determined by the Lolcpal. by the Centr:il Go•ernmenL 
5. AI this stage, it is not possib[e 10 give precise details of the expend irure to be 
incurred on the Lokpal. II is. however, ex~led that the Bill. when enacted, willtnvolve 
as non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty-li ve lak.h and a recurring expenditure of 
rupees one crorc a year. In case it becomes necessary to construct :a building to house the 
establ ishme nt of the Lokpal. additional expenditure of a non-recurring nature of the 
order of rupees one crore may also be involved. 
The Bill if enacted wtll not incur any other recurring or non-recurring expendi;ure. 
71 
• 

• 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauoe 29 of the Bill empowers til<; President to make rules for the purpose of 
carrying into effect lh<> provisions of proposed enacunenL 1be various mailers in relation 
to which such rules may be m>dc have been enumerated in detail under various items of 
sub-clause (2) of that clause and relate mainly to the form in which complaints may be 
m:ldc and the fees, tf any. wh1ch may be charged in respect thereof: the manner in which 
ond the outhontics or •scncieswilh whom depooits shall be m>de under sub-clause (3) of 
clause 12 and the form 1n which certificate shall be furnished in respect of such deposits 
under sub-d3use (2) of clause 12; and the additional matters in respect of which powers 
of a civil coun may be c>crcised by the Lokpal. These arc matters of detail necessary for 
effective admintstt:woo of the provisions of the Bill and it is difficult to provide for all the 
situations in the Bill iuelf. 1be delegation of legislative power is. therefore. of a normal 
chancier. 
72 
• 

• 
• 
ANNEXURE 
E.xnACT fll0>11HE COMMJSSIONS <lf' INQUIRY ACT. 1952 
(60 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
3. (/)The appropriate Government may, if \tis of opinion that it is necessary so to 
do, and shall. if a resolution in this behalf is p~sse d by the House of the People or, as the 
co.~e may be. the l<ogoslative Assembly of the Stote, by notification in the OfCicial Gau:tte, 
appoin t a Commission of inquory for the purpose of makong a~ 1nquiry into any definite 
molter of public impo.-.ance and performing such functions and wi01in such time as may 
be specified in the noufication. and the Commiuion so oppointcd shall moke the inquiry 
and perform the functions accordingly : 
Provided that where any such Co!llmission has been appointe d to inquire into any 
m3tler-
(a) by the Central Governmen t, no Stote Government shall. except with the 
approval of the Central Government, appoint another Comm•ssion to inquire into 
the same matter for so long ll.S the Commossion appointed by the Central Govern­
ment is functioning; 
(b) by 3 Sl3te Government, the Ccntr~l Government shall not appoint another 
Commission tO inquire into the same molter for so long as the Commission •t>' 
pointed by the State Government is functioni ng. unless the Central Govern ment is 
of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should be extended 10 two or more Sl3leL 
• • • • • 
73 
Appo:.ntmen1 o( 
Commission, 
.~ 
~ II 
j 
r 
----------------·-------------------- ~------~--
-

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to provido for lhc establishment of lhe institulion oflokpa l to inquiro into allegllions 
o( COrTUpliOn :lgainst public functjon:uics .and for matters: conne cted lhc:rewith. 
(Shn' Kodambur M.R. Jtuwnlu;.n(Jn, Minister of Srate in the :\1inis:ry of Personnel, 
Pubfic Grievances. Pensions) 
14 
• 
• i 
! 

AL'<NEXURE-l11 
(See Para 11.1 of the Report) • 
STATEMENT ON THE LOKPAL BILL , 1998 
(J) A statement indicat ing the proviSions in the Lokpal Bill, 1996, the 
recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs made thereon and the decision of the Government taken on each of 
the recommendations, which were included in the Lokpal Bill, 1998, is enclosed. 
(2) Apart from the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, it was 
decided that in Clause 5 of the Lokpal Bill, 1996, which prescribed that a Member 
of the Lokpal shall be ineligible to hold other Offices, membership of the 
Legislature of a Union Territory should also be incorporated. This has been 
included in the Lokpal Bill, 1998. 
(3) Besides the recommendat ions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on the 
Lokpal Bill, 1996, the following decision was also taken by the Government: 
"(1) In respect of the tenure and maximum age of the Chairman and Members of 
the Lokpal, the following provisions may be suitably incorporated in the 
Lokpal Bill:-
(i) A person appointed as Chairman shall hold office for a term of 3 years 
from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 
(ii) A person appointed as Member shnll hold o ffice for n term of 3 years 
from the date on which he enters upon his of[icc or until he attains the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 
(iii) On ceasing to hold office, the Chairman or a Member shall be ineligible 
for funhcr employment under the Government of India or under the 
Government of any State. 
(iv) A person who has been -a Chairman or a Member of the Lokpal shall no.t 
be eligib le Cor re-appointment in the Lokpal. 
(2) In respec t of discharge of the functions of the Chairman owing to his absence 
on leave or otherwise, as also in the event of the occurrence of a vacancy by 
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the following provisions may be 
suitably incorporated in the Lokpal Bill:-
(i) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairman by reason of his death, resignation or otherv.<ise. the President 
may, by notification, authorise one of the Members to act as the 
CHairman until the appointment of a new Chairman to fill such vacancy. 
(ii) When the Cha irman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence 
on leave or otherw ise, such one of the .Members as the President may, by 
notificat ion, author ise in this behulf, shall discharge the functions of the 
Chairman until the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties." 
This has been incorporated m the Lokpal Bill, 1998. 
75 
• 
I 
'I 
' 

• 
76 
Statement todlcatlng Existing Provisions In the Lokpul Bill, 19%, the Rccommtnd tuWns of the Departanent-Rc l:dcd 
Parli.amcnlury Stand ing Committee on llomc Affair s mQde thereon and the O...dsion Taken hy the Government to 
AcccptiRcj<c:v'Modify thc RccommcndotioJU 
Cause Existing Provisi-ons in the Sill 
(I) (2) 
Recommendations made by Decision of the Government 
the Standing Committee 
(3) (4) 
3 (2)(b) "Twa Members who arc, or The Commit tee has Rc::.comrnendation accepted. 
first 
pro­
'iso 
to 
Oausc 
4(1) 
6{1) 
hove bc:en. or qoa1ified to be, a 
Judge or the Suprem e Coun "' 
Provided th:u every appointment 
under this sub-$Cction shGII be 
made alter obtaining the 
recommendations of a 
Committee consisting o(-
(a) the Prime MiniOier-
Oiairman . 
(b) Speaker ol the House ol the 
People-~lembcr . 
(c) Minis:er in-charge of the 
Ministry of Home Affain in the 
Government of India-Mem ber. 
(d) Minister in·chargc ol the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Gric.v::anecs and Pcns ion.s in lhc: 
Government o( lndia--.\lfcmbcr. 
(c) Leader of the Opp<nition in 
the House o l the People· 
Member. 
(f) Le3der of the Opposition In 
the Counci l of States-Member . 
(g) Deputy Chairman ol the 
Council ol State•-Member 
Every Member shJll hold office 
for :& term of five years (rom 1he 
date on whicb he enters upo n 
hu, orfic.e. 
• 
rc<:-ommcn<Jcd substitution of 
the existing clause: wiijl the 
following cl>usc:-
'"Two M cmbcn who a:re, or 
have been, Judges or the 
Supreme Cour1 or the Chie f 
Justice of the H1gh Court". 
The Commiuee has 
recommen ded tho.t first 
proviso to Oausc 4(1) be 
substituted to rend as 
follows:-
"Provided thai every 
appoimmcnt under this sub· 
section shall be mndc after 
obtaining •he reeomme :;da. 
rions of a Commiucc consist· 
ing ol-
(a) The Vice·Preside nt of 
India~Chairman, 
(b) the Prime 
MinLster-Mc:m bcr. 
(c) Speaxer of the Hous.: of 
the People-Member, 
(d) uadcr of the Oppositi on 
in the Ho use ol the 
l'eop!e-Mcmbcr, 
(c) Leade r of the Opposition 
in the Council ol 
States--."tember. 
The Comm iuec has 
reeommended lhnr the term 
of office or the Members or 
the Lokpal be reduced from 5 
years to 3 yean 3nd rhr 
cx:s-ling clause moty bt 
amended accordil'1gly 
Rceommenda;io n modified 10 the 
e:f(ecr th3l Cornminee under section 
4(1) of the Lokpal Bill. 1998 shall 
consist of Vice-President of India. 
Pnm< Minister, Speaker of Lok 
Sabho, Minister or Home Affairs. 
Leader ol the House to which the 
Prime Minister does not bclOJlg, 
Leader ol Oppooition in Lok Sobha 
and Lc>der of Opposition in Raj~ 
Sabha , 
Rec omme ndatio n accepted . 
i 
l 

~~--~--=================-======~-=~~-
s. 
(l) 
7 
8(2)(i) 
4nd 
8(2)(ii) 
(2) 
A member shoJI nor be removed 
from his ofr.cc cxcepr by an 
order mad e by rhe Presidenr on 
rhe ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after 
an inquiry mode by rhe Chief 
Ju5ti(;e o( lndia o r. as 1hc 'ilsc 
may be, by such orber Judge or 
the Supreme Coun 3.s the Chief 
Ju,srice of India may nominate in 
rho< behall, on which the 
Member had been informed of 
1hc ch:u-gcs ugainst him and 
given a reasonable o pporh.ni ty 
or being heard in r<spcct oi 
rhosc charges. 
"8(2) Wirhour prejudice ro rhe 
provisions of sub-scerion (1), rbe 
Lokpal may, for the purpose of 
denling v.·ith any complaints or 
any dass.cs o( comp laints , 
secure-
(i) rhe services of any officer or 
employee or investigating agency 
o( the Centra l Oovcmmc:nt or a 
St:t.tc Governmen t with tbe. 
concurren« or that Govern · 
mcnt; or 
(ii) the servi ces o( any other 
pC'tSQn or agency" 
• 
77 
(3) 
The Committe e has 
recommended 1hon the 
inquiry :.gain5t a member of 
the Lokpa l :~s c:omcmpltth:d 
under Cbusc 7 ror his 
removal shoukl be made bv ... 
the Chief Justice o[ Indi~ and 
the two senior·rnost judge s of 
rhc Supcme Coun. Til< 
Committee has~ therefore, 
desired rhor Clause 7 moy be 
amended acc.ord ing1y. 
Conscquenrly rhc modified 
Clause 7 will read as 
below: -
.. A Member shall nor be 
removed rrun1 his office 
excepr by an order made by 
the rresident on the ground 
ot proved misbt:havioor or 
mcapac:icy arccr an inquiry 
made bv rhc Chief Jusricc of 
India a·nd two SC:'Iior mos: 
judges, on which rhc Member 
had been Informed O( lhe 
charges again st him and g.iven 
a reasonable: opponunily or 
being heard ir. respect of 
rhDSc chargu " 
111c Committee has 
recom men ded t!~at in ordc:t 
to eruut ~ rh:u the services of 
office rs. ere. ro the Lokpol 
arc prov ided wi th due 
promp tness and necessa ry 
procedurt: in this regard may 
be provided in rhc rules to be 
framed under rllis Aer. 
Accordin&IY, 1 he modified 
clause will rend ~s follows:· 
S(l) Wirhour prejudice 10 rhc 
provisio ns or sub ·secti on ( 1). 
:md subject 10 rules 
prcscdbcd in chis reg:.rd. the 
Lokpal may, for the purpose 
o( dealing with QOY 
complai nts or ~· ny cl~sses of 
compla ints. $Ccurc::-
(i) the services of any officer 
Qr employe e or investigating 
agency of rhc Ccnrra l Gqv· 
cmmcnr or :1 State Govern­
menl with lhe con currct\CC of 
1hat Govc:rnmcnl; or 
(ii) rhe service$ of any orhcr 
pc rson or age rtcy. 
(4) 
Recommendouion accepted . 
The provisions rcl~ t i ng to Clause 
8(2) (I) ond 8(2)(i i) as rhcy cmtcd 
in rhe Lokpal BiU. !996 should 
stand. 

{I) 
9 
10 
(2) 
''9(1) SubJ<Cl 10 the other 
provisio.ns of 1his Act, the 
Lokpal moy inquire into 3ny 
m~:uter involved in, or arising 
from, or connected with, any 
o lleg:;~ ti on m ;~ d c in n complain!. 
9(2) The Lokpal moy inquire 
1.n10 any iCt or conduct of any 
person other thOJn a public 
functiooary in s.o (or as ic 
considers it ncce.s.s3ry so to do 
for the purpose: or us inqu>ry 
mto any such allegation: 
Provided lhat <he Lokpol shoJI 
give such p:-rson a rcason;tbfc 
opportuni<y or beins heard and 
10 produce evidence in his 
ddcnce. 
9(3) l'o maner in re$pcCI or 
which • complaint may be mode 
under this A« shall be rererred 
(or inquiry under the 
Commis.sion,s. of Inquiry Act, 
1952, except on <he 
rccommcndo.tlon, or wi{h the 
concurrence:, of the Lokp;,l." 
" 10(1) Tho Lokpal shall no< 
Lnquire 1nto any m:allc:r 
.concerning :my person jf any 
~·!ember h:!.S any bias in respect 
o( $UCh n-\att~:r or person antJ 1f 
:any dlspuu: :.rises in this beh::alf. 
1he Pr<:,ident shall, on :an 
application m<~de by the p:Hi y 
aggrieved, ob1ain, in such 
manner 2s may be prescnbc:d, 
1hc opinion of the Cheif Ju.suce 
o( 1 ndia and decide th~ dispu1e 
ln conformity with such opinion. 
10(2) The Lol<pal shall not 
tnquirc into any m:mer which 
has bc!t-n rderrcd for inquiry 
under the Commissions of 
Inquiry Ae<. 1952. on ilS 
sccommendtllion ot with HS 
prior concurrence. 
10(3) The Lokpal shall not 
mquire nHO :~.ny compl:1inr if the 
complaint i11 m:.de afte r !he 
expiry of (ive yc:.rs from the 
done on v.-hich lhe offence 
mentioned 1n such complaint 1& 
:Jitcscd to hove been 
commincd." 
78 
(3) 
The Comm111e.c has 
recommended thtu the word 
' 'may"' in $Ub·clau5C (!) of 
this cbuse may be substituted 
bv <he word "shall... The 
Committee has turlhcr 
recommended th~lt this 
amoun1 of discreuon 
conrerrcd on <he Lokpal vide 
sub-clause (3) of clause 9 in 
the matter of referring any 
comp!aint !or i.1quiry under 
1hc Commissions of lnquiry 
Act, L951, is not desirable 
and the worcb 'exccpl on the 
rccommendaliOn. or with the 
concurrence , of the LokpaJ' 
occurring therein be tJelctcd 
Clause 9 may be amended 
accordingly. The modified 
sub·cla use ( I) and (3} or 
clause 9. will read :as under­
"9(1) Subject to the other 
provisions Of lhis ACI the 
Lokpal shall enquire in10 any 
mauer involved in. or arising 
ftom. or connecicd ~Nl1h. anv 
allcs,:nion m:Jdc in ~ 
compla int. 
9(3) No m~ue:- 1n ccspcc{ o! 
which a compfllml m:~y be 
m:adc: under 1his Act ~ h ;al l be 
rderre d fot inquiry under the 
Commissions or lnquir;· Act. 
1952.'' 
The: Comntince h:t$ 
rc:commendccJ dclc:uon of 
sub·<iause (2) or Cl"u"' 10 . 
The Commi l tee has runhcr 
recom mended that the rc:riod 
of ' YC-3r$ occurnn: m sub· 
douse (3) o1 Clasuc 10 be 
subsrirmed lt> r~ad nJ· ten 
y~ars. 
Accordingly. I he sub·dJusc 
{3) or clause 10 will be 
renumbered us sub .. cluusc (1) 
and will rc:~d as gtv\!n 
beluw :-
10(2) The [..okpa l shnll no< 
inquire into o.ny complnint ,( 
the complaint is made a!tcc 
the expiry Of ten yc:lD from 
rhc. dote on which the offcru:c 
mentioned in such compl:~int 
is :alleged to h<i''C been 
committed . 
(~) 
Recommendation <!Cteptcd. 
Recornmend:JIIon accepted . 
f 
, 
\ 
\ 

-
(I) 
II 
12. 
(2) 
"ll(3) The compla int shall 
deposit in such manner and with 
such authority or agency as may 
be prescribed a sum of one 
thou.s.and rupees 10 be: av(lilable 
lor dispOsal unde r Section 28. 
Provided thot the Lokpal moy. 
for suffic.."ient cause to be 
recorded in writing, exempt a 
complainant from the 
requirement under this $Ub­
s.ection. •• 
"12( 1). If the Lok;>al is satisfied, 
after considering D compl;.~int 
and after making such 
verification as it deems 
appropriate-
( a) that the complaint is not 
m;:~dc within the period of five 
years specified In sub-section (3) 
of section 10; or 
(b) that it cannot make an 
inquiry in rcspc~t of t.hc 
complaint by reoson of the 
provisions of sub -sect ion (2) of 
section 10 or any other provision 
of sub-section (I) of this Act; or 
(c) that the complaint is 
frivolous or vexatious or is· not 
mode: in good faith: or 
(d) that there are no sufficient 
grounds for inquiring into the 
complaint, the Lokpol shall 
dismiss the complaint nfter 
recording iLS reasons therefor 
and -communicate the S;)mc to 
the complainant and to rhe 
competent authority ... 
• 
79 
(3) 
Committee has 
recommended suitable 
amendment 'to this provision 
for the reasons indicated 
against this provision. 
Accordingly, the modified 
sub,lausc (3) of clause 11 
will read as bclow:-
"11(3) The complainont shall 
dc.po$it in such manner and 
with such authority or agenc-y 
such sum as m~y be 
pres.eribed to be av01il01ble (or 
disposal und-er section 28." 
(I) The Committee has 
recommended that the period 
or s years men! ioncd in 
Clause 12(1)(a) be subst ituted 
to read as I 0; ye:Jis. 
(2) Consequential change in 
Clouse 12(1)(b) be effected in 
the light of the Committee's 
recommcnduttion recommen­
ding deletion of sub·cl::JUsc 
(2) of Claus~ 10. 
(3) Sub-douse (1) (c) should 
be reworded to read ' that the 
complain! is roaoifestly false 
and vexatious' and sub-cl;;~usc 
(!)(d) shoul d be deleted in 
roto. 
Th< modified sub-clause (I) 
of ci;>uSC 11 will read as 
bclow:-
"12(1) H the Lokpol is 
satisfied afler considering a 
comploinl :md after nt:lking 
such verification as it deems 
appropriate-
(a) that the comp laint is not 
made within ·the period of ten 
years specified in sub-sec1ion 
(2) o! section 10; or 
(b) that it cannot make an 
inquiry in respect or the 
compl:.~ i nt due lu any 
provision of this Act; or 
(4) 
Recommendation accc:pted. 
It was further decided that the 
employees of autonomous bodies 
should olso be brought within the 
ambit or the explanation below sub­
clause (1) of claw;c I 1 of the 
Lokpal Bill, 1996, adopting the 
description used for the 
amendmtnls proposed in the 
Rcprcscnl:3tjon of the People Act, 
1951. Accordingly, it was deci ded 
that the Legislative Dcpanmcnt 
should incorpor:uc suit::~bly 
Explanotion (C) below sub-clause 
{!) of Oause II of the Lokpal Bill 
as under: 
.. (c) any person in the service or an 
institution, concern or ~ndenaking 
which is comrollcd or fmaoced 
wholly or substantially by the funds 
provided, directly or indirectly, by 
the Centr-al Government or ~ Sfate 
Government." 
Recommendation accepted. 

13. 
1~. 
"13(2) Every such inquiry shall 
be conduc1c:d in amcra by the 
Chairman and the Mcmbcn 
siuing jointly"'. 
"14 (I) Where the Lokpol 11 
sahsified-
(>) that investlgotion by any 
police officer under the Code or 
Crimmal Procedure. 1973, into 
2ny oUcnc.c in respect of which a 
eomphainc is made or into O'lny 
motucrs connected thccc:with 
may prejud iciolly affect the 
c:o.nduct of inquiry under this act 
witb respect to such complaint: 
and 
(b) thot having rcgord-Jo all the 
circumstance.$ o.l the cal-C u 
wou ld be p<opcr to defer such 
invc.stig:uion pending the 
completion of such inquiry • 
• 
80 
(c) that the c:ompl•int ;, 
manifestly false and 
VClOIIOUS, the Lokpal Shall 
dismiss the complaint 3Cttr 
rcoording its reasons therefor 
and communicate the ~me 10 
the complainanl and lhc 
The Commit:cc h;Js rccom ­
mendd that sub-clause (2) of 
C13USC 13 be :amended and 
1hc words in c:Jm~ra be 
substilutcd by 1he words in 
open and ot proviso be :.ddcd 
lhcrclo as follows; 
.. Provided that the Cha i rma.n 
and the Member> of the 
Lokpal n~ay ~on d uct an 
inquiry m c:Jmer;, in 
exceptional tircumstances for 
rcnsons to be recorded in 
writing... Accordi ngly, 1hc 
modified sub·dausc (2) of 
clause J 3 will re-::~d as 
belo w:-
" Every such Inqui ry shall be 
conduc ted in open by the 
Chairman and lhe ,'¥1eAlbers 
sming joimly. 
Provided that rhc Ch:~. irrn an 
and the Member> o f the 
Lokpal may conduct an 
Inquiry in camcr:J in 
exceptional Clrcu.msrances (or 
reasons to be recorded in 
wnting ... 
The Committee has 
recommended that clause 14 
be omitted from the Bin. 
. .... jlf ·. ~ 
.. 
Recomrnenda:ion accepted . 

II 
l 
I 
(1) {2) 
It may by order in writing and 
for reasons to be recorded 
therein direct th:,u till the 
completion of such inquiry or 
for such shorter period u may 
be: specified in the or<ler any 
such inve:stigatjon $h:dl be 
deferre d or as the cue may be, 
shall be suspended. 
Provided that no .such direcdon 
shall apply with respect to any 
investigation req uired to be 
made in pursuance of an order 
or any court . 
(2) Notv.•itltstondin& onything 
conr-ained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, in 
computing for the purposes of 
Chapter XXXVI of that Code, 
the period of limil3tion for 
taking cognizance o f any 
offence, being an offence the 
inve-stigation in respect of which 
has been deferred o r 
inte rnational org3nisauon, o r 1he 
investigation or detection or 
crime; or 
(b) as might involve the 
disclosure of proceedinp of the 
C.binet of the Union 
Government or of ttny 
Committee or such Cabine t. 
C.binet or the State 
Government or of nny 
Committee of such Cabinet; and 
for 1he purpose of lhis sub­
sectio n. a c;crtiric3te issued by a 
Sc<::retary to the Government o( 
India or Chief Secretory of the 
State Government. as lhc C3.SC 
may be, eertifyin& that any 
information, answer, or ponion 
of a document is of the nature 
specified in clause (a) or clouse 
(b') shall be bind ing ond 
conclusive. 
IS. Provided that the Lo\tpal moy 
require any inrormadon or 
answer or portion of a document 
ia.ltt.Spect or which a c:eniCic:ate 
is.: issued under thi.s sub-section 
to the effect that it is of the 
natur e specified in e1:lusc: (a} to 
be disclosed to it in private for 
serutiny and if on such $Ctutiny 
the Lo~pal is <ati.sfied thnt such 
ccrtlfiCa.tc ought not to have 
been issued. it shall dcclorr: the 
cc:riificate to be or no ef!cct . 
• 
81 
(3) (4) 
------------------~~~---- . --

... ·.· (I) 
16. 
·-
(2) 
Explanation-For the purpo"'s 
o( thas scelion, .. public serv~nt" 
s.h~l1 h~ve the s::unc mcanmg as 
in sce1ion 21 of the indian Penal 
Code.· 
"16 (J) If the Lokpal bas reason 
to bc!ic.,c: th:ll any dOC'Umcnts 
which. in irs opinion, w1ll be 
wdul !or, or rcle.,ant to. any 
inqu1ry under chis act, arc 
secreted ln any place. 11 m01y 
outhor~c ~ny ort'iccr S\lbordin::ue 
to 11, or any ot!iccr or an 
invcstictuin& IJCnc:y referred 10 
in sub·scc,ion (2) ot scctton 8, to 
search !or 3nd to scitc iuch 
documcnu. 
16(2} Jr the Lokpal is satisfied 
that any documciHS seazed under 
sub·sccuon (I) would be 
evidence: tor the purpose of any 
inquiry under this Act and tha t 
11 would b.: nccessory to rc1ain 
the documen ts in its custody . II 
may so retain !he wid 
docun\cnts lill the c:omplc:tion of 
such inquiry. 
Provided thot wher e such 
d;x;umcnts 11 1cizcd lleforc the 
commencement or such inquiry, 
the Lokpal shall rctutn the 
documents before: the expiration 
or o period or one year (rom the 
d:uc on which il is seized unlcu 
such inquiry has been 
commenced bc:focc such 
CXp1C3UOR, 
Explanation-For the purpoSC$ 
ol this sub-section, 2n inqu•ry in 
CC$pCC( O( :1 COmplaiOI-
(a) shall be deemed h) have 
commenctd on the d;a1c on 
"'hich the Lokp:tl Corwards • 
copy of the eomplaint to the 
competent authority under 
clause {a) or sub-section (l) of 
sccaon 13. 
82 
(3) 
The Commiucc: has 
recommended 1h:u the 
proviso to sul>-<:lause(2) o( 
clause 16 may be n:odificd to 
rc;~.d -u follo>4'S: 
'"Provi<!cd rh:u in cases where 
such doc:umcms are required 
to be returned. rhe Lokpal 
shall return the doC\:mcnts 
alter rc1~1ning copies thereof 
wit~ due aurhcntication ... 
The Commillcc has also 
recommended rhat 1he: 
Explanalion 01ddcd <Jftc:r lhc 
proviso appears to be 
unnce-cssary to lht! 
Comm ittee and hence it 
should be dekted , 
Accordingly, the modified 
sub-clause (2) oi clause !6 
wiU re'<'d as below:-
"16{2) If tl1e Lokpal is 
satisfied th3t any document s 
sciz.cd unde r $ub-section (1) 
would be evidence ror the 
purpose of any inquiry under 
this Act and that it would be 
necessary 10 rc12in the: 
documenlS in its custody, h 
may so rcC3tn the said 
documents rill the cornplc:fiOn 
of such inquiry: 
Provided that tn ~ses wht:tc 
S\lcb documents arc required 
to be returned, the Lokpal 
shall return the docurncnt~ 
DCtcr retaining topies thereof 
with due Juthcn(ic:uion ... 
. ... ,; -.. u:> . .. :;e:;o , 
• 
(4) 
Recommcnd:1tion uccptcd , 

(I) 
17. 
(2) 
(b) shall be deemed 10 have 
been completed on the clute on 
which the Lokpal closes !he case 
under clous.c (a) of sub-section 
{ I) of section 17 or where the 
Lokpal mokcs a ~eport to 1he 
competent aulhority und::r 
clause (b) or chat sub-scerion on 
1hc expiry of the period 
mentioned in sub-section (3) of 
that sccti<)n. 
(3) The provision of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure. 1971 
relating 10 searches $hall, so (ar 
as may be apply 10 searches 
un(Jcr thi5 5cction subject to the 
modiii~ l ion 1ha1 sub·section (5) 
of ..:ction 165 of the said Code 
::hall have c:rrect as if. for the 
word ''M!Iglslratc", wherever it 
O«urs, the words "Lokpol or 
ony officer authorised by it" 
were substiluu:d. 
"17{1) If, oftcr inquir;y in respect 
or • comploint, the Lokpal is 
salisfied thot-
(a) no allegation m3de in the 
c:ompJ~int has been substan1i:ned 
cilher wholly or part ly, it shall 
close the case anc.! in1im:uc !he: 
complainant. the public 
{unctionnry and the compete nt 
3uthority a<XOrdingly; 
(b) all or • ny or the allcg01ions 
made in the comp laint have or 
h:a.s been 5Ub$tantiated either 
wholly or partly, u shall by 
report in writin&,. communicate 
oiS findings and 
rc:commc:n<.lation1 to the 
competent aurhority and 
Intimate the compl3inant and 
rhe public functionary 3bout its 
b;,vir\g m:H.Ic. the rep-ort. 
'>'1 ':rojRS - F 911-· 
• 
83 
(3) 
(1) Tl!e Commi ttee: has 
recommended th:u sub. 
clauses (a) and (b) of Clouse 
17(1) onoy be combined in10 
one clause to read as 
follows:-
.. AI the conclu:..ion O{ the: 
inquiry. the Lokp.,l shall 
determine whether all or any 
o( the offences "llcgecl in the 
complainrs have or h.,s been 
proved to its s:uisfaction. The 
Lokpal shall report its 
finding,s to the compl:unanJ. 
the public functionary and 
the competent :authori1y ... 
Consequcntia.l amendrnl!nt in 
this clnusc moy be made 
ac;cordingly to rc·numbcr &t as 
17(1) instead of 17(1)(3) and 
(b). 
(4) 
Recommcndtttion acee.pte!d. 

(I) (2) 
(2) The c:ompetent authority in 
the eose of a public functionary. 
other th3n the Prime: Minister, 
shall cxominc the report 
forw>rded to it under clause (b) 
of sub-section (I) and 
communiC3te to the Lokpal. 
within three months of the date 
of receipt of the report , che 
ac1ion ukcn or proposed to be 
t;.kc.n on the basis of the rcp<Kt. 
(3) The Speaker, in che c:ISe of 
the Prime Mini.$tcr or a Member 
of the House of the People and 
che Chairman of the Council of 
States in the case of a Member 
of that Council shall, as soon :u 
may be J:tfter and in any case not 
l:ucr thnn ninety days from the 
reccipl of report under Clouse 
(b) o r SUb·SCCiiO n (l), COU$C lhe 
some to be laid before lhe 
House or the People, or the 
Counc:il of Stntes, as lhc ease 
may be. 
C.Xplan3tic.>rt-ln computin& the 
period of ninecy doys referred to 
in thi> sub->cecion, any period 
during which cha Houle or chc 
People or the Council or StOIC$, 
:\S the c:.sc may be. is not m 
s<:ssiun sholl be excluded. 
17(• ) The Lok~l sh•ll prc>cnl 
:.nnually to the President a 
c::on.solid:ucd report on the 
Jdmin~u:uion of thi.s Act ;tncJ 
1hc: President sh:sU. a.~ soon as 
mJ.y be :tfter. and in any t:::l$C 
not l;ucr than ninety days from 
the rcceipl or such rcporc c:su$C 
the s;&mc, toactherwith 3n 
~xplanatory mcmor:andum. to ~ 
L::aid before each House uf 
Parliament. 
• 
84 
(3) 
(2) The Comntillcc ha> also 
recommended that the words 
"other than the Prime 
~tinlstcr'" occu.rring in sub­
clause (2) of the Clause 17 
should be delcccd . 
(3) The Commictce h:u also 
recommended th:at the pcriud 
of ninety days prescribed 
under sub~l>usc (3) for 
laying ot the Report of the 
Lokpal before the House of 
1hc People or the Council of 
Sta1es, as the case m .. y be, 
rc:ld wi th E,;:planation 
appended thereto, ls quilc 
unreasonable and it should be 
omitted (rom the clause 
alongwith the Explanation 
ln$lcad sub·clausc(3) may be 
amended to provide ror 
laying of the Reporl after iu 
reccip1 beCore the House: of 
lhe People or the Council of 
StJlcS as the c;asc may be. 
within the first week on 1hc:ir 
aJSembling (or a session. 
(~) The Comminee ho< •lso 
recommended th:a1 since sub­
clause (3) of Oause 17 rcl:ues 
to 1he 12-ying or Reports in 
respecr or compl:tin:s agatnst 
publu; runctionanes received 
from che Lokpa l, it should 
have been prc:c:edc:ncc for 
chronological rc:3$0!U ove r 
sub-douse (2) and 
accordingly >ub-clousc (3) as 
amended. be n:
4
numbered as. 
sub-clause (2) and sub-<lausc 
(2) be rcnu mbercd as sub· 
clau:«: (3) 
(4) 
Recommcnd3tions on sub.claus.c 
(2) Clause 17 accept<~. 
( 

(l) (2) 
17. Explanation. - !n computing the 
period of ninety days referred to 
in this sub-secti o n, any peri od 
du ring which Parliament o r, as 
the case may be, either House 
of Parli a ment, is not in session. 
shall be exclude d . 
!8. "18 Eve ry Member oi 
Parliament shall rurn ish a re1um 
of ail assets owned by him and 
me,nbers ot his family and all 
liabilities i J~cu rrd:l by him and 
the member's of his family 
before I..okpa l every year in such 
Corm a.s may be presc ribed." 
85 
(3) 
According ly, the 
sub-clauses (2) & 
re3d as follows:-
modifi.ed 
(3) will 
(2} The Speaker . in the case 
of the Prime Minister or a 
Member of the House of rhe 
People and the Ch airman of 
the Coun cil of States in the 
C3Sc of a Member of thai 
Covncil shall, as soo n as may 
be after and in any c:~.se 
within one wec:k on th.eir 
assembling for a sessi on from 
!he: receipt o( rcpor1 under 
clau« (b) of sub-section ( 1), 
cause th-e samt 10 be laid 
before the House of the 
Peop le or the Council oi 
States, as the case. may be . 
(3) The competent authority 
in 'he case or a publ ic 
functio nary shall e,;am ine the 
report forwarded to it under 
clause (b) of <ub -section (1) 
and comm unicate to the 
Lokpill. wilhin three monchs 
of the dace o( re~:::d pt of I he 
repo rt. the action taken or 
propostd to be taken on the 
basis o f the reporL 
(4) T he Lokpal shall pres ent 
an11ually to the Presiden1 a 
consolidated repon on the 
administr:uion of this Act and 
the Pres idcnc shall, as soon as 
may be after, and in any case 
not late r th:tn ninety da.ys 
from che receipt of suc h 
re pon, cause the same 
togetherwith nn expla natory, 
memorand um. to be laid 
before eac h House of 
ParliamenL 
The Comrnincc has 
recommen ded that Clau:;e 18 
which provides of declar ·a tion 
of asset s bv the Members of 
Parliament: bdo re the 
Lokpal cvey yeur, should be 
;~; mended 10 p rovide for 
furnishing of return by t he: 
• 
(4) 
Recomme ndation accepted. 11 wi'IS 
aiso decided that a deuerent clause 
may olso be lnsened to deal with 
cases of non.filing or delayed filing 
of returns by any Membe r(<) of 
Parliament or their being filed in an 
incomplete or fa lsified manner . It 
was decided th:ll a suitable 
' -

(l} 
.. 
(2) 
(2) The competent authority in 
the case of a public functionary. 
other than lht Prime Minister, 
shall examine the report 
(orw:udcd to it under clause (b) 
of sub-section (I) and 
communic:.atc 10 the Lokpill, 
within thrc~ months of the date 
of receip t of the report, the 
accion taken or prop-osed to be 
taken o n !he b.asi.s of the: report. 
(3) TI>< Speaker , in the case or 
the Prime Minister or a Mt:mbcr 
of the Ho11s< of the People and 
the Cha irman of the Council of 
St3tcs in the case of 3 Member 
of that Council shall, as soon as 
may be 3ftcr and in any case not 
latt:r th:ln ninety days from the 
rece ipt of report under Clause 
(b) of sub-section (1), cause the 
same to be laJd bdorc tOe 
House of the People. or the 
Council of State~. as the case 
may be. 
Explanalion- ln computing the 
period of ninet y days referre d to 
in this ~utrsection , any pc:riod 
during which the House of the 
People o r the Olunci l of States, 
as 'he c:1se may be , ls not in 
session shail be excluded . 
17( 4) The Lokpal shall prese nt 
annually 10 the Ptcsident a 
consolidated report on t he 
3dm~nislr.H ion of this Act and 
the Preside nt shall , as soon ns 
may b.: after, and in any case 
not later than ninet)' days from 
the reccipl of such report, c:.~ust: 
the same, togetht:l'\l.·ith an 
expla 1lato ry memorandum , to be 
l:.1id before each Hou.\c: of 
Parliament . 
84 
(3) 
(2) The Comm iHee has also 
recommended chat the wo.rds 
"other than the Prime 
Minister'' occurr ing in ' sub­
clause (2) of !he Clouse 17 
should be dele.ted . 
(3) The ComtniHce has olso 
recommended lhat the period 
oJ ninety da.ys prescribed 
under sub-clau>< (3) lor 
laying of the Report ol the 
Lok pal before the House of 
the People or the Counci l of 
S{ate.s, as the case: may be, 
read with Expl;;:.nation 
appended theieto. is quite 
unreasonable and it should be 
omitted from the clause 
:alongwith the: E.'(p13o<!lion 
lnstcod sub-cl;>use(3) may be 
amended to provide for 
laying of the Report after its 
receipt before the Hou.sc: of 
the People or the Coun cil of 
Srates. as the e-ase may be:. 
within the firsc we·ek on their 
assc:mbli ng for a sessiOIL 
(~) The Committe.: has also 
rero mmende d th:H since sub· 
clouse (3) or Clouse 17 relate> 
to the laying of Reports in 
respect o-f compi<Jints agnins1 
public functionar ies received 
from the Lolcpol. it ;hou ld 
have b-een prece dence (or 
chronol Ogic:JI reasons aver 
sub-clause (2) ~nd 
\ICCOrdingly s~b·dallsc (3) as 
amended, be re-numbered as 
sub·ci~HiSe (2) atld sub-dause 
(2} be renumbered a. sub · 
clause (3) . 
(4) 
Recommendalions on sub-clauS<: 
(2) Clause 17 accepted. 
( 

(I) (2) 
17. E.!<plonorion.-ln comput ing the 
period of ninety doy• referred to 
in this sub--s.tction, any pc:riod 
during which P~rliOJment or. as 
the: case may be. either House 
of P;;srliament, is nol in se:uion. 
shall be excluded . 
!8. .. 18 Every Member of 
Parli3ment 5h:lll Cumish 3 r~ tu rn 
of oll o•w:r. owned by him and 
mc.nbers of his family and oil 
liabilities incurreO by him and 
the members of his fa mily 
befo re Lokpo! every year in such 
form ns mny be pres.cribed ... 
t _. 
85 
(3) 
A«:ordingly. the ntodified 
sub-c lauses (2) & (3) will 
read as follows:-
(2) The Spea ker. 111 the Cll$t 
of !he Prime Minisltr or u 
Member of the House of the 
People and the Chnirm on <>f 
che Council of Suue! in the 
case of • Member of rh al 
Council shall, as soon as moy 
be ~her and in any case 
'*:ithin one week on 1hc1r 
asscmblin& (or a session (rom 
the receipt o( n:porl under 
d•usc (b) Of $Ub-SCCiiOn (! ), 
cau.st; 1he ~n\c. to be laid 
befo re: the I {ouse o( the 
People or the Council of 
States, as the c.nse may be. 
(3) The competent a ut ho rit y 
in the c3sc of m pub lic 
func tiona ry sha ll exam ine the 
report forwa rded 10 il under 
clause (b) of sub·scerio n (1) 
and communicate to lhc 
Lokpal, will>in rhrco months 
oi the dale or rcecip l of th e 
repo rt. the action taken or 
pro;w>sed to b~ t~ken on th e 
basis of the reporr . 
(4) The Lokpal shall present 
annually 10 che Presidenr a 
eon.solidated repon on the 
adminisaation of this Act 3nd 
1he President shall. 3S soon as 
may be after, ;,nd in ::sny ~sc 
not later th-.n ninety days 
from the receipt of such 
reporl. cau)t the same 
lO_&c:lhcrwir h :10 explnnntnry. 
memo randum. 10 be laid 
before each llou$e of 
Parliament. 
The Committee has 
recommended thut Clause 18 
which provides of dcclnr:.uio n 
of assets by the Members of 
Parliament, before the 
Lokpo l eve y year. should be 
amen ded to p ro vide for 
furnishing of return by th e 
• 
(4) 
Rccommend;,tion accepted It was 
also decided that a deuerent cl::~usc 
may also ~e inserted to <!cal with 
c.ucs of oon · iiling or delayed filinJ: 
of re tu rn< by any Member(<) of 
Parliamen1 or their being tiled in on 
inco mplete or falsified manne!'. It 
was dec ided t hai :J suitable 
I 

(I) (2) 
• 
(3) 
members withtn 3 period of 
ninety days on their 
becoming mcn\bcrs and 
annullllv there:aflcr. within 
ninety • doys of 
commencement o( e:1ch 
Fin3ncia1 Yc~r. An 
explana rion should also be 
added to 1he cluusc. to define 
rhe !omily as including borh 
the spouse 3nd depende nt 
children. 
The Comrnince hJ~l funhcr 
cecommcndcd lh;H a 
provision be m:adc in the Bill 
10 inclu<!c. chat th~e dct;;~ib or 
rhc returns filed by the "' 
Members or Parliantcnt will 
be reported by !h< Lokpal ro 
the Chairpcrsnns of 1hc: 
House of rhe People and rhe 
Council of Starcs . A 
deterrent cl:~. usc muy :1ls.o bt 
insc::ned to dc~l with cases of 
non.filing or delayed filing or 
returns by che MemberS or 
Parli3men1 ur their filing 
th<=m in an tncomplctc Ol" 
fatsificcJ m:.1nn\!r 
Acco rdmg!y, lhc 
clau•c ( 18) will 
under:-
lntH.fitil!d 
rt.::ld as 
"18(1) Every Member of 
P~rliamc:nt sh:1ll £urnisn a 
return of all 3S)C:L5 owned by 
him and ntc:mbcrs of h~ 
f1lmily 3nd all lrabrhlics 
incurred by him :and the 
members of hiS (amily bdore 
Lokpol wuhi n 3 pcriud ur 
ninety days u.( becoming, 
~\.-tembc:r or Pnrliomcn l a 1~d 
[hercafler within ninc1y days 
of commcnc:cmcn1 o( each 
financial ve:~r, in such furm 
-as m;,y be prescribed. 
The de:t:~ils or such returns 
will be reported by the 
Lokp31 10 Ch~upcrsons oi 
rhc House or the Peuple and 
the Council or S;arc.s ::..s the 
~:ase may be. 
E:<plan:u ion.-1 he tcc-n1 
•familv· will i ncl u~c borh rhc 
spous~ :md cJc:p~nd..:ol 
children. 
(4) 
provision as a sutK:JOJusc to clause 
IS moy be ineorpo~r<d. Suirable 
provisions i.e. Sub<la..se (3) and 
su!H:Ilust (4) or clause 18 h.-e 
been added in the Lokpal Bill. 
1998. 
• 

• 
(I) 
' 
19. 
zo. 
(2) 
·: 19 The sal:~rics, allowances a nd 
pensions ruyab lc: 10, or in 
respect or. the Membe,. , shall 
be expcndilurc chuged · on the 
Consolidated Fund o r Indio". 
"20 (1) Any informati on 
obtained by the Lokpal, or by 
:my officer, employee. agency or 
~rso n referred ro in sec lion 8, 
In the course or. or for the 
purposes or, any verification or 
mquiry under lhis Act, and :my 
evidence recorded or colh::cled 
in connection thc:rewirh $hnll be 
tre:ued 3.S confiden tial and. 
notwilhstandin& anything 
cont3lned in the Indian 
Evidence Act , ,1872, no cou rt 
'h:oll be entitled 10 co m,el the 
Lckpal, or any such officer, 
employee, 3&Cncy Of pe.rson, lO 
give C\'idcncc relating 10 such 
Information or 10 produce lhc 
evidence 110 recurdcd or 
collect ed. 
• 
87 
(3) 
(2) If a Member o r 
Parliament fails to furnish 
5\.ICh return wnhin a period 
mcn1ioncd above in the 
prt:scrfbcd form, he will be 
disqu:alified to Cunction as o 
Member until such timc chc 
return is filed by him and 
information of the same il 
sent by the Lokpnl to the 
Chairperso n or the House or 
the People and the Council of 
Slates. as the c:ls.e may be:. 
The Commi 11ce has 
recommended thot the 
language or clause 19 be 
slightly modified in the 
intctC$t of claraty to substitute 
the words "th e Membe rs" 
with lite words "the 
Choirman and the Members 
of the Lokpal.'' 
Accord ingly the 
dnuse 19 will 
follows:-
n'lodificd 
read gs 
"19. The salaries, a11ow~mccs 
:a nd pensions pnynble to. or 
in respect of. the: Ch:1irm:ll1 
and Members of Lokpal sh>ll 
be expenditure charted on 
the Consolida ted Fund or 
lndi~ ... 
The Commiucc has 
recommended delerion of 
cl~use 20 from the Bill. 
(4) 
Re:::ommcndrllion accepted . 
Rtt<>mmcnd:uion accepted . 
~~~--·· · ·-· ·. 
·. 
I I 
! 

r 
!' 
! 
(1) 
21. 
(2) 
20 (2) Noth.n& in sub-settio n (I) 
shOJI apply tO the dis.closurc or 
the inform:ltion or evidence 
referred to thcrein--
(a) for the purposes of thos Act 
or for the purposes of :.ny action 
or proceedin&S to be taken on 
any report under section 17; or 
(b) for the purposes or any 
proceedings. for an ol!enc:c of 
giving or fabricating false 
evidence, under the tndian 
Penol Code: or 
(3) (4) 
(c) for such Other purposes as 
rn•y be prescribed. 
The Committee is in broad 
agreement with the pro,· isions 
of cl::ausc 21 as the dignity of 
the o ffice of Inc Lokpal is to 
be respected :md protected. 
However, the C ommitt ee has 
recommended deletion of 
sub-clause (2) of clause 21. 
Consequentially, the rc!cr ~ 
cnce to sub-clous.c (2) in sub· 
cl3use (3) be also delete<!. 
Rerommend3tion :Kccpted . 
··21 (I) Whoever intcntionolly 
uf!cn 3ny insult, or c:t.u.sc.s any 
Interrup tion , 10 the Lokpal while 
the Lolcpal or any of its 
Members is makinK 3ny 
verification ot conductina, any 
inquiry under this Act, shall be 
puni~hed with simple 
impri sonment !or :t term which 
moy c:uend to six months, or 
with ti ne, or with both. 
21 (2) Whoever, by word s 
spoken or intl!nd cd to be read, 
makes or publishes any 
smtcrnc nt. o r docs any Other 
:1ct, which is C:llculatcd to bring 
the Lokpnl into disrep ute, shall 
be puni:.hcd with simple 
impr is.onmcnt ror ~ term which 
m::ay e:c:1cnd to six mon ths. or 
with fine, or with bot h. 
21 (3) The provosions of 'ub­
scction (2) of section 199 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure. 
1973, shall apply in relauo n to 
on offence under sub-<:lausc ( 1) 
or sub->ection (2) as they apply 
in relalion to an offence referred 
10 on sub-section (2) or the s>id 
secrion 199, oubjcct 10 the 
modir1-C3tion th::at no compl:unt 
on respect of '"ell offence sholl 
be m>d< by the publi< 
Prosecutor cxcepl w1tb the 
previous sanction o! the 
Lokpol." 
• 
Accordingly, 
clause 21 
undcr:-
the 
will 
modified 
read os 
"21 (I) Whoever intcntocnally 
offcn ;:any \n.suh. or c::auSC$ 
any inlerrupt ion. lO the: 
Lokpol while lh< Lokpal or 
aolY of its Member$ is making 
any verific ation or conducting 
any inquiry unCer this Ac.t. 
sholl be punisbed with simple 
imprisonment ror a term 
whh:h may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with 
both. 
(2) The pcovosions oi sub· 
seotion (2) of section 199 of 
tbc Code of Crimina l 
Proce<lure , 1973, shall lpply 
in relation to an offence 
under .sob-s.c,lion (1) as they 
;apply il'l rel:ation to an 
o[fencc referred lO in sub· 
section (2) of che $aid se.;tion 
199, •ubj<el to the 
mocJ1fic.;;ation that nu 
compl:aint in respect o f such 
oCfence sha II be made by the 
Public Prosecutor exce-pt with 
lhc: previous sunc~ion or the 
Lokpal". 

- J - - --
(I) 
22. 
(2) 
.. 22 (I) IC, at any sragc of a 
proceeding befo re the Lokpol. it 
appear> to the Lokpal that any 
per>an appearing in such 
pmcccdings had knowi ngly or 
wilfully &ivcn f:Jlse cvidc:nc:c: or 
had fabric:ued !abe evidence 
with lhc intention thal such 
evidence: should be used in 5uch 
proceedings. The Lokpal may. if 
satisfied th:u It i1 necessary and 
expedient in the inH:rcst of 
justice that the per>an should be 
tried summari ly Co r giving or 
fabric,atina as the case may be, 
falK evidence, tak e cogniz.ancc 
ot lhc offenu and may. after 
giving lhc offender a reasonable 
oppor1U011)' Of showing C:.:JUSC: 
why he should not . be punished 
for such offence , try such 
offender summarily. so f;u as 
may be. in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed for 
summary trials under lhc Code 
of Crimnal Procedure, 1973, and 
sentence him to imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to 
three mont hs, or to fine whith 
may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or 10 both. 
22 (2) When ony such offence as 
i:s described in section l7S. 
section 178, section 179 or 
section 180 of the lnd i3n Penal 
Code is comm ined in the vie.w 
or presence of the Lokpal. the 
Lok pal may cause the offen der 
to be dc:wilcd in c·ustody ar\d 
may, ;u nny time on the same 
day. take cognizance or the 
offence ond. after giving the 
offender :1 • ~sonable 
opportunity of showing cause 
why he shou ld not be p unished 
under thts $CCtion. try such 
offender summaril y so fJr as 
may be in acco rdance with the 
proccduro prescribed Cor 
summary tri:sls under the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and 
sentence him to simple 
Imprisonment (or a term which 
may extend 10 one month, or co 
fine which OHJV exten d to five 
hundred rupee;, or to both, 
• 
89 
(3) 
(I) The Comminee has 
recommended th;Jt sub--clause 
( 1) of clouse 22 shou ld be 
dele ted. 
(2) The Commit tee has also. 
recommended th:u the words 
occurring in •ub<l•us• (2) or 
cl3us.e 22 from .. in Sec1ion 
17S, .... to the Indian Penal 
Code .. be substit utcd by the 
words .. in clause 21(1) of this 
Act". 
(3) The Commillce hos also 
recommended that sul>-cl3us.e 
(4) may be amended to 
provide for appeals 10 the 
Supreme Court and the 
Explanation to th1S clause 
which consequently becomes 
redundant shou ld also be 
delet ed. 
Accordingly. the mod ified 
cl3u.sc 22 will read 35 under-
.. 22 (I) When any such 
offence as is described in 
section 21(1) of this Aet is 
commiued in view or 
presence of the Lokp:~l. 1hc 
Lokpa l may cause the 
offender to be dctailtd in 
custody and may. at any cime 
on the S3me day. take 
cognizance of 1h c: offence 
and, after giving the offende r 
a re::~.sonablc opponuni'Y of 
show ing cause why he sho uld 
not be punished unde r this 
s.cc:tion, in such orrendcr 
summ.arily so far as may be in 
accordance wilh the 
proee:dute prescribed (or 
summary arials under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 and sentence htm to 
simple imprisOnrTK:nl for a 
term which m::~y extend to 
one month, or to fine which 
may extend to fi"" hundred 
rupees, or to both . 
(2) In every case 1ned under 
this section. the Lokpal shall 
record the facts consti1Uting 
the offence with the 
"atemcn t (if any) mode by 
the offender as well os the 
finding and chc sentence . 
(4) 
It was decided to modify sub·clausc 
(1) of clause 22 to read as under :-
"22 (!) if at any stage of the 
inquiry, the l.okpal, in the intercsr 
natural justice, 
(a) considers il nc«M3.ry to inqu1rc 
into lhc conducl of any penon; or 
(b) i.s of the opinion tbot the 
reputation of nny person is lik.c:ly ro 
be prejudlciully affected by the 
inquir y. the Lokpal shall givt to 
th:tt ptrM)n a rc3SOnabk 
opporcunity of being heard in the 
inquiry and ro produce:: evidence in 
his defence : 
Provided that nothing in this clause 
shall 3pply where the credit of 3 
wilncs.s is being impeached." 

( 1) 
23, 24 
&25 
(2) 
22 (3) in every C.:ls<: tried under 
!hi:; scclion , the Lokpa l shall 
record the f<lcls conStitu ting the 
of(ence with the statement (if 
a ny) made by the offende r as 
well as the finding and the 
s.cmence. 
22 {4) Any person conv icted on 
a Hi31 held unde r this sect'ion 
may appeal to the High Court 
and the provisions of Chap ter 
XXIX or the Codo of Criminal 
Procedu re, 1973, shall so [or os 
may bo, apply 10 appea ls under 
this sect ion and the H igh Cou rt 
may alter or reverse the finding, 
or rc::duce or reverse the: 
sentence appeale d against. 
Explanation.- For the purposes 
or this sutrscct ion, loHigh 
Couct.. means the. High Court 
within the jurisdiction of which 
lhe· person convicted ord inarily 
resides or carries on bus iness or 
persona!ly works for g;;1in or the 
High Co urt within whose 
jurisd iction the orde r oi 
conviction has been passed . 
22 (S) TI>c Provis ions of this 
sect ion shall h3vc effect 
notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of 
Cr i min:~l Procodurc, 1973" . 
"23 (1) II an y person prinlS or 
publishes any information wi1t'r 
respect to any complaint undell' 
this Act (including the identi ty 
at the person makiJ\8 the 
comp lain t, the public 
functionary against whom rhe 
complain! h:.'IS bc:.en made and 
the particulars contained in chc 
compl:Jint) or with respect ta 
any proceeding, ac~ or thing. 
taken or done o r purported to 
h.1ve been takt!n or done undc:r 
this At:! in relation to suc;b. 
compl:lint-
(a) where the Lokp al disn>iSSe< 
such campi-aim under section 12, 
a t Jny time bdote such 
disrnissJI; or 
• 
90 
(3) 
{3) A-ny person convicted on 
a tri;rl held unde r this sect ion 
nuJy appcaJ to the Supreme · 
Court and the provisions of 
Chapl<r XXIX of 1he Code 
or Criminal Procedure. t973, 
shall , so far as may be. apply 
ro appeals under this section 
and 1hc Sup reme Court may 
a he r or reverse the finding. 
or reduce or reverse the 
scntenc;e appc3lt:d ag-:tinSI. 
(4) The provisions or this 
sectioz\ shall ll:lvc dre cJ 
nocwithsranding a1\)'thing 
contained in the Code or 
Crimina l Procc duro, 1973". 
The Cocnmiuee ha~ 
rccommcnd.c d that daul)t;li 23 
and 24 m(•Y be: drOppt:d in 
view of this recommendation 
of rhc Commiuee , c:lausc 25 
co nscqucn lially bt:cOmcs 
redun dant and the 
Committee hJs recommende d 
thal il m:1y also be dtopp~d . 
(4) 
(I) Rccom m cndo t ion~ on Claus e 23 
accepted. 
(2) ln regard to rccommend:uia-11 
on Clause 24. it was dt:eicled th:u 
scotion 24(2) in the Lt:>kpal Bill, 
1996 sho uld be re10ined nnd 
conseque ntial changes , if any, mJy 
be made in the Lokpal Bill, t998. 
Accordingly, section 24(2) or the 
Lokpal Bill, 1996 has been reta ined 
:.s sub-sectio n ('2) of Clause 21 of 
the Lokpal Bill. 1998 and 
subsequcntiol changes mod~ in 
section 23 or the Lokpal Bill. 19?8. 
{3) Recommend~ tion o n Clause 25 
.accepted, 

(1) (2) 
(b) where the Lokpol doses the 
c~c wirh rcsptct to such 
comploint under clousc (a) uf 
sub---section (I) of SCChOn 17. ;at 
any time bdurc such closure: or 
(c) where the Lokpol forwarus 
to the com~tcnt :authortly :. 
rcpon or its findings oan<J 
rceornmcnd:uions with respect to 
.such complaint under dDusc (b) 
of sub-scction (1) of section 17, 
at any time before rhc expiry of 
three mon1hs from the ~hue of 
tcccipt of chc: report by the 
compe1cn1 :~uthority or :J.S the 
c:~se may be, at any clmc before 
the report is laid before the 
House of the People or the 
C<>uncil or Stutes unucr sub· 
•ec tion (J) of Sec tion 17. Such 
perso n shoJI be guilty or un 
offence under 1his sub·.secrion. 
2J (2) If ony person prints or 
pub lishes ony inform~tiun 
allcgi nt: or sutgc:uing that :a 
~ompl~int has been made untJcr 
thas Act against nny public 
functionary and such 
information is f:alsc, such person 
shall be guilty of an offence 
under this sub·sec1ion. 
2J (3) When any offence under 
sub-section (I) or sub-section (2} 
is commiucd. the Lokp:.l muy 
t3kc eog,nirance or the orrence 
and, after tivin& the offender 
CC350n::tblc Oppor1unity Of 
showin' Qus.t why he shoul<.l 
n01 be punished for such 
orrence, try such offender 
summarily so rnr as may be in 
:.u:·cord::.nce wich rhe procedure 
prescribed for summ61ry crials 
under the Code o( Criminol 
Procedure, 1973 and scntcne< 
him ro imprisonment for 3 term 
which may extend co six months. 
or co tine which mny extend ro 
t<:::n rhou.sand rupees, or to both. 
2J { 4) In every cose tried under 
this section , the Lokpol shull 
fCCOI'd the (aC1$ COnSti tuting lhC 
c.')rccncc with the st::ucn1cnt (ir 
nny) made by the ofrcnuer as 
well ns the findings nnd the 
sentence. 
• 
91 
(J) (4) 
' 

•• 
(I) 
' 
I 
.I 
I 
1 
1.· 
li 
I 
(2) 
2J (5) A ny pcr.on convicted in • 
tri:aJ under this section may with 
the Leave of the Supreme Court, 
prdcr an appeal 10 the Supreme 
Courr within tharty days of such 
conviction or wirhin s.uch further 
pcnod as the Supreme Court 
m:ay for sufficient cause aJiow 
and save as :aforesaid, no appeal 
or revision shall be in any court 
against such conviction. 
2J (6) The provisoons or this 
section sh:tll h;avc effect 
notwitlulonding . anything 
contained an rhc Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1m. 
2J (I) Every pcr.on who makes 
ony complain t which os held by 
the Lokpal to be rolsc: shall be 
punishable us provided in sub .. 
•ct tion(2) . 
24 (2) When any offence under 
sub-section (l) is committed, the 
Lokpal may tak e cognizance or 
the: offc:ncc and afh:r giving the 
offc n<.lcr a reasonable 
opportunity of showing c-:h.t.s.c 
why he should no t be punished 
fc>r such o ffcntc, 1ry such 
offender sumn\3rily, so fJr a$ 
m:1y be. in ncco rdn nec with the 
procedure prescribed ror 
summary lri:!lS under thr Code 
ot Crim inol Procedure. 1973 and 
sentence him to imprisonment 
for a 1crno which sh>ll no t be 
Jess th:~n one ye:.r but which 
mny extend to three years and 
:tlso 10 fine which m:ay extend to 
filly thou .. nd rupees. 3nd moy 
:tlso :awud, out o( the .. mount of 
fine. to the public funclionary 
;ac .. insl whom such false 
compl:tinr has been madr:, such 
3mount of compcns:uaon as 1hc 
Lokpal thin ks fit. 
24 {3) In every case tncd un<lcr 
this scctiun. the Lokpal shall 
rr:cotd the (t\cts constituting the 
offence with the st:.lcmcnt (If 
ony) mode by the orrender 0$ 
well :1! 1hc On<Jings a nd the 
sen tence. 
; .. 
92 
(3) (4) 
I 
I ' 
• .... -~_<;~> 

• • 
( I) 
26. 
I 
(2) 
2< (4) Any penon C:OnVrc:Jed o n 
:. triaJ under this section may. 
with ahe lc3vc of 1hc Supreme 
Cuurt prdc:r an appe-al to rhe 
Supreme Court within 1hiny 
(J;ays. of such conviction or within 
suc:h- further pctiod :as the 
Supreme Cour1 may for 
suffictcnt caus..: ;allow ;~nd. s.avc 
as aforesaid, no appeal or 
revision shall 1ic in any coun 
ogain.st such convic:llon. 
2• (S) The provision.s of chis 
.$Cttion sh:~ll hove cUcc.t 
notwithsa;~ndinl anything 
cuntalncd in the Code. of 
Criman~l Procedure. 1973. 
2S Subject to the other 
provisions of chis Acl 1mU 
subject lo the modifieiltion th:Jt 
f~Jr purpose of transfer o( any 
~sc under 'cc1iun 23 or scctiotl 
24. the provisions of section 406 
or the Code of Criminnl 
l'rocedure. !973, sholl alone 
::.pply. the provisions of 1he said 
Code shall opply to procecdi ng 
before a lokpal under section 
22, 23 an~ 24 and for chc 
purpo5C5 or the said provisions 
of thac Co~c aJld the .. id 
proccedinss the l.okpal •hall be 
deemed to be 3 Court o( session 
and shall have all the powers or 
011 Coun of Session. 
Nu rwiths t and in ~ ::lnyching 
cont;~in~d in any other law for 
the time being In rorc::c, where 
on an inquiry in rc5pctl or a 
comp l01int against ~ public 
functionnry the Lokp::1l or rhc: 
competent ;authority h~s held 
thm any allegations ma;Je in chc 
comp13int h::Jvc not bc:cn proved 
or substantiated. no proscc-ulion 
sh:all be on any complaint. 
report, informouion or otherwise 
and no court shall t::.ke 
cog,niz:1ncc or any offence on the 
ba~is or the ~me or subscanli:.lly 
the same allegations ::as in the: 
c:umpl::~inL 
93 
(3) {4) 
The Commiucc has Recommcnd;uion acccptecJ. 
recommended thi,. clause 
should be dropped 
ol1ogcll1cr. 
• 

:: 
I 
I· .. ·1 
\ 
1· 
• I 
(1) 
!7. 
(~) 
"27(1) n •• 1'rc•idcnl, may. by 
order '" wruin' and subject to 
:r..uch condihons or limiH1tiuns :~s 
may be spccll'ic:d in I he orcJcr. 
require: the Lokpal to inqu•rc: 
mto :~ny :a1lcJ:Jiaon (bc1ng :.~n 
Jllc;:nion in rc:~pcc1 of whrch a 
complaint may be nt:Kic) spcc;i­
ficaJ in lhc on.!cr in rc:,.pcct or .. 
publtc (uncuon;uy 3nd. notwith· 
Sl3ndin& ar.yth•n& ront3mcd in 
thos Act, the lokpa1 shall 
(;Umply ""''h such order. 
27(2) When the Lokpal ;. to 
mukc ony mquiry unUcr sub-­
.cction (1), the lokpol shall 
cx.crci.:~oC the ~:amc powcn <:~nd 
<.lisch;arJ:C thl.! ,5amc Cunc:-tions ;J5 
11 wouhJ in the C!l)l! of :lilY 
inquiry made. Qn a cQrnpl;,int 
und~.:r thi.s Act and the provi~ 
s.ion~ 1C this A~l (cxc..:pt sec tion 
24) •hull ~pp l y occurding ly" . 
28 •nd "28 The sum depooucJ by o 
29 cornpl:lm:lnl under section 11 
sholl:-
(a) 1n 3 C-:kSc where the 
curnpl::atnt b t.li.smis.scd under 
ci3USC (c) o( >ul>-scction (1) oC 
$C(IIOn 12, stand forlctlcd co lhc 
Ccntr::tl Go .... crnm.:nl. 
(b) or the lukpal, Cor rca>on• to 
be: recou.lcd tn writlng w Juccts , 
be uuli.s~aJ !or compc:IU:Jtmg 1hc 
publ ic (unl.!tionary compl:~anc 
01g:umt. and 
• 
94 
(3) 
The Cornm iucc has 
recom m ende-d thJ. I the wor<h 
'"notwithst3nding ;mythi-ng 
co nt ~incd in this Act .. 
occurring in cl:~.usc 27 be 
lubstil utcd by the worth 
-subject to the pto~o•isions o( 
clousc 12". 
Ac;1;ordingly. the mQdificd 
cloUS<' 27(1) ... ;u read "" 
follows:-
"27(1) The Pre>idcnt. ma~.by 
orcJcr in writing and :.ubjcct 
to $uch conditions ur 
lirnhauun~ tlS rna}· 0..: sp.ct:i­
(jcd in the o rder. rcqmrc ch.: 
Lo kp;.~l to inquire into iJ OY 
ullcga tiorl (bc 1ng an 
::t ll cg~ t ion in r~:r.pcc t of whu:h 
a ~:u mpl:li JH m;.Jy be mJ..Ic) 
:spcci("i-.:ll ln the ord er 10 
rcspcc1 or ;~ public­
funcl i.onary :..nd ·subject to the 
provisio ns o f c1aiJSC )2, thC 
Lo kp:al sh all co mply with 
such on1cr. 
Since the Commincc h~:, 
recommended ddcd on or 
clause 24. the w<! rJ~ (~xcep t 
section 24) oc:cut ring in 
douse 27(2) will also be 
~c1ctcd . 
The Committee 
rccommcn~cJ that lhc ;ltC:tS 
cove red by d:auscs 28 ;mc.J 2Y 
;are somewhat intcrlinkct.J :.md 
11 will be more 3ppropri:stc tC 
bolb these dausc-! arc 
combmcd into one and 
provision is m:1dC for the 
:amount of cornpcnsauonl 
rew-ord o r puniS.hinCJl1 10 be 
decided by the Lokpal while 
conclu ding its fi11din~s. The 
Commiltce h~ alw 
(~) 
Rcc:ommcnd:~ tion :Jcc . ..:ptcd. 
Recommcnd:uiotu on Ctau.sa 28 
and 29 occcptc<l 

(I) (2) 
(c) in any uthc:r case:. be 
rdunded tO lhc:. compla inanL 
29 If 1hc Lokp;ll is satisfic~ 
(a) 1ha1 all or anv of the 
nllcgJtions made in a· compla int 
hove or has been substantiated 
either wholly ur parily, and 
(b) that having regard to the 
expenses incurred by the 
complainant in rcl:Hion to <he 
pro-ceedings in respect of such 
complaint aod all other reJcvant 
circums tan ces or the case the 
compl~inant desetves to be 
compensated or rewa rded. 
The: Lok pal sh~U determi ne the 
amount which shJU be p;.id to 
lhc complaionm by way of such 
compensation or rcw~ud and the 
Ccn1ral Government shan pay, 
1hc :~ moun1 or amounts so 
dcfcrm incd, to the complain::ml. 
• 
95 
(3) 
recommended lha t the words 
occurring 31 the end of clause 
29 (which may be comb ined 
wilh clause 28 in appropriate 
form) viz., .. and !he Centra l 
Government shall poy, the 
amount or omounts so 
dete rmined. to the compla i­
nant .. be subs1i1u1cd by the 
words " omd the Lokpill shall 
dc1ermine the person by 
whom the said compensat ion 
or aw<Jrd sh<lll be p;tid after 
giving th;)t person a 
reJ.Sonable oppo 11uni ty of 
being heard " . 
According ly, the 
clause 28 & 29 
together win 
iollows:-
modified 
comb ined 
read as 
.. 28{1) T11e sum depos ited by 
a CO!nplain<lnl under section 
II shall:-
(a) in a case where the 
comp l ~ in t is d ismissed unde.r 
clause (c) of sub-sect ion( !) of 
section 12, Stand forfeited 10 
the Centra l Government. 
(b) lr the Lokpal. for rcnsons 
to be rccotded in writing so 
directs, be utilised for 
compensating the publi c 
funct iona ry compla int 
Jga inst; and 
(c) in any o1hcr c~1sc . be 
refunded to lhc compla innnl. 
(2) if <he Lokpa l is satisfied­
(a) thot nil or ;my of the 
allegat ions m:Jdc in a 
complaint have or has bcerl 
subst:mtinted either wholly or 
partly; and 
(b) 1ha1 having rcgurd 1<,> the 
expenses incurred t>y the 
complainan1 in re lalion ro the 
proceedi ngs in respect of such 
complni.nt and all other 
relcv3nt circumsranccs of the 
cosc the oompl~in:mt dese rves 
10 be compensated or 
rewarded , the Lollpal shnll 
determine the amount which 
shnU be p.aid to the 
complainan t b)' w~y of such 
compensation or reward ond 
sh::JII also determine 1he 
person by whom the soid 
compensat ion or awJrd shall 
be paid after giving that 
person a rcasonJblc 
oppor1u nity of being hcJr d:' 
. ' 
(4) 
I i 
I 
I 
r 
I 

l 
(1) 
' 30. 
31. 
(2) 
"30(1) No sui r proscc urion or 
orher legal proceedings >haU be 
ag3inst the: Lokpal or against 
any officer, c:mptoyc:c, 3gency or 
person re:f4:rrcd to in section 8, 
in rcspc:tt of ;anything which is in 
good r:~ith done, or inlcnded to 
be done , unde r this Act. 
30(2) s~ve a$ orherwisc provided 
in this A-er, no proceedings or 
decisio n o ( 1hc Lokpol shall be 
liable: to be ch::.lleng~d. reviewed 
(Ju.:tshed or QUed in question m 
any Court." 
"31 The Lokpol may, by general 
or speci al order in wri ting :.nd 
subject lO such condlrion:s and 
timil:uions .,s mJ.y be specified 
rhcrcln , di rect th;u ~ ny powe rs 
e-onfcrred or duties impose d on 
it by or under this Act (exccpl 
the powers under the proviso to 
sub·sc:ccion (3) or section I l. 1hc 
power to di.smiu a compb.int 
under sub-section {1) or section 
12, the powc:rs to close c;lScs 
and m~ke rc:ports under seaion 
17 and the po"~A.ers under section 
22. 23. ond 2·1) moy ol<o be 
c:xcrc:ised o r dischargc:d by such 
of the officers, employees or 
agencies referred 10 in sub­
section (!) or $Ub·scctiun (2) of 
section 8. a.s may be specified tn 
the order ... 
96 
(3) 
The Comcniucc has 
recommended that sub-clause 
(2) or Oause 30 may be 
dropped. 
Accordingly, clause "30(1)" 
will be re11umbcrcd as daU$e 
.. 30-. 
The C;,rnnmtc-e 
rccornmendc:U ChiH In vtcw o f 
its rec::ommC1UJ:.uiun Cor 
droppinc; .sub<l.ausc (I) vf 
clau!t.c: 22 nnd clnuscs 23 nncJ 
24. con.scquc:nti:tl changes 
m3y be mildc in dau..\.C 3L 
Accordingly, 
d3ult-C 31 
follow5:-
the 
will 
mudificd 
rc:ad as 
"The l..okpal 1nay, by gcncrol 
or spccinl o rd~r in wriring . 
and subject to .auch conc.Jitions 
and limitations as m~y be 
specified there in, di rect that 
any powcn conferred or 
duric:s impos~d on it by or 
under rhis Acr (c~ccpt rhc 
powers undt:r the proviso ro 
sub-section (3) of section II. 
the power hJ dismilis a 
comp1l1int um.lc:r ' sub .. ~cction 
(1) u( sc:ction ll. 1hc powers 
to close cases and m:lke: 
reporu under sc:ctiOJ) 17) may 
also be exercised or 
dischor ced by such or !he 
ouu;cn , employees or 
agencies rdcrred to in sub­
sect•on (I) 0< sub-section (2) 
of sccrion 8, ;;~s may be 
specified in 1hc order . " 
(4) 
J t w:1s th.:C'idcd co rcuain sub 4ci:Ju~e 
(2) of Cl:luse 30 or rhc Lokpal Bill, 
1996 with a slighl modification 10 
re::td as u nl.ll.!t:-
'"30{2) SOJve JS otherwise pruvidc:d 
in this Act no prcx:c:cdin~$ or 
decision or !he Lokpal shall be 
caned II' qucStl(lO IR :my Coun ... 
Rccommcndati<)n" JCCCptctJ. 
} 

(1} 
33. 
35. 
(2} 
"33 For the removal or doubts. 
ot is hereby declared thot 
nothong in this Act shall opcrotc 
10 confer or c:n3blc the 
conkrring of any jurisdicrion oo 
the Lokpal to make any 
inquiry-
(3) into any allegation 3gainst or 
nny acr or condut.1 or-
(i} the Preside nt, the Vice­
Prcsidc=:nt or rhc: Speaker of 1hc 
House of the People; 
(ii) the Chic! Justice or any 
oth<r Judge of the Supreme 
Court of India; 
(iii) the Comptroller and 
Auditor·General of India, the 
Chief Election Commissioner or 
other Elcc:ion Commissioner or 
chc Chairmnn or nny other 
Mcrnbcr oi lhc Union Public 
Service OJmmission. 
(b) upon its own knowledge or 
inform:ttion_ .. 
"35 In section 3 of the 
Commis.sions of Inquiry Acl, 
1952. in sub-section (1) lor the 
words "The appropriate 
Govem menl may", the words , 
bcnck.cts and figures .. Subjcc:l tO 
the provisions of sub-sectio n (3} 
of ..:ction 9 of the Lokpal Act, 
1996, the appropriote 
Government may• shall be 
subsaiauacd4 .. 
Enacting Formula and the. Title. 
The Cornmiuee has at;reed with 
the provisions cont:.1incd in chc 
remaining clauses of the Bill. 
• 
97 
(3} 
The Commollcc has 
recommended deletion of 
sub-dause (b) of clause 33. 
Accordingly, sub-dausc(b) of 
cl3usc 33 will be dclclcd . 
Consequently. the word "(o)" 
will also be deleted and the 
rc:st of the provisions will be 
made in continuulion of 
clause 33. 
Tht Committee 
recommended ch:u douse 3S 
be suitably omendcd 10 t:.ke 
c-ru-e of ;he amc ndmcnt 
suggested by h in sub·elau$e 
(3) of d ouse 9. 
Clause 35 of the Lokp al Bill 
relates to ahc consequential 
amendments o( 1hc 
Commissions of I nqul ry Act, 
1952. The Commiucc has 
recommended modific»lion in 
sub-clause (3) of clause 9 of 
the Lol<pal Bill. 
ll1c: Commillcc has 
recomme nded that d1c 
consequen1ial ch:.nges in 
respect of cl::~usc I. thl! 
Enacting Formulo and chc 
Title with reference to lhc 
ycar of cnactmcnl as 
indicated thereon may also be 
carried ouc. 
Accordingly, in the enacting 
formula the year " 1996" will 
be subsrituted with the: yc<Jr 
"1997" and the words "Forty· 
seventh Ycor" wuu1d be 
subst i tu~cd by "Fony •t:rJ;hlh 
YcoC 
(4} 
It was decided thot the original 
provision of sul><:louse(b) of elau.<c 
33 in the Lokpal Bill, 1996 should 
be rcraim:d. 
RtcOmmendation accepled. 
Needfu l done in the Lokpa l Bill . 
1998. 
• .. 