PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 129
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28  FEBRUARY, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 28  FEBRUARY, 2008)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28  FEBRUARY, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 28  FEBRUARY, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 AND THE CONSTITUTION 
(ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

93
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 AND THE CONSTITUTION
(ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH FEBRUARY , 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 28 TH FEBRUARY , 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2008/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-249

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................... (i) -(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—29
CHAPTER -I
Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1—7
CHAPTER -II
Presentation of the Ministry of Home Affairs ................................................... 8—9
CHAPTER -III
Oral Evidence of W itnesses/Memoranda from Public ....................................... 10—14
CHAPTER -IV
Oral Evidence of Administrator, DGHC ............................................................... 15—16
CHAPTER -V
Oral Evidence of the Representatives of Government of West Bengal ........ 17—21
CHAPTER -VI
Issues Raised and Responses of Authorities ...................................................... 22—23
CHAPTER -VII
Issues Raised and Observations of the Committee ........................................... 24—26
CHAPTER -VIII
Clause-by-Clause consideration .............................................................................. 27—29
4. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS  O F T HE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE .................................................................................................................... 30—31
5. M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ........................................................ 33—69
6. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 71—92
I. The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 ................ 71—83
II. The Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 ........ 85—88
III. L ist of individuals/organizations/political parties/groups who deposed
before the Committee ........................................................................................... 89—92

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri Raghunath Jha
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(i)
* Nominated w.e.f. 12th December, 2007 vice Shri T.K. Hamza who was nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Twenty-ninth Report on the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
(Annexures I & II) .
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred* the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One Hundred and
Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 30th November, 2007 and
pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report by the last day of the first week of
the first part of the Budget Session, 2008.
3. The Committee held nine sittings in all spread over eighteen hours on the Bills. In its
meeting held on 13th December, 2007, the Committee heard the presentation of the Home
Secretary, Government of India and other officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs, on the Bills
and held preliminary discussion thereon. Keeping in view the political sensitivity and implications
of the proposed legislations and the large number of representations received from organizations
and public, the Committee heard the oral evidence of local MPs of both the Houses of Parliament,
namely, Shri Dawa Narbula, representing Darjeeling in Lok Sabha and Shri Saman Pathak
representing State of West Bengal in Rajya Sabha; former Members of Parliament from that area,
namely, Sarva Shri Ananda Pathak, R.B. Rai and S.P. Lepcha and Shrimati Dil Kumari Bhandari;
eighty-four witnesses representing twenty organisations including political parties and seven
individuals including some of the former Councillors of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, in its
sittings held on 20th December, 2007, 10th and 11th January, 2008.
3.1 The Committee also interacted with the representatives of an All Party Delegation of
the West Bengal Legislative Assembly on the provisions of the Bills, in its sittings held on
21st January 2008.
4. The Committee also heard the oral evidence of Administrator, Darjeeling Gorkha Hill .
Council and the Chief Secretary and senior officers of the Government of West Bengal in its
meeting held on 7th February, 2008.
5. In its sitting held on 18th February, 2008, the Committee held in-house discussion on the
Bills in the light of the evidence tendered by witnesses and written views submitted by individuals
and organisations. The Committee also heard the oral evidence of Home Secretary on various issues
raised on the provisions of the Bills in the same meeting. The Committee took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bills on 19th February, 2008.
6. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 27th February, 2008 and
adopted the same.
7. The Committee has made use of the following documents in the finalization of the Report:
(i) Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007;
* Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 44729 dated 11th December, 2007.

(ii) Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007;
(iii) Background Note on both the Bills supplied by the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iv) Memorandum of Settlement signed on 22.08.1988 (Darjeeling Accord);
(v) Memorandum of Settlement signed on 23.08.1988 (Darjeeling Accord);
(vi) Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988 enacted by the West Bengal Legislative
Assembly on 15.10.1988;
(vii) Memorandum of Settlement (MOS) signed on 06.12.2005 between the Government of
India, Government of West Bengal and Shri Subash Ghisingh, Administrator, Darjeeling
Gorkha Hill Council;
(viii) W ritten memoranda submitted by organizations/individuals to the Committee;
(ix) Oral evidence tendered before the Committee;
(x) Debates of the Constituent Assembly dated 5th and 6th September, 1949 relating to the
Sixth Schedule;
(xi) Books titled:
(a) “Fifth and Sixth Schedules to the Constitution of India”: by P. Chakraborty, 2005,
Capital Publishing House, Delhi;
(b) “Sixth Schedule to the Constitution” by Justice B.L. Hansaria, Second
Edition 2005, Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., Delhi.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
9. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable
contributions made by the Members of the Committee in its deliberations; sitting Members from
Darjeeling and a former Member of the House from that region and witnesses who deposed before
it and facilitated the Committee in formulating its views on the Bills. I would also like to express
my thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law and Justice,
Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department for their invaluable assistance rendered to
the Committee in the course of the examination of the Bills. A special word of thanks for the
Secretariat for the hard work done in preparing this report in a very short time.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
27th February, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background to the Bills and their Salient Features
1.1.1 The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007:—  The Bill seeks to
create an autonomous self governing Council called the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling (GHC)
under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution within the State of West Bengal, which shall have
legislative, administrative and financial powers in respect of specified subjects. The Bill also
provides for adequate safeguards for the non-tribals to ensure that any law as may be made by
the GHC will not, in particular:—
(a) extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges enjoyed by any citizen
including his land rights within the areas under the GHC at the commencement of
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007; and
(b) bar any citizen from acquiring land either by way of inheritance, allotment,
settlement or by way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise eligible for such bona
fide acquisition of land within the areas under GHC.
1.1.2 The Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007:—  This Bill seeks
to amend articles 244 and 332 of the Constitution. Clause (2) of article 244 of the Constitution
provides that the provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal
areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. This Bill seeks to amend article
244 of the Constitution so as to bring the administration of the areas under the GHC in the State
of West Bengal within its ambit. Article 332 of the Constitution provides for reservation of seats
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States. To protect
the rights of non-tribals in the Gorkha Hill Council in Darjeeling, in pursuance of the MoS dated
6th December, 2005, the existing representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes
in the Legislative Assembly of the State of West Bengal from the areas under the Gorkha Hill
Council is proposed to be kept intact. The Bill, therefore, seeks to insert a new clause after the
existing clause (6) of article 332 of the Constitution.
1.2 Darjeeling Accord: Before and After
1.2.1 As per the information submitted to the Committee, the background relating to the
Darjeeling Accord and the subsequent events till the introduction of the Bills under reference is
explained in subsequent paragraphs.
1.2.2 Four major communities inhabit the hills and plains of Darjeeling District—the Nepali, the
tribals, the Bengalees and the original inhabitants (Mech, Rajbansi, Lepcha, Bhutia etc.). The
atmosphere in the hills of Darjeeling was in keeping with the excellent tradition of communal
harmony till the emergence of Gorkhaland agitation led by Gorkha National Liberation Front
(GNLF) which raised the issue of separate State of Gorkhaland with economic blockade and
violence. The agitation reached its crescendo in 1980. As many as 1200 people were killed while
.fighting for their demand for a Gorkha State within the Union of India.
1.2.3 Following the agitation, two Memoranda of Settlement also known as ‘Darjeeling Accord’
were signed between the Government of India, Government of West Bengal and the Gorkha

2
National Liberation Front (GNLF) on 22 & 23 August, 1988, respectively, to put an end to the
violent agitation. This Accord paved the way for setting up of an autonomous hill council, named,
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill ‘Council (DGHC) through the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988
enacted by the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal on 15.10.1988, for fulfillment of socio-
economic and political aspirations of the hill people of Darjeeling district.
1.2.4 The salient features of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council to be set up under the
Darjeeling Accord, 1988 are as under:
(a) An autonomous hill council named as ‘Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council’ to be set up
under a State Act.
(b) The Council will cover the three hill sub-divisions of Darjeeling District namely,
Darjeeling, Kalimpong and Kurseong plus 13 revenue villages (Mouzas) in the Siliguri
sub-division.
(c) The executive power of the Council will cover various subjects, including allotment of
land, management of any forest other than reserve forest, agriculture, public health,
tourism, transport, fisheries, education, small scale and cottage industries, etc.
(d) The Council shall exercise general powers of supervision of over Panchayat Samities,
Gram Panchayats and Municipalities falling within the area of the Council’s jurisdiction.
(e) The DGHC Council consists of 42 members, 28 elected and 14 nominated by the State
Government, with a term of five years.
(f) There will be an Executive Council and the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the
General Council will be ex-officio members of the Executive Council with the
Chairman of the General Council functioning as the Chief Executive Councillor.
(g) The Chairman of the General Council-cum-Chief Executive Councillor will have the ex-
officio status and privileges of a Minister in the Council of Ministers in the State.
(h) The Bill for setting up the Hill Council will be introduced and passed in a special
session of the State Legislature. The election to the Hill Council will be held by the
15th December, 1988.
(i) The State Government in order to restore normalcy in the region agreed to review all
cases registered under various laws against persons including Government servants
involved in GNLF agitation.
(j) GNLF agreed to surrender all unauthorized arms to the district administration and
withdraw all agitation activities and to extend full cooperation to the administration for
the maintenance of peace and normalization of the political process in the hill areas of
Darjeeling.
1.2.5 Pursuant to the above mentioned Settlements, GNLF agreed to drop the demand for a
separate State of Gorkhaland and an autonomous hill council, viz., Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
(DGHC) was set up under ‘The Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988’ notified by the
Government of West Bengal on 15.10.1988. In pursuance of the Darjeeling Accord, elections under
the DGHC Act, were held in 1988, 1993 and in 1999. The term of the last Council expired on
22 March, 2004 after completing its five year term.
1.2.6 The term of the Council was extended upto 26th March, 2005. However, elections to the
Council could not be held and as per provisions of the DGHC Act, Shri Subash Ghising was
notified as Administrator of the DGHC exercising caretaker powers of the General Council from

3
March, 2005 and his term was extended six times and the last extension was granted on 26.9.2007
for six months or till the first meeting of the newly elected General Council is held whichever is
earlier.
1.2.7 However, the Administrator, DGHC had been constantly demanding constitutional status for
the DGHC as the above mentioned settlement could not fulfil the aspirations of the hill people of
Darjeeling. A series of tripartite meetings were held between Government of India, Government of
West Bengal and Administrator, DGHC to review the implementation of Darjeeling Accord and other
issues arising from it. Alternately it emerged that the solution lies in according Sixth Schedule status
to the hill areas of Darjeeling District within the State of West Bengal. Accordingly, the Union
Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs approved the proposal of the Government of West Bengal
to enter into an ‘in principle’ Memorandum of Settlement (MOS) to set up a new council under
the Sixth Schedule replacing the DGHC.
1.2.8 The main objective of MoS is to replace the existing Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council by an
autonomous self governing council to be known as Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling under the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution following due consultative legislative and constitutional processes by
the State and Central Governments, so as to fulfill the economic, educational and linguistic
aspirations and socio-cultural and ethnic identity of the hill people, while duly protecting the rights
of the non-tribals. Accordingly, a Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) popularly known as ‘tripartite
agreement’ was signed on 06.12.2005 between the Government of India, Government of West
Bengal and Shri Subash Ghisingh, Administrator, DGHC.
1.2.9 Salient Features of Memorandum of Settlement (MoS):
(a) The autonomous self-governing Gorkha Hill Council shall comprise of 33 Members of
whom 28 shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage out of whom 10 shall be
reserved for STs, 15 for non-tribal communities, 3 open for all communities, the
remaining five nominated by the Governor from amongst the unrepresented
communities of the areas under the council. Out of the five nominated members at
least two shall be women.
(b) The area of the proposed council shall comprise of three contiguous hill sub-divisions,
viz., Darjeeling, Kalingpong and Kurseong and 16 Mouzas of Siliguri sub-division
which shall be transferred to Kurseong sub-division.
(c) There shall be safeguards for the non-tribals in terms of their settlement rights,
property rights etc. and bona fide acquisition of land by any citizen.
(d) The Council will have legislative powers in respect to (45) subjects mutually agreed
between State Government and Administrator, DGHC.
(e) The Council shall have same powers of supervision over lower tiers of Panchayats as
that of the existing DGHC. Existing arrangement of lower tiers of Panchayats would
continue to function under the new Council.
(f) Executive functions of the Council area to be exercised through its Principal Secretary
who shall been officer of the rank not below that of Commissioner/Secretary to
Government of West Bengal.
(g) For interim administration immediately after signing of the agreement and till such time
the process of constitutional amendment is carried out and the new Council is put in
place, elections to the DGHC and to Panchayat bodies would be held in the DGHC
areas in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Constitution/existing Laws of
the Central/State Governments, among other things.

4
(h) Resolution by State Legislative Assembly recommending the grant of Sixth Schedule
status for Darjeeling Hill Areas and any other Legislative process as may be necessary
shall be carried out precedent to initiating process for amending Article 244 of the
Constitution.
(i) Amendment of Article 244 of the Constitution.
(j) Amendment of Sixth Schedule through an Act of Parliament and enactment of any
other consequential Parliamentary Act(s).
(k) Dissolution of the DGHC and repeal of the DGHC Act 1988 with appropriate saving
clause.
(l) Election and Constitution of new council (within six months of enactment of
Parliamentary Acts).
1.2.10 Following the signing of the MoS, the W est Bengal Legislative Assembly adopted
a Resolution on 16.3.2006 recommending grant of Sixth Schedule status for Darjeeling hill
areas. To achieve the above objectives, the two Bills were introduced in the Lok Sabha on
30 November, 2007.
1.3 Historical Background of Sixth Schedule
1.3.1 The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution provides for special status to certain areas in the
States of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura in the North Eastern Region of the country, in
terms of administrative and functional autonomy.
1.3.2 The genesis of this special status to some States of North Eastern part of our country in
the constitutional system can be traced back to 18th and 19th centuries. In 1765, estates bordering
north east regions came under the control of the authorities at Fort William. Though the Company
appointed its own officers for the collection of public revenue, the actual collection was made by
Zamindars and their officers. The internal quarrels among Zamindars and unrest in these areas laid
the foundation for the pattern of administration to follow in respect of the tribal areas of north-
east India. Acts of British Government in the course of time conferred on the Governor- General
powers to legislate laws separately for the backward areas of Assam valley and its hill districts
1.
1.3.3 The Government of India Act, 1854 enacted by the British Parliament brought certain
territories in India, including Kamrup, Darrang, Nowgong, Sibsagar, Lakhimpur, Garo Hills, Khasi
and Jaintia Hills, Naga Hills, Cachar and Goalpara of erstwhile Assam, under the immediate
authority and management of the Govemor-General-in-Council. In 1874, the Scheduled Districts Act
was passed under which areas inhabited by such backward tribal people were comprised into
Scheduled Districts. Around 1880, a need was felt to render again a separate treatment to certain
frontier tracts of Assam, owing to the stage of backwardness prevailing in such tracts or areas.
Accordingly the Assam Frontier Tracts Regulation, 1880 was promulgated to give the power to the
Chief Commissioner of Assam, to remove any part of that area from the coverage or extent of
the laws in force in such tract. It was extended to the frontier tracts including the erstwhile Lushai
Hills District of Assam
2.
1.3.4 Again after a careful examination of the whole issue, the Governor-General in Council by
a notification under the Government of India Act, 1915-19, declared certain territories in the then
Province of Assam as backward tracts.
1 Hansaria, Justice B.L., Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, Universal Law Publishing Co., Delhi, 2005, pp. 1
2 Chakraborty, P., Fifth and Sixth Schedules to the Constitution of India, Capital Law House, Delhi, 2005, p. 1-2

5
1.3.5 The Government of India Act, 1935 created three types of special areas. Under the Act of
1935, these backward areas were classified as excluded areas and partially excluded area. The
newly created excluded areas, to the extent of about 18,600 square miles in Assam and 10,000
square miles in the provinces of Madras, Bengal, North-West Frontier, Punjab and Assam, were
placed under the personal rule of the Governor’s in their discretion. The newly created partially
excluded areas were placed under the responsibility of a Minister specifically in charge of such
areas while the Governor was assigned with certain special responsibility in the administration of
these areas only in certain matters in respect of which he had the power to act in his individual
judgment and to overrule the Minister’s advice
1.
1.3.6 In a statement on 16th May, 1946, the Cabinet Mission reiterated the need for special
attention of the Constituent Assembly to these excluded and partially excluded areas and tribal areas
while drafting the new Constitution of India. An Advisory Committee was planned on Fundamental
Rights and Minorities in such manner that it should contain due representation of all the interests
likely to be affected, and should advise the Constituent Assembly on framing an appropriate scheme
for the administration of tribal and excluded areas
4.
1.3.7 The Advisory Committee in its meeting held on 27th February, 1947 set up three Sub
Committees – one to consider the tribal and excluded and partially excluded areas in Assam, another
to consider the tribal areas in the North-West Frontier Province and Baluchistan, and a third Sub
Committee to consider the position of excluded and partially excluded areas in the Provinces other
than Assam. The Sub Committee on tribal and excluded and partially excluded areas submitted its
report on 28th July, 1947, while the other Sub Committee on the excluded and partially excluded
areas in the provinces other than Assam submitted its interim report on 18th August, 1947 and final
report in September, 1947
5.
1.3.8 The Drafting Committee considered the recommendations and the draft prepared by the Sub
Committees were included in the draft Constitution of February, 1948. When the Sixth Schedule
was being considered for adoption in the Constitution Assembly , Shri Gopinath Bordolai supporting
the idea of Sixth Schedule in the Constitution said:
“...I want to place before you the, background in which this draft had to be formulated.
It is not unknown to you that the rule of the British Government and the activities of the
foreign Missions always went together. These areas were formerly entirely excluded areas
in the sense that none from the plains could go there and contact them. ...Sir, some of
these areas were war zones. During the war, the then rulers and officers developed in the
minds of these tribal people a sense of separation and isolation and gave them assurances
that at the end of the war they will be independent States managing their affairs in their
own way. They were led to believe that the entire hill areas would he constituted into a
province and put under some irresponsible Governor. You might possibly have read in the
papers that plans were hatched in England in which the ex Governors of Assam evidently
took part, to create a sort of a Kingdom over there. ...People of this area were already fully
suffused with these ideas of isolation :and separation. ...The point therefore that presented
itself to us was whether we should raise in them a spirit of enmity and hatred by
application of force or whether we should bring them up under the broad principle of
Government by good will and love. With that background the draft was prepared and was
placed before you. In the meantime, great changes have come in the structure of the
Government of India. More powers are being vested in the Centre today than it was
1Chakraborty, P., Fifth and Sixth Schedules to the Constitution of India, Capital Law House, Delhi, 2005, p.4
4Ibid p.5
5Ibid pp.5

6
contemplated then. The trend of criticism on the amendments that have been submitted
seems to indicate that we gave more powers to these autonomous Councils, perhaps very
much beyond what the State Legislature of Assam could. I do not agree with this view.
...I submit, therefore, that nothing has been proposed here which is not in line with the
pattern and the structure of the Constitution which we are framing for the whole of India.”
1.3.9 While replying to the debate on the discussion on Sixth Schedule Dr. B. R. Ambedkar,
Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constitution stated:
“...The tribal people in areas other than Assam are more or less Hinduised, more or less
assimilated with the civilisation and culture of the majority of the people in whose midst
they live. With regard to the tribals in Assam that is not the case. Their roots are still in
their own civilisation and their own culture. ........ Their laws of inheritance, their laws of
marriage, customs and so on are quite different from that of the Hindus. I think that is the
main distinction which influenced us to have a different sort of scheme for Assam from
the one we have provided for other territories. In other words, the position of the tribals
of Assam, whatever may be the reason for it, is somewhat analogous to the position of the
Red Indians in the United States, as against the white emigrants there. Now, what did the
Untied States do with regard to the Red Indians? So far as I am aware, what they did was
to create what are called Reservations of Boundaries within which the Red Indians lived.
They are a republic by themselves. No doubt, by the law of the Untied Stated they are
citizens of the United States. But that is only a nominal allegiance to the Constitution of the
United States. Factually they are a separate, independent people. It was felt by the United
States that their laws and modes of living, their habits and manners of life were so distinct
that it would be dangerous to bring them at one shot, so to say, within the range of the
laws made by the white people for white persons and for the purpose of the white
civilisation. I agree that we have been creating Regional and District Councils to some
extent on the lines which were adopted by the United States for the purpose of the Red
Indians.”
Development during post-independence period:
1.3.10 As per the provisions of the Constitution, the provisions of Sixth Schedule can be amended
in three different ways:—
(a) by Constitutional amendment by following procedure laid down in Article 368 of the
Constitution;
(b) by an ordinary Parliamentary legislation as provided in paragraph 21 of the Sixth
Schedule; and
(c) by notification issued by the Governor under paragraph 1 (3) of the Sixth Schedule
resulting in amendment to the table appended to paragraph 20 of the said Schedule.
1.3.11 After independence, the Sixth Schedule has been amended on 10 occasions as a
consequence of the following details of amendments made from time to time:—
1. State of Nagaland Act, 1962
2. Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969
3. North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971
4. Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act 1971
5. Repealing and Amending Act, 1974

7
6. Constitution (Fo rty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984
7. The State of Mizoram Act, 1986
8. Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988
9. Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995
10. Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003
1.3.11 The National Commission to review the working of the Constitution under the Chairmanship
of Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah’ also dealt with the decentralization and devolution of
powers. The Commission while dealing with institutions working in North-Eastern regions of the
country recommended that:—
1. The subjects mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution (relating to
entrustment of powers, authorities and responsibilities of the panchayats) may be
entrusted to the Autonomous District Councils functioning under the Sixth Schedule.
2. The implementation of centrally funded projects should be entrusted to the Autonomous
District Councils with strict audit by the CAG.
3. Anti defection law should be made applicable to all the Sixth Schedule areas
6.
6 Hansaria, Justice B.L., Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, Universal Law Publishing Co., Delhi, 2005. pp. 19-28

8
CHAPTER-II
PRESENTATION OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
2.1 The Joint Secretary (Centre State), Ministry of Home Affairs made a Power Point
presentation before the Committee on 13 December 2007. The salient points of the presentation are
given below:
(a) From 2001, the GNLF raised the issue of constitutional status and four tripartite
meetings were held between the Government of India, State Government and GNLF.
(b) West Bengal Government amended the DGHC Act to provide for appointment of an
Administrator for a period not exceeding six months at a time.
(c) From March, 2005, Shri Subhash Ghisingh has been notified Administrator of the
DGHC exercising caretaker powers of the General Council.
(d) It became clear that the solution to the issues raised by GNLF could not be
satisfactorily resolved without a constitutional amendment.
(e) There was clear perception that Sixth Schedule Status need to be considered for
DGHC areas under exceptional circumstances.
(f) On 1.12.2005, the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs approved the proposal to
enter into an in principle Memorandum of Settlement, to set up a new Council under
the Sixth Schedule replacing the DGHC. The MOS was accordingly signed on
6.12.2005.
(g) Under the GHC based on the mutual agreement between the State Government and
DGHC the area has been expanded to include 4 more mouzas from Siliguri sub-division
to the DHC areas.
(h) The MoS also provides for safeguards for the non-tribals in terms of their settlement
rights, property rights, etc. and bonafide acquisition of land by any citizen.
(i) Provision in the Sixth Schedule will ensure that in the new Council area, language and
medium of instruction in educational institutions will not be changed without approval
of the State Government.
(j) Amendments to the Sixth Schedule shall include provisions in such manner that non-
tribals are not disadvantaged in relation to the rights enjoyed by them at the
commencement of the new Council and their rights and privileges including land rights
are fully protected.
(k) New Council will have legislative powers in respect to 45 subjects mutually agreed
between State Government and Shri Subhash Ghisingh.
(l) New Council shall have executive, administrative and financial powers in respect of
subjects transferred to it.
(m) There shall be an Executive Council comprising not more than 6 Executive Members
from amongst the members of the General Council, one of whom shall be Chief and
another one the Deputy Chief.
8

9
(n) At least two Members of the Executive Council will be represented by non-tribals.
(o) State Government to provide an amount, to be decided every year on population ratio
basis, as grants-in-aid in two equal installments to the new Council for executing
developmental works.
(p) To accelerate development of the region, Government of India is to provide financial
assistance of Rs.30 crore per annum for five years for projects in the new Council
areas in addition to the normal State Plan.
(q) The State Government also agreed to provide grants-in-aid of Rs. l0 crore annually in
addition to the budget provisions for development projects.
(r) Immediately after signing of the MoS and till such time the process of Constitutional
amendment is earned out and the new Council is put in place, the administration of
the area shall continue to be with the existing DGHC constituted under the existing
Act.
(s) On 16.3.2006 the West Bengal Assembly resolved to recommend grant of Sixth
Schedule status to DGHC area.
(t) On 3.7.2006 the State Government finalized the areas and subjects to be transferred
to the new Council and on 12.12.2006 issued necessary notification reorganising the
existing sub-divisions of Darjeeling district.
(u) Under the Sixth Schedule paras 1-17 relate to administration of the autonomous areas.
(v) The GHC would be vested with legislative powers on specified subjects and allotted
certain sources of taxation.
(w) The Council will have powers to maintain services in respect of land, revenue, forest,
etc. and to administer their system of justice.
(x) It is proposed to amend Article 244 of the Constitution to bring GHC areas within the
ambit of the provisions of the Sixth Schedule.
(y) It is proposed to insert a new clause after clause (6) of Article 332 in order to protect
the existing representation of STs and Non-STs in the Legislative Assembly of the State
by keeping their constituencies intact in the GHC areas.

10
CHAPTER-III
ORAL EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES/MEMORANDA FROM PUBLIC
3.1 The Committee received memoranda in thousands from organizations/individuals
expressing views on the Bills. More than one hundred organizations/individuals submitted their
memoranda to the Committee. A list showing organizations/individuals who submitted memoranda
is at Annexure-III.
3.2 The Committee also received an overwhelming number of requests seeking to express their
views before the Committee. The Committee gave opportunity to most of the organizations/
individuals who requested for an audience before it. The organizations/individuals were classified
into certain categories and out of each such category individuals having a representative character
were invited to speak before the Committee. Care was taken to ensure that every shade of opinion
got an opportunity to make their views before the Committee. A list of organizations/individuals
who appeared before the Committee is at Annexure IV .
3.3 The Committee also heard local MPs, namely, Shri Dawa Narbula, representing Darjeeling
constituency in the Lok Sabha and Shri Saman Pathak representing State of West Bengal in Rajya
Sabha; and also former Member of Rajya Sabha from West Bengal, namely, Shri Ananda Pathak.
3.4 The views expressed in the memoranda as well as the oral evidence by witnesses are
divergent and diametrically opposite. Some have supported the Bills whereas an overwhelming
majority has rejected them. Some other views also emerged before the Committee. The views have
been summarized and listed below.
3.5 Viewpoints against the Proposed Legislations
3.5.1 The Bills conferring Sixth Schedule status to the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling are
vehemently opposed on the following grounds:
(i) In order to accord Indian identity to the entire Gorkha population in India and also
to recognise their patriotism and services to the nation, a separate State for Gorkhas
be created at the earliest by taking together Darjeeling district and adjoining areas of
Duars under the provision of Article 3 (a) of the Constitution;
(ii) W ithout a State of their own, the Gorkha community in India is always being
misconceived and misconstrued as outsider and immigrant;
(iii) The Administrator, DGHC is an appointee of the State Government. Hence making
him a party to the tripartite agreement will in no way reflect people’s participation and
fulfill their aspirations;
(iv) The Bills defy common logic as they seek to declare an area with nearly seventy per
cent non-tribal population as a tribal area and then to extend Sixth Schedule status
to that area by Constitutional amendment;
(v) A sizeable population of Gorkhas resides in the Siliguri sub-division whereas only 18
Mouzas are intended to be made part of the proposed Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling.
10

11
This would further divide the people of the region and also make the region
economically backward;
(vi) As per the para 10 (ii) of MoS, election to DGHC and panchayat bodies in DGHC
areas were to be held in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Constitution/
existing laws, as an interim step. Surprisingly, it has not been accomplished before
the Bills are taken up in Parliament, thus breaching the chronology of the process
without any logic;
(vii) Implementation of the Sixth Schedule Amendment Bill in the present form will lead
to compartmentalization between tribals and non tribals and between tribals of the
region and create sharp divisions between them;
(viii) Granting of Sixth Schedule status will deprive the population of the region from
assimilating with the mainstream;
(ix) According to Census 2001, the Scheduled Tribe population of Darjeeling district stood
at 12.69 per cent. There is almost three fold increase in the ST population in 2005,
which was achieved after including Tamangs and Limbus under the ST category. The
ground on which these two communities were included in the ST category is
unknown;
(x) Hill people including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes apprehend that the Bill
if passed will bring about division, disharmony and disunity among the people, disturb
the peace and tranquility and it will ultimately lead to destabilization of the strategic
area, the Siliguri corridor, which connects the mainland to the North Eastern Region;
(xi) The passage of these Bills and imposition of Sixth Schedule status will lead to
violence and bloodshed in the entire region;
(xii) A disturbed Darjeeling will affect Sikkim and a turbulent Nepal with a similar
populace existing in the west of Darjeeling Hills with a potential spill over of its
Maoist plague which, according to Hon’ble Prime Minister, is the greatest threat to
internal security in our country;
(xiii) If at all the Sixth Schedule is to be imposed in DGHC areas it should be done by
a referendum which would be the proper democratic step.
3.6 Viewpoints in favour of the Proposed Legislations
(i) The Bills and conferment of Sixth Schedule status to the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling are necessary for the region;
(ii) Bloodbath is imminent in case the Bills are stalled;
(iii) Functioning of DGHC could not redress the grievances of the public and the hopes
and aspirations of the people could not be fulfilled. To provide Constitutional
recognition and safeguard to DGHC, passage of these Bills is important and it would
lead to the development of this area;
(iv) The frustration among the people of Darjeeling was due to not holding of elections
for a long time. These Bills may be passed with some amendments like giving power
to the Council to establish heavy industries; giving representation to its members in
the WB Planning Commission and Central Planning Commission and giving specified
package to the Council;

12
(v) Power should be decentralized in the new administrative set up;
(vi) An elected body of Gorkha Hill Council may be constituted at the earliest. Self-
governing bodies like municipalities, panchayats, etc. shall be operationalised through
elections at the earliest;
(vii) The Bills may be passed immediately.
3.7 The Committee was informed that the West Bengal Legislative Assembly had adopted
another Resolution on “Inclusion of Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council in the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution of India” on 19th December, 2007. A request was received from the Government of
West Bengal requesting the Chairperson of the Committee to grant audience to an All Party
Delegation of the West Bengal Legislative Assembly which would brief her on the subject. The
Chairperson placed the request before the Committee as she thought it appropriate that the
Delegation may if it so desires, meet the full Committee instead of its Chairperson. The proposal
of the Chairperson was endorsed by the Committee. The suggestion was accepted by the State
Government and the All Party Delegation from the West Bengal Legislative Assembly led by
Shri Ashok Bhattacharya, Minister-in-Charge Municipal Affairs and Urban Development Department,
Government of West Bengal interacted with the Standing Committee in its sitting held on
21st January, 2008. The delegation informed the Committee that the West Bengal Legislative
Assembly had adopted two resolutions regarding inclusion of Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council in the
Sixth Schedule; one on 16th March, 2006 and the other on 19th December, 2007. The members
of the delegation consisting of four Ministers and eighteen MLAs while supporting the Bills
requested the Committee to submit its report at the earliest so that the Bills could be enacted by
Parliament soon after it meets for the Budget Session and elections held and the new Council under
the Sixth Schedule could be set up which would help in restoring peace and normalcy in Darjeeling
hill areas. It was also stated by the members of the delegation that delay in passage of the Bills
would cause frustration amongst the people and send confusing signals.
3.7.1 The members of the delegation further stated that the Gorkha Hill Council under the State
Act did not have the constitutional sanctity as, in the Indian Constitution there was no provision
of autonomous “District Council” outside Sixth Schedule. They added that since the existing DGHC
was not a constitutional body, a lot of confusion took place between the State Government and
the DGHC in terms of power sharing. The members of the delegation were of the view that the
Constitutional sanctity granted through the Sixth Schedule would take care of the people’s
sentiments. They further added that early passage of the Bills was imperative to end the turbulence
in the hill areas and any further delay could lead to unrest among people which may also be violent
in nature.
3.8 Other viewpoints on the Proposed Legislation
(i) The territory of Duars may also be included in any proposal that seeks to solve the
problem of the area as these are contiguous areas of the Darjeeling district and
linguistically united by the Nepali language;
(ii) There is no provision in the Sixth Schedule for the constitutional rights and privileges
of the Scheduled Castes. While reserving 10 seats for Scheduled Tribes, l5 for non-
Tribals and 3 open, no seats have been kept reserved for Scheduled Castes inspite of
its substantial population. There should be reservation for women in the Council.
(iii) The B ill seeks to empower the West Bengal Government to nominate five members
with equal powers including voting rights and privileges to the Council. West Bengal
Government intends to use the nominations to tilt the balance in the proposed Council
in its favour in forming the Executive Council. This might lead to confrontations.

13
(iv) Instead of Sixth Schedule status, status of Union Territory may be granted to the
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council areas and it should be governed by Central
Government.
(v) Special provision with respect to the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council areas may be
provided by inserting a new Article 371J in the Constitution.
(vi) Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council areas should remain a part of the State of West Bengal
duly governed by it and no Sixth Schedule status be granted to the area so as to
defuse the prevailing tension in the region.
(vii) Both the demands of Sixth Schedule and separate State of Gorkhaland would mean
ultimate partition and disintegration of West Bengal. Both the demands should be
rejected.
(viii) Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council may be abolished and the Darjeeling District put directly
under state administration, with Army protection.
(ix) Clause-VII of the Indo-Nepal Treaty of 1950 may be repealed to prevent foreign
Nepali infiltration.
(x) All foreign Nepalese should be identified and pushed back to Nepal, as per the
Foreigners Act, 1964 as is being done in the case of illegal Bangladeshi migrants.
(xi) Border outposts be set up with barbed-wire fencing. Visa be introduced in the Indo-
Nepal border as is the case with Bangladesh.
3.9 Committees’ proposed visit to Darjeeling
3.9.1 Almost all the witnesses representing groups/organizations who appeared before the
Committee and the organizations/individuals who had sent written memoranda, requested the
Committee to visit Darjeeling to make on-the-spot study of the area and assess the situation at the
ground. Since divergent views had been expressed before the Committee and it had been suggested
by some that parties/organizations which opposed the Bills were splinter groups of GNLF and were
politically motivated, it unanimously proposed to visit Darjeeling and Siliguri in its sitting held on
21st January, 2008, to assess for itself the actual situation prevailing therein. The Committee also
decided to hear the Administrator, DGHC and the representatives of the Government of West Bengal
at Kolkata while returning from Darjeeling. The Committee proposed to undertake the study visit,
tentatively, from 6th to 8th February, 2008.
3.9.2 As per practice, the Chairperson of the Committee had sent a formal request to the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha seeking permission for the Committee’s proposed visit. However, the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha in his minutes dated 25th January, 2008 marked to Secretary General/
Secretary, Rajya Sabha Secretariat referred to a communication dated 24th January, 2008 alongwith
a report from Darjeeling Police authorities, indicating the prevailing circumstances and a request to
review the proposed visit of the Committee. In the said minutes the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
suggested that in the given circumstances, it would be appropriate that the Committee may review
the proposed visit.
3.9.3 The note of the Chairman, Rajya Sabha based on the report of the Government of West
Bengal, Home Department, suggesting that in the context of the circumstances prevailing in
Darjeeling, the proposed visit of the Standing Committee be reviewed, was considered by the
Committee in its sitting held on 31st January, 2008. As desired by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha the
Committee reviewed its proposed visit to Darjeeling and decided to drop the proposal.

14
3.9.4 After the Committee decided to drop the proposed visit, several organizations had written
to the Chairperson of the Committee expressing their dismay over the cancellation of the visit of
the Committee to Darjeeling. The main submissions made therein are as under:—
(i) This move of the Committee deprived the people of Darjeeling and Duars of being
heard before the Committee;
(ii) Law and order problem might have been raised by the State Government to discourage
the visit of the Committee. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Darjeeling is
completely tranquil. There is absolute peace and harmony;
(iii) As the Standing Committee did not physically visit Darjeeling to gauge the situation
prevailing on the ground there, any report/recommendation made on the fate of the
people of Darjeeling cannot be realistic. It was incumbent upon the Committee to
actually feel the pulse of the majority of the people before coming to any conclusion
in this regard;
(iv) V olunteers of Gorkha Janmukti Morcha have started fast unto death programme in
support of the following demands:
(a) That the Sixth Schedule Status of the Constitution should not be implemented in
the Darjeeling Hills. Forcible imposition of the Sixth Schedule status will bring
political unrest in the Hills.
(b) That Shri Subash Ghisingh should be removed immediately from the position of
Caretaker Administrator of DGHC. He should not be given any more extension.
(c) Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs should visit Darjeeling to
assess the actual situation before sending the report to the Lok Sabha.

15
CHAPTER-IV
ORAL EVIDENCE OF ADMINISTRATOR, DARJEELING GORKHA HILL COUNCIL
4.1 Shri Subhash Ghisingh, Administrator, DGHC who was one of the signatories to
the Darjeeling Accord 1988 as well as the T ripartite Agreement i.e. Memorandum of Settlement
(MoS) 2005,  was invited to appear before the Committee for evidence.
4.1.1 The Administrator, DGHC, raised various issues concerning the Darjeeling Accord and the
present Bills. The submissions made by him are briefly as under:—
(i) After signing of the MoS, 2005 there has been undue delay in implementing the
provisions of MoS leading to non fulfilment of expectations from the leadership;
(ii) Sixth Schedule is being opposed by the disgruntled people;
(iii) Only a few section of the people have started the movement stating that Sixth
Schedule could cause division among various communities of Gorkhas;
(iv) There is inherent fault in the MoS. Reservation for Scheduled Tribes and non-
Scheduled Tribes community was opposed (by  the Administrator) vehemently at the
time of signing of MoS, Government was told that all 28 constituencies seats should
be open to all;
(v) Any reservation, if required at all, should be confined to the category of 5 members
to be nominated by the Governor;
(vi) Darjeeling being attached to international borders touching Nepal, Bangladesh, China
and Bhutan has got strategic and diplomatic significance for the country. Traces of
international spying network have been found which has been accordingly
communicated to the Government of West Bengal and Government of India;
(vii) The calculative move and mission of international spying network hovering around
Darjeeling have the ulterior motive of annexing Darjeeling. It was in this context,
Administrator, DGHC wanted the conferment of Sixth Schedule to keep the people of
Darjeeling pleased and integrated with India with a sense of belongingness;
(viii) Removal of Administrator, DGHC would pave the way for gaining ground by the
international spying network who have sinister design and mission;
(ix) Original demand of GNLF was a separate state of Gorkhaland. However, due to
amicable settlement Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council became the reality which
functioned for 15 to 16 years;
(x) DGHC practically worked as only a developmental agency for construction work,
salary dispensation, as a result of which political aspirations of the people could not
be fulfilled;
(xi) The prevailing emotional out burst of the people of Darjeeling can be attributed to
the delay caused in introducing the proposed Bills in the Lok Sabha after signing of
MoS. The Government of West Bengal and the Government of India took undue time
to agree to confer the status of Sixth Schedule to Gorkha Hill Council;
15

16
(xii) Due to non fulfilment of political aspirations and delay caused in implementation of
provisions of MoS, frustration among the people is mounting. Fuel is being added by
international spying network active in the region. Armed guerrilla training in the deep
forest is going on along with procurement of arms. The situation in the region has
become explosive which needs to be tackled with administrative suave and political
willingness to give the due to the people of Darjeeling;
(xiii) Since the political aspiration of the people of Darjeeling could not be fulfilled with
the mechanism of DGHC, he requested the Government that either the existing
DGHC be upgraded by entrusting more power by conferring Sixth Schedule status
or special provision under Article 371J of the Constitution may be considered;
(xiv) To save the Darjeeling from regional turbulence and falling prey to international
spying network, cooperation of Government of India and Government of West
Bengal is essential as DGHC has no power pertaining to Home and Defence;
(xv) Opposing the proposed Bills amounts to support to the international spying network
seeking to balkanize. Therefore, conferment of the Sixth Schedule status to the
DGHC is the appropriate route to ward off danger from international spying network;
(xvi) As per Census 1931, all the Gorkha communities were Hill tribes But thereafter the
“Limbus” community has been conferred tribal status while “Rai” community was
left out. Similarly, “Tamang” was given tribal status, while “Gurung” has been
considered as non-tribal community;
(xvii) People residing around Darjeeling have composite culture and tribal character with
their old practices. They recognize the existence of spirits and worship them. Such
culture and religious practices are typically tribal in character. Even the Britishers
recognized the fact. It was on this basis that he approached the Government to
recognize the whole Gorkha community as hill tribals;
(xviii) Conferment of Sixth Schedule to the proposed Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling on the
pattern of Bodoland Territorial Council with sufficient and appropriate power would
ensure sustenance and survival of Darjeeling. Therefore, sooner the proposed Bills
are passed by the Parliament, the better it would be in the interest of the nation and
the people of Darjeeling;
(xix) The people who opposed the Bills are deliberately and baselessly doing so to make
it a political issue for their personal interest which was neither in the interest of
Darjeeling nor in the interest of the nation;
(xx) Majority of the people of Darjeeling still desired the Sixth Schedule.
4.2 Responding to the Member’s queries, the Administrator, DGHC gave the following
replies:
(i) Provision for election to the DGHC and Panchayat Bodies was there in sub-clause (ii)
of Clause 10 of the Agreement under Interim Administration and it was contemplated
that election would be conducted just after the signing of MoS. However, that did not
happen;
(ii) Duars should also be included in the Council; and
(iii) He was not satisfied with the draft MoS and registered his protest. However, having
realized that grant of statehood was not forthcoming and that constitutional
recognition to the Council was very crucial at that point of time, he signed the settlement.

17
CHAPTER-V
ORAL EVIDENCE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL
5.1 The Chief Secretary and other representatives of the Government of West Bengal appeared
before the Committee and tendered oral evidence on the two Bills. The oral-evidence of the
representatives of Government of West Bengal was the penultimate round of oral testimonies.
During the rounds of oral deposition the Committee came across conflicting and divergent views
on the Bills. On the one hand, the overwhelming majority of the witnesses objecting to the Bills
were of the view that in case the Bills were passed there would be civic unrest and bloodshed in
the region. On the other hand, some witnesses vehemently supported the Bills stating that the Bills
would fulfil the aspirations of the local people. The latter group averred that in case there was
further delay in passing the Bills, there would be bloodshed in Darjeeling. It was in that backdrop
that the Committee heard the views of the Chief Secretary and other officers of Government of
West Bengal.
5.2 The Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal stated that the two Bills were in line with
the tripartite MoS signed by the Government of India, Government of West Bengal and the
Administrator, DGHC on December 6,2005. Therefore, the Government of West Bengal was fully
in agreement with the provisions of the Bills including the setting up of an Interim Council till the
election to autonomous district council under the Sixth Schedule was held. To a poser of the
Committee as to how Shri Subash Ghisingh could be considered as the true representative of the
people of Darjeeling as he was merely an appointee of the State Government at the time of signing
of the MoS, the Chief Secretary responded as follows:
“The tripartite Memorandum of Settlement, ..., was signed on December 6, 2005.
..., at that time, Mr. Subash Ghisingh appeared to be or, in our assessment, he was the
undisputed leader of Darjeeling. Elections to the DGHC were held once after signing of the
1988 Memorandum. After that twice it was held, but later on, it was not held mainly at
the insistence of Mr. Subash Ghisingh because he wanted a constitutional status for the hill
areas of Darjeeling. We amended the DGHC Act and provided for constitution of an
Administrator or a body of Administrators and Shri Subash Ghisingh was appointed
Administrator for the first time on March 26, 2005. His term has been extended by six
months five times since then. Now, when the Memorandum of Settlement was signed
in 2005, the State Government’ s expectation was that, at least, within a period of one year,
the constitutional amendment would be carried out. It was not done. Because of procedural
reasons or some other reasons, it did not happen. As a result of which, there have been
a lot of misgivings among the people of Darjeeling now as to whether Sixth Schedule status
will at all be given to Darjeeling hill areas or not. This created an atmosphere of
uncertainty, but I would still say on behalf of the State Government that we are aware of
the situation and we have discussed with our Chief Minister and Council of Ministers. Our
assessment is that if this Constitutional Amendment is carried out within a very short period
of time, the situation in Darjeeling will come to normalcy. There are a large number of
fence sitters who are hesitant about what will happen in the future. So, they will all fall
in line and take part in the Sixth Schedule Autonomous District Council elections to be held
thereafter”.
17

18
5.3 The Chief Secretary, the Government of West Bengal further added:
“In this connection, I would like to draw your attention to the Memorandum of
Settlement which was first signed in 1988. There, in the Preamble itself, it has been
mentioned that as a result of this Memorandum of Settlement, the Settlement that was made
with the Gorkha National Liberation Front, the GNLF had agreed to drop the demand for
a separate state and following that all these things happened in Darjeeling. So, I think that
with the conferment of the constitutional status on the hill areas of Darjeeling, there will
be a permanent solution and things will become absolutely normal. Now, it is our
assessment that because of this delay there is a lot of resentment among the people and
there are doubts in their minds as to whether this Sixth Schedule status would be given to
the hill areas at all.”
5.4 The Chief Secretary further averred that “it was true that the Administrator was an
appointee of the State Government at the time of signing of MoS in 2005. He was the undisputed
leader of the hill region of Darjeeling, therefore, the State Government’s stand was that if at all
any agreement was to be signed it should be with Shri Subhash Ghisingh”.
5.5 The attention of the Chief Secretary was then drawn to clause 10 of MoS which inter alia
provides for holding election to DGHC and Panchayat Bodies in the DGHC areas in accordance
with relevant provisions of the Constitution/existing laws of Central/State Governments, in the
interregnum between the MoS and the constitution amendment, and was asked to explain the
reasons for not holding the election. The Chief Secretary replied that the State Government was
anticipating that the constitution amendment and the Parliamentary acts would be carried through
quickly. Therefore, it was not considered necessary to conduct the election as per said provision
of MoS which was subsequently amended on 22nd March, 2005 to incorporate a provision for
appointment of Administrator and also for providing extension of his term by six months at a time.
5.6 In support of that stand the Chief Secretary made the following statement:
“So, as all hon. Members are aware, there was a situation where the State Government had
to take a decision, not purely from administrative point of view, but taking into
consideration all other factors operating at that point of time, like what the situation could
be, the need for maintaining peace and tranquility in the hill areas of Darjeeling, and so
on. So, all these factors were taken into consideration.”
5.7 When the Chief Secretary was asked whether at any given point of time during the fifteen
years of functioning of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, any resolution seeking conferment of
the Sixth Schedule or Statehood was passed, he told the Committee that he was unaware of any
such resolution. A Member while pointing out that a certain percentage of tribal population was
required to meet the criteria for conferment of the Sixth Schedule status to an area and enquired
as to since when the Government of West Bengal started contemplating Sixth Schedule status to
Darjeeling. The Chief Secretary, the Government of West Bengal explained as under:-
“after 1988 elections took place, two other elections were held, and, within the
extended term, the fourth election to the General Council of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill
Council was to be held before March 26th, 2005, and, during this time, Mr. Subash
Ghisingh, the Chairman of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council started demanding the Sixth
Schedule on the basis that there is a demand for constitutional status for DGHC or the hill
areas of Darjeeling. Then only the State Government started examining the issue. At a time
even before he started demanding, there was a proposal from DGHC for declaring two
communities, Limbus and Tamangs, as tribals in 2004-05 and that was being examined by
the Government of India. So, finally, sometime in 2005, they declared these two
communities as ‘tribals’. We made a brief calculation and we have given papers as to how

19
we did that. We found that if we added the population of Limbus and Tamangs in the
scheduled tribe population..., it came to about 31.4 per cent of the total population of
tribal hill areas. On the basis of that and on the analogy of the Bodoland Autonomous
District Council, we supported the stand taken by the Administrator, DGHC and we
requested the Government of India to examine this issue, and, as a result of that,..., the
Memorandum of Settlement was arrived at.”
5.8 Since the Constitution originally intended application of Sixth Schedule to the State of
Assam and later on to States of Tripura, Mizoram and Meghalaya, and that the proposed Bills
intended to extend it further to Darjeeling Hills, a query was put to the Chief Secretary, whether
any exercise was undertaken to examine the constitutional sanctity of the two Bills. The Chief
Secretary replied that the requisite action was undertaken by the Ministry of Home Affairs which
in turn consulted the Ministry of Law and Justice for expert legal opinion.
5.9 A Member of the Committee questioned the urgency of suddenly identifying ‘Limbus’ and
‘Tamang’ as hill tribes and leaving out two other Gor kha communities ‘Rai’ and ‘Gurung’ without
waiting for the next census and the such exercise was undertaken by the Cultural Research
Institute of Kokata instead of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. The Chief Secretary
clarified as under:—
“It was because the question of conferment of constitutional status was very much
there in the minds of the State Government and the Government of India...The Cultural
Research Institute is under the Backward Classes Welfare Department (Government of West
Bengal), which looks after Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and also other Backward
Classes. It is not merely for other Backward Classes. And we did a quick job in the sense
that we took the 2003 electoral rolls, and from that on the basis of...”
5.10 The Chairperson asked the Chief Secretary that by transferring only 18 Mouzas of Siliguri
Sub-Division to GHC, a large number of tribal population would be left out of the jurisdiction of
GHC and a sizeable non-tribal population in the area proposed to be included, would come within
the purview of GHC.
5.11 Replying to the Chairperson’s and Members’ queries, the Chief Secretary responded as
under:—
“The Hill areas of Darjeeling have certain special characteristics; they have certain
cultural affinities within themselves, which really distinguish them from the rest of West
Bengal. And the entire thing was done; you are fully aware of this that there has been a
persistent demand for a separate Statehood for the hill areas of Darjeeling. And the State
Government assessed that conferment of Sixth Schedule, or initially, it was the Darjeeling
Gorkha Hill Council, according to a State Act, was a good alternative to the ultimate
demand of Statehood. So, that was done in order to ensure that there is no further demand
for Statehood for Darjeeling. That is the assessment.”
5.12 In the same argument, Chief Secretary made the following observations:-
“the point is that supposing the Sixth Schedule status could not be conferred and the
Bills are not passed. Then, what would be the situation like? Then, either we have to go
back to the current DGHC Act, hold elections and run it...But our assessment is, the fallout
will be something else. There will be a united decision; their agitation for a separate
Statehood. That is the assessment of the State Government...Because they will say that
despite all our demands, DGHC could not function and Sixth Schedule status could not
come; so, the only way out is to go for an agitation to have a separate State.”
5.13 The Chief Secretary’s attention was drawn to the fact that nineteen out of the twenty
organizations that appeared before the Committee opposed the Bills taking the stand that the

20
proposed Bills were creating a division between the Gorkhas and non-Gorkhas and amongst the
Gorkhas themselves, notwithstanding the fact that all Gorkha communities were united by a
common culture and ethnicity. Since the Bills were creating division between Gorkhas and Non-
Gorkhas, Tribes and Non-Tribes, those were unacceptable.
5.14 The Chief Secretary replied as under:—
“No, 1 think the divide...that the hon. Chairperson is talking of is not there because
Gorkhas, whether they are tribals or whether parts of them have been declared tribals or
not, constitute more than 90 per cent of the population of the hill areas. So, there is no
question of a divide within the Gorkhas.”
5.15 The attention of Chief Secretary was drawn to the submission made by Shri Subash
Ghisingh, Administrator, DGHC, that he was unhappy with the provision of reservation for tribals
and non-tribals in the MoS and he wanted all the twenty eight seats to be thrown open. He had
gone on record before the Committee that he had signed the MoS because he wanted the Sixth
Schedule status at any cost. The Chief Secretary in response clarified that the proposed Bills did
the right thing by having provision for ten reserved seats for STs. The Chief Secretary said that
the provisions for reservation for scheduled tribes in the Bill was intended to fulfil the constitutional
obligation while reservation for non-tribal communities were aimed at protecting the interests of
that section of the society under the proposed GHC regime.
5.16 In regard to the charge of Darjeeling being the hotbed of international spying network,
vehemently and repeatedly levelled by the Administrator, DGHC and pleading for conferment of
Sixth Schedule at the least, to make the people happy, the Chief Secretary clarified that the
Administrator, DGHC was over-blowing the issue and the Darjeeling Hill areas and the entire North
Bengal were under surveillance by the State Government, intelligence agencies as well as by the
Central I.B., and the State Government was fully aware of the situation prevailing there.
5.17 Responding to a Member’s query whether the West Bengal Government was not trying to
create “a State within a State” the Chief Secretary replied:
“This kind of a provision already existed in the Constitution. The Government had not
agreed to something which was outside the purview of the Constitution. So we are trying
to say that the Sixth Schedule status may be there as it is in some States of the North-
East. It is in a way a State within a State. They have a lot of autonomy because of their
special characteristics. We protect their cultural affinities. This is the provision which is
there in the Constitution.”
5.18 One Member enquired whether Shri Subash Ghisingh was enjoying the support of the
majority of the people of Darjeeling in view of the fact that nineteen out of twenty groups who
appeared before the Committee, opposed the Bills and whether the Government of West Bengal had
ever assessed the support base of the Administrator. The Chief Secretary replied as under:—
“The exact support enjoyed by any political leader can only be assessed through the
process of election. But, as there has been no elections since 2004, it is very difficult to
say officially or on the basis of logic as to whether he enjoys overwhelming support or not.
The only point I wish to make before here is that after signing the Memorandum of
Tripartite Settlement in December, 2005, the expectation was that the constitutional status
would be conferred very soon within a period of one year. That was our expectation, but
this did not happen. That actually created a lot of confusion, a lot of doubts, in the minds
of the people of the hilly areas of Darjeeling, that the State Government says something,
but the Central Government never does it. Our assessment from intelligence sources is that
conferment of the Sixth Schedule is going to solve a lot of problems, and a large number
of people will support this and they will take part in the elections.”

21
5.19 A question was posed to the Chief Secretary also whether it would not be better to conduct
election first under the existing set up, which was otherwise pending since 2005 and thereafter the
elected representatives decide whether they wanted Sixth Schedule or Gorkhaland or something
else, to maintain peace and order. The Chief Secretary stated as under:
“We had initially given some powers to them in 1988, later on we carried out
amendment and gave further powers and practically barring reserve forest, law and order,
police and higher education, we have transferred all the powers, all Departments to DGHC.
In fact, the proposed Sixth Schedule will not make much of difference between the present
DGHC and the Sixth Schedule so far as exercise of powers and functions is concerned. But,
there is a big difference. DGHC is a statutory body set up under an Act of the Legislative
Assembly. If Sixth Schedule is brought into play in the hill areas it will be a constitutional
body and there is a lot of difference in the perception of the people, they would like to
have constitutional status for the Hill areas. That is what Mr. Ghisingh has been saying
right from the beginning to which we also agree because it will be easier to convince the
people.”
5.20 When the Chief Secretary’s attention was drawn to the idea that several States may demand
similar constitutional status for certain areas in the respective States and it may open the Pandora’s
Box, the Chief Secretary stated as under:
“Sir, you have raised a very large issue. The only thing I would like to say is that
so far as Darjeeling hill areas are concerned, historically, there has always been a demand
for treating Darjeeling areas and the Gorkhas of Darjeeling somewhat separately from the
rest of the country and rest of Bengal. This dates back to Morley-Minto Reforms. There also
they had represented for a separate identity for them. So, over a period of time, they have
been staying with the West Bengal Government and we tried to accommodate their
aspiration that brought us to this State of DGHC and they are now asking for Sixth
Schedule status. We think we should consider this practically. So far as the rest of the tribal
conglomerates and concentrations are there in our State, their integration with the general
population is much higher; much closer compared to the hill areas of Darjeeling. Since they
have been agitating for long, I think, this is a practical solution for the problem.”
5.21 The Chief Secretary supporting the Sixth Schedule status to Darjeeling Hill stated as under:
“Madam, I can tell about the situation existing in Darjeeling as of now. It is a fact
that an agitation of the Jan Mukti Morcha did take place, but everybody is now waiting
with baited breath to see what this august body is going to decide about the Sixth Schedule.
The agitation is presently not there. They are waiting for the Constitution amendment to
come or not to come. By and large, the people of hill areas of Darjeeling are not in favour
of violence per se. They want some decision by the Government of India. As has been
rightly pointed out by the hon. Member, the State Government has unanimously taken a
decision that the entire legislation should be brought forward.”

22
CHAPTER-VI
ISSUES RAISED AND RESPONSES OF AUTHORITIES
6.1 The Home Secretary appeared before the Committee on 18th February, 2008 to clarify
various issues raised in the Bills. The Committee also received written replies on certain other
issues. On the question of non-provision of reservation to Scheduled Castes in the proposed
Council despite the SCs having a population of one and half lakh, the Home Secretary stated that
the same was not provided in the present Council and also in the proposed Council. He explained
that in the proposed Council, ten seats are reserved for Scheduled Tribes, fifteen are reserved for
non-tribals, and three seats are open to all and besides this five seats are for nominated
representatives. Unrepresented communities would be given priority in the category of nomination.
He informed the Committee that the SCs constitute 5.7 % of the total population there and through
this arrangement their representation could be ensured.
6.2 On being asked as to whether any Commission was constituted by the Government of India
or by the State Government to make an assessment before conferring the ST status to ‘Tamang’
and ‘Limbus’, the Home Secretary stated that those communities had already been given tribal
status and were already listed as STs in Sikkim and the inclusion thereof was not intended to
enhance percentage of the tribal population in Darjeeling so as to confer Sixth Schedule status on
it.
6.3 The Additional Secretary & Registrar General of India (RGI) stated that the ‘Lokur
Committee’ set up by the Government of India in 1965 which had surveyed the whole country,
recommended 5 criteria to confer ST status to any group. The Cabinet Committee on Tribal Affairs
had accepted these criteria in 1999 which were slightly amended in 2002. According to it, any State
Government can send a proposal to the Central Government to confer ST status to a group or
groups. Then, it would be examined by the RGI, which would submit its recommendations to be
scrutinized by National Commission for Scheduled Tribes and submit its report to the Central
Government. The Central Government would then take a final decision on it. He further stated that
‘Tamangs’ and ‘Limbus’ were conferred tribal status through this process only.
6.4 As already stated elsewhere in this report, Sixth Schedule status is intended for the North-
Eastern region. The Ministry of Home Affairs was therefore asked as to whether that Schedule
could be extended to any other State/area outside the North-East and in a non-tribal area and
whether Government satisfied itself about the intra vires of the proposed move to extend the Sixth
Schedule status to Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council. In response, the MHA in its written reply stated
that both the Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and
Justice were consulted at the stage of preparation of Cabinet Notes and neither of the Departments
had found any legal or constitutional objection to carry out the proposed amendments.
6.5 Since the Administrator, DGHC is apparently an appointee of the State Government, the
Ministry was asked as to how such an appointee could represent the people of Darjeeling to sign
the Memorandum of Settlement (MoS). The Ministry of Home Affairs in the written answer stated
“Shri Subash Ghisingh who is the President of the GNLF was the Chairman of the
DGHC for more than 15 years as an elected representative. All the three members of the
Legislative Assembly from the Darjeeling Hill area belonged to the GNLF. Therefore even
22

23
though the administrator was appointed by the State Government as an interim arrangement
till the regular elections are held, Shri Ghisingh who was appointed as Administrator was
a political functionary and can be considered as representative of hill population to sign the
Memorandum of Settlement.”
6.6 The Ministry was asked whether it would not be desirable to make separate provisions with
respect to the hill areas of Darjeeling District in the State of West Bengal on the analogy of special
provisions made in respect of certain States/regions in Part XXI of the Constitution. The Ministry
of Home Affairs in the written answer stated-
“Various options for granting greater autonomy to Darjeeling Gorkha Hill areas were
examined during discussions with Shri Ghisingh and also during the Tripartite Review
Meetings, prior to MoS of 6.12.2005. At one stage an attempt was made to make separate
provision with respect to Hill areas of Darjeeling District on the analogy of special
provisions made in respect of certain States/regions in Part XXI of the Constitution by
inserting Art. 371J. However, in the 4th Tripartite Meeting held on 1.7.2005, the proposal
was not accepted. Thereafter it was felt that inclusion of Darjeeling Hill areas within the
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution would perhaps be the best option to provide greater
autonomy to the Council and conferring constitutional status on the hill areas of Darjeeling.”
6.7 Eighteen mauzas of Siliguri sub-division are intended to be made part of the Gorkha Hill
Council (Darjeeling). The Committee was given to understand that a sizeable portion of Gorkhas
reside in Siliguri sub-division but the entire sub-division of Siliguri was not included in the GHC.
When the Ministry of Home Affairs was asked to explain the reasons thereof, the MHA stated that:
“In the 4th Tripartite Meeting held on 1.7.2005, the issue of including the entire district of
Darjeeling including Siliguri sub-division within the Sixth Schedule jurisdiction was
considered. This was, however, not accepted by the State Government. It was felt that 18
Mouzas of Siliguri sub-division, which have a majority of Gorkha population, have been
made part of the DGHC. Since Gorkhas are not predominant in other parts of the sub-
division, the inclusion of entire Siliguri sub-division in the DGHC was not considered
justified”.
6.8 When the Ministry of Home Affairs was asked to comment on some media reports about
a reported proposal on constitution of the Second State Re-organisation Commission (SRC), the
Ministry in the written reply stated that the Government was ‘yet to take a decision in the matter’.
This issue was again raised in the meeting of the Committee on 18th February 2008, in
response to which the Home Secretary stated as under:—
“Madam, on the issue of the media reports on creation of SRC, I can tell you with
complete clarity that there was no such statement issued or indicated by the Government
or the MHA. The Ministry even in a written reply to a question raised in Parliament, stated
that the Government has yet to take a decision in the matter.”

24
CHAPTER-VII
ISSUES RAISED AND OBSERV ATIONS OF COMMITTEE
7.1 The Committee notes that two diametrically opposite views have emerged on the Bills. One
group strongly supported the Bills and emphasized for early passage of the Bills and conferment
of Sixth Schedule status to Darjeeling Hill areas, whereas another group with overwhelming
majority among those who appeared before the Committee, vehemently opposed the Bills and the
grant of Sixth Schedule status to the areas. The Committee also notes that both groups claimed
that there would be law and order problem if their viewpoints were ignored.
7.2 It was suggested to the Committee that the Bills should be passed and the events that may
unfold could be handled later on according to the circumstances. It was also suggested that instead
of conferring Sixth Schedule status, the Council could be given more power and autonomy and the
solution should be found within the State of West Bengal. According to them, the spirit of the
Constitution was being changed by giving Sixth Schedule status to Darjeeling, and a new precedent
was being created by extending the Schedule to an area beyond the NE region. It was further
apprehended that in future it would have to be extended to other areas as the tribal areas of Orissa,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar may demand Sixth Schedule status. The
Committee also notes the fact that there are already such resolutions from Arunachal Pradesh and
Manipur and such demand may gain momentum.
7.3 The Committee notes the considered view of the Law Secretary on the issue of judicial
scrutiny and legal sustainability of the Bill. According to him, Article 244 does not anywhere say
that the Sixth Schedule is only confined to tribal areas and constitutionally there is no problem in
extending it to West Bengal. The Committee also notes the views of the Home Secretary that the
resolutions of Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur Governments were under consideration and would
be considered in the light of other factors. He does not foresee opening of the Pandora’s Box if
the Sixth Schedule status is given to Darjeeling and he was quite sure in his own assessment.
However, the Committee is not convinced by the assertions of the Home Secretary.
7.4 The Committee also takes note of the viewpoint of both the State Government as well as
the Home Secretary that those, who are opposing the Bills, are splinter groups, who had been
together with the original party when the resolution for conferring Sixth Schedule status to the
Council was adopted. It was further pointed out that as elections had not been held since long,
it was difficult to assess who enjoyed the majority. The Committee is, however, not convinced by
the reasons given by the representatives of Government of West Bengal and the Home Secretary
for not holding elections since 1999 and for the delay in bringing forward the Bills. Home
Secretary’s assumption and the Chief Secretary’s observations that those who are opposing the Bills
are fence sitters and they will fall in line once the Bills are passed and elections are held, could
have been verified had the Committee visited DaIjeeling to assess the ground reality. The
Committee observes that if the Bills had been passed immediately after signing of MoS, the
situation would have been different because Shri Ghisingh was the undisputed leader at that
time. During the last two years, much water has flown down and non-holding of election has
added fuel to the fire.
7.5 The Committee cannot be oblivious to the opposition by the overwhelming majority of the
representatives those appeared before it who asserted time and again that there would be bloodshed
24

25
in the region if the Bills are passed. At the same time, the Committee cannot also ignore the official
viewpoint that if the Bills are not passed there would be chaos, unrest and agitation. The
Committee has no mechanism at its disposal to find out the ground reality except depending
on the official stand of the Central and State Governments. Had the Committee visited the
area, it could have felt the pulse of the people. The Committee therefore, observes that it
has no option but to go by what the Government tells it in regard to the prevailing situation
or possible future law and order situation.
7.6 The Committee notes the submission of the Home Secretary that the first tripartite
discussions took place in 2001 when it was inter-alia decided that the DGHC would sent its
proposal through the State Government for its inclusion into the Sixth Schedule. But for some
reasons, it took a long time. When the tripartite agreement was signed, people were aware of it
and a lot of representations mainly on the issue of reservation for Scheduled Castes were received
which were examined by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government. The
State Government was of the opinion that it would not be appropriate to disturb the consensus
which had been arrived at after prolonged interaction and deliberation. According to the Home
Secretary, as a result of prolonged dialogue of over 20 years, two things had emerged; one was
that the Statehood demand not accepted and two the best solution after considering various options
has been to include the Council under the Sixth Schedule. He also asserted that if the whole matter
was reopened, as people are opposing, the situation may become more serious.
7.7 The Committee also notes that one of the options discussed was to insert Article 371J in
Part XXI of the Constitution. Regarding giving of special status under Fifth Schedule, the
Committee has been given to understand that this was neither discussed nor contemplated.
According to the Home Secretary special status under Fifth Schedule would have been totally
confined to the Tribal Advisory Council only and the Fifth Schedule solution would not have been
appropriate for Darjeeling Hill areas. The Law Secretary supplemented that the Fifth Schedule does
not offer any autonomy in the real sense and there are no law making powers available to the
Tribal Council.
7.8 In the context of the issue raised by Shri Ghisingh concerning working of international
spying network in the sensitive area which is called the “chicken neck” of the country, the
Committee notes the following submission of the Home Secretary:—
“In so far as any training etc. or the international espionage ring is concerned, all I
can say is that the Government is continuously looking at every such kind of possibilities
wherever they may be and we do not have any specific information of this kind. I can
assure you that if there is any information of that kind, it shall be seriously and promptly
act upon.”
7.9 One school of thought pleaded for Gorkhaland on the argument that the trend in our polity
is of creating smaller States and if smaller States like Uttarakhand, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh can
be created to the satisfaction of those regions, Gorkhaland can also be carved out. The Committee
in this regard would like to clarify that the issue of a separate State of Gorkhaland is not its brief
and it will restrict itself to the examination of the Bills. A overwhelmingly large number of people,
who deposed before the Committee, were against the Bills and wanted Gorkhaland. But the
Committee is bound by the mandate given to it which precludes it from making its
recommendations on any matter outside the scope of the Bills.
7.10 The Committee observes that ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ are the responsibilities of
State Government and the Committee enquired several times both from the State
Government as well as Central Government as to whether the law and order would not
deteriorate with the passage of the Bills because the evidence before it was to the contrary.

26
Representatives of both Governments have asserted more than once that the enactment of
the Bills would not lead to any major law and order problem and rather the local people
would in course of time join the mainstream of electoral politics.
7.11 The Committee after taking into consideration the statements made by the Union
Home Secretary and the Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal before it to the effect
that as per their assessment the passage of the Bills would fulfil the aspirations of people
of Darjeeling; they would in course of time participate in the electoral process under the
new dispensation of the Sixth Schedule; and that there would be no serious law and order
problem in Darjeeling consequent upon the passage of the Bills by Parliament and that the
apprehensions of civil unrest and turmoil in the hills in the event of conferment of the
Sixth Schedule status were highly exaggerated and in view of the lack of any mechanism
with the Committee to verity the averments of the authorities, it had no other option but
to rely on the official statements and decided to proceed with the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bills. In this context the Committee would like to caution and advise
the Ministry of Home Affairs to make a fresh assessment of the ground realities all over
again before proceeding with the Bills in the two Houses of Parliament.

27
CHAPTER-VIII
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
8.1 The Committee accordingly in its sitting held on 19 February, 2008 took up the clause-by-
clause consideration of the Bills. The Committee first took up the Constitution (One Hundred and
Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007:
8.2 Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007:
Clause 2
8.2.1 This clause seeks to amend clauses (1) and (2) of Article 244 of the Constitution by
substituting the words “and Mizoram” with the words “Mizoram and the areas under the Gorkha
Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal”.
8.2.2 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3
8.3.1 This clause seeks to insert a new clause after clause (6) in Article 332.
8.3.2 The Committee pointed out printing mistakes in line 8 and accordingly recommended
that the words “in clause (6), after” should read as “after clause (6)”. The representative
of the Legislative Department pointed out that a corrigendum has already been issued to
that effect.
8.3.3 The Committee noted the statement of the representative of the Legislative
Department and adopted the clause.
8.4 Clause 1, Enacting Formula, and the Title are adopted with some changes which are
of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2007” and ‘Fifty-eighth” to be substituted by
“2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, wherever these occur.
8.5 The Committee thereafter took up the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment)
Bill 2007.
8.6 Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2007:
Clause 2
8.6.1 The Committee took up clause 2 of the Bill. Sub-clause (3) of clause 2 provides for
insertion of following proviso in paragraph 1, after sub-paragraph (2) of the Sixth Schedule:—
“Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to the areas under the
Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal”.
8.6.2 Sub-paragraph (2) in paragraph 1 of Sixth Schedule provides that if there are different
Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, the Governor may, by public notification, divide the
area inhabited by them into autonomous regions. The Committee noted that by adding the special
proviso, the power of the Governor would be restricted. The Committee wanted to know the
necessity of the proviso and the implications thereof.
27

28
8.6.3 In response to the query of the Committee, the MHA in their written comments stated as
under:
“Sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule makes provisions about
autonomous districts for tribal areas enumerated in the table appended to paragraph 20 of
the Schedule. Sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 makes provision enabling the Governor to
divide such area or areas into autonomous regions if there are different Scheduled Tribes
in an autonomous district. Sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 makes provision for the
composition of District Councils in terms of the total number of elected and nominated
members.
These provisions have remained unaltered with reference to Autonomous Hill Councils
in respect of various areas which have been constituted under the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution from time to time. However in the case of the Bodoland Territorial Council,
the following two distinctive pr ovisions were made:—
(i) a provision was made whereby nothing in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1
would apply to the Bodoland Territorial Areas District; and
(ii) specific provision was made in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 through a
proviso indicating the composition of the Council which was different from the
general composition stipulated in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 1.
These changes were necessitated on account of the fact that the decision to include
the areas of Bodoland Territorial Areas District had been arrived at as a part of an Accord
in which, inter alia, the specific territories to be covered and the composition of the
Council were also decided.
In the case of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council also the proposal to bring it under
the Sixth Schedule follows Tripartite discussions between Government of India,
Government of West Bengal and Shri Subash Ghisingh (President, GNLF and Administrator,
DGHC) and a Memorandum of Settlement in which specific provisions were made
pertaining to the area to be brought under the Council (which was part of the District of
Darjeeling) and the composition of the Council. Keeping this in view similar provisions as
in the case of the Bodoland Territorial Council have been made with reference to non-
application of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule.
The underlying logic is that where, on the basis of an Accor d or Settlement specific
provisions regarding the area and composition of the Council have been made in the
Constitution, the existing provision in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 enabling the
Governor to divide such area or areas into autonomous regions would no longer be required”.
8.6.4 In view of the clarification given by the Ministry of Home Affairs, sub-clause (3) is
adopted.
8.7.1 The Committee then took up sub-clause (4) of clause 2, which seeks to insert following
proviso after sub-paragraph (1) in paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule:—
“Provided that the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal shall
consist of not more than thirty-three members, of whom twenty-eight shall be elected on the
basis of adult suffrage out of whom ten shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, fifteen
for non-tribal communities, three open for all communities and the remaining five, of which
at least two shall-be women, having same rights including voting rights and privileges as
other members, to be nominated by the Government from amongst the unrepresented
communities of the areas under the Council.”

29
8.7.2 The proposed proviso makes provision for reservation of seats in the proposed Council,
which is in the nature of a local body. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Constitution
(Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Constitution (Seventy-fo urth Amendment) Act, 1992
provide for reservation of not less than one third seats for women in Panchayati Raj institutions
and urban local bodies. This special provision has also been incorporated in the Cantonment
Act, 1924 by a recent amendment. The Committee pointed out that this constitutional reservation
has not been provided in the elected category of the members of the Council.
8.7.3 The Committee accordingly, recommends that thirty three percent reservation for
women should be provided in the composition of the proposed Council. Provision already
exists for reservation of two seats for woman out of five nominated seats. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that nine seats (three out often seats reserved for ST, five out of
fifteen seats reserved for non-tribals and one out of three open seats) should be reserved
for women out of the twenty eight elective seats.
8.7.4 The Committee further noted from the composition of the Council that there is no
provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes. Darjeeling Hill areas have substantial SC
population and there is no reason why reservation to SC should not be provided in the
Council which is a constitutional requirement. The Committee is not convinced by the reply
of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the SC population is not sufficient to provide
reservation to them. The Committee therefore, recommends that necessary reservation to
SCs may be provided in the Council.
8.7.5 The Committee recommends that necessary amendments, may, accordingly be made
in sub-clause (4).
8.7.6 Subject to the above, Clause 2 is adopted.
8.8 Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which are
of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2007” and ‘Fifty-eighth” to be substituted by
“2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, whenever these occur.
8.9 The Committee recommends that the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh
Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2007
be passed taking into account amendments suggested in this chapter and the observations
made in Chapter VII.

30
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
The Committee observes that if the Bills had been passed immediately after signing
of MoS, the situation would have been different because Shri Ghisingh was the undisputed
leader at that time. During the last two years, much water has flown down and non-holding
of election has added fuel to the fire. (Para 7.4)
The Committee has no mechanism at its disposal to find out the ground reality
except depending on the official stand of the Central and State Governments. Had the
Committee visited the area, it could have felt the pulse of the people. The Committee
therefore, observes that it has no option but to go by what the Government tells it in
regard to the prevailing situation or possible future law and order situation. (Para 7.5)
The Committee observes that ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ are the responsibilities of
State Government and the Committee enquired several times both from the State
Government as well as Central Government as to whether the law and order would not
deteriorate with the passage of the Bills because the evidence before it was to the contrary.
Representatives of both Governments have asserted more than once that the enactment of
the Bills would not lead to any major law and order problem and rather the local people
would in course of time join the mainstream of electoral politics. (Para 7.10)
The Committee after taking into consideration the statements made by the Union
Home Secretary and the Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal before it to the effect
that as per their assessment the passage of the Bills would fulfil the aspirations of people
of Darjeeling; they would in course of time participate in the electoral process under the
new dispensation of the Sixth Schedule; and that there would be no serious law and order
problem in Darjeeling consequent upon the passage of the Bills by Parliament and that the
apprehensions of civil unrest and turmoil in the hills in the event of conferment of the
Sixth Schedule status were highly exaggerated and in view of the lack of any mechanism
with the Committee to verity the averments of the authorities, it had no other option but
to rely on the official statements and decided to proceed with the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bills. In this context the Committee would like to caution and advise
the Ministry of Home Affairs to make a fresh assessment of the ground realities all over
again before proceeding with the Bills in the two Houses of Parliament. (Para 7.11)
The Committee pointed out printing mistakes in line 8 and accordingly recommended
that the words “in clause (6), after” should read as “after clause (6)”. The representative
of the Legislative Department pointed out that a corrigendum has already been issued to
that effect. (Para 8.3.2)
The Committee noted the statement of the representative of the Legislative
Department and adopted the clause. (Para 8.3.3)
Clause 1, Enacting Formula, and the Title are adopted with some changes which are
of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2007” and ‘Fifty-eighth” to be substituted by
“2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, wherever these occur. (Para 8.4)
The Committee accordingly, recommends that thirty three percent reservation for
women should be provided in the composition of the proposed Council. Provision already
30

31
exists for reservation of two seats for woman out of five nominated seats. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that nine seats (three out of ten seats reserved for ST, five out of
fifteen seats reserved for non-tribals and one out of three open seats) should be reserved
for women out of the twenty-eight elective seats. (Para 8.7.3)
The Committee further noted from the composition of the Council that there is no
provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes. Darjeeling Hill areas have substantial SC
population and there is no reason why reservation to SC should not be provided in the
Council which is a constitutional requirement. The Committee is not convinced by the reply
of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the SC population is not sufficient to provide
reservation to them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary reservation to
SCs may be provided in the Council. (Para 8.7.4)
The Committee recommends that necessary amendments, may, accordingly be made
in sub-clause (4). (Para 8.7.5)
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which are
of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2007” and ‘Fifty-eighth” to be substituted by
“2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, whenever these occur. (Para 8.8)
The Committee recommends that the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh
Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2007
be passed taking into account amendments suggested in this chapter and the observations
made in Chapter VII. (Para 8.9)

MINUTES

34

35
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 13 December, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri T.K. Hamza
12. Shri Raghunath Jha
13. Shri Ajit Jogi
14. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
15. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
16. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
17. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
18. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chowdhary, Addl. Secretary (CS)
35

36
3. Shri D.K. Sikri, Addl. Secretary and RGI
4. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary (CS)
5. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary (NE)
Representative of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2.1 The Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and informed them that the two
Bills, namely, the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 related to Darjeeling, had been referred to the
Committee for examination and report by the last day of the first week of the Budget Session. She
further informed the members that as Government wanted to get these Bills passed in the next
Budget session, the Committee would have to submit its report on these Bills as per schedule.
2.2 The Chairperson also informed the Members that the Home Secretary had been invited to
the sitting to give presentation on the two Bills. She further informed that the Lok Sabha Member
Shri Dawa Narbula representation of Darjeeling constituency along with six organizations and 50
other organisations requested for granting an opportunity appear before the Committee to put their
views. She added that the Committee would also hear the representatives of the West Bengal
Government and the Administrator of DGHC.
2.3 The Chairperson thereafter stated that a proposal to visit Darjeeling to take stock of ground
realities had also been received. The Committee after some discussion would be inconvenient to
record evidence of the stake-holders of Bills in Darjeeling as there would be practical problems in
taking reporters and interpreters from here and making other necessary arrangements, it was
decided to hear oral evidence of all the concerned groups/individuals in New Delhi itself in view
of the practical difficulties involved the recording the evidence of the Stake holders during its
proposed visit.
3. The Chairperson thereafter welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials and asked
them to introduce themselves to the Committee and make presentation on the Bills. The Joint
Secretary of the Ministry made a presentation explaining about the provisions of the Bills.
3.1 The Home Secretary elaborated that these Bills were intended to create an autonomous self
governing council under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution for the hill areas of Darjeeling
District in the State of West Bengal through constitutional amendments and by transferring 45
subjects of the State Government to the proposed new Gorkha Hill Council. He explained that the
right of non-tribal population, like rights of acquiring land, etc would be protected in the proposed
Council.
4. The Chairperson asked the Home Secretary to explain the reasons for not making provision
for reservation to SCs in the proposed Council despite the Schedule Castes having a population of
one and half lakh. She stated that even the Administrator of DGHC had also demanded for the
reservation to SCs in the proposed council.
5. Responding to the Chairperson’s query, the Home Secretary stated that there was no
provision for reservation to SCs in the present Council and also in the proposed council. He
explained that in the proposed council there were ten seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes, for non-
tribals, three open to all and five seats for nominated category and it had been provided that
unrepresented communities would be given priority in the nominated seats. He informed the
Committee that the SCs constitute 5.7 % of the total population there and through this arrangement,
their representation could be ensured.

37
6. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members raised the following queries:
(i) The ratio of Tribal population to total population in Darjeeling District.
(ii) The propriety of artificially increasing tribal population to 31.4% by giving tribal status to
'Tamang' and 'Limbus' to create a Tribal Hill Council by amending Sixth Schedule which is
restricted to 'Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura, as there tribals were 12.6% of the
population, according to 2001 Census.
(iii) Need for Legal consultation with Attorney General and other concerned law officers
regarding sustainability of the proposed Bills.
(iv) Comparative analysis of the provisions on executive and financial powers in proposed
Gorkha Hill Council vis-a-vis in other Tribal Councils in other States with Sixth Schedule status.
(v) Studies made by commissions appointed by the Government of India or by the State
Government to assess and confer the ST status to two castes 'Tamang' and 'Limbus' and the
criteria to confer ST status to any group.
(vi) What is the legal status of Shri Subhash Ghising at the time of signing of MOS 2005?
Whether he was drawing salary from the Council or was working as an honorary member? If he
was an employee of the State Government, can a tripartite agreement be legally valid?
(vii) The extent of acceptability of provisions of MOS by the people and their representatives.
(viii) The extent of the legislative powers of the proposed Council.
(ix) Duar sub-Division has not been included in the proposed Council.
(xi) Need for ascertaining views of the Sikkim Government on the proposed Bills as historically,
Darjeeling belongs to the kingdom of Sikkim and Sikkim had given support to Gorkha activities
during the Gorkhaland agitation of 80s.
(xii) The non-Budhists are counted as "Nepali' in Darjeeling.
(xiii) The Demand of Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh for sixth schedule status to certain areas.
7.1 The Members also asked Home Secretary to provide following information to the
Committee.
(i) The report of the survey done by the Cultured Research Institute of India in 2006 on
tribals.
(ii) The names of castes and the break-up of total population among SCs, OBCs and STs
in the Darjeeling Hill Council with reference to 2001 Census.
(iii) The demographic composition of the hill areas of Darjeeling.
(iv) A comparative study of Darjeeling Accord of 1988 and MoS signed in 2005 in a
chart format.
7.2 The representatives of the MHA, assured the Committee to collect and provide the
information sought by it.
8. The Home Secretary in response to the queries raised by the members stated that the
Ministry of Home Affairs had consulted the Ministry of Law and Justice on these Bills. He further
stated that 'Tamangs' and 'Limbus' which have been given tribal status were already listed as STs

38
in Sikkim and the inclusion of these two communities into ST category was not intended to
enhance the tribal population in Darjeeling so as to facilitate to conferment of Sixth schedule status
to it.
9. In response to the queries of members, the Additional Secretary and Registrar General of
India, stated that the ‘Lokur Committee’ set up by the Government of India in 1965 which had
surveyed the whole country and recommended 5 criteria to confer ST status to any group. The
Cabinet Committee on Tribal Affairs had accepted these criteria in 1999 which were slightly
amended in 2002. According to it, any State Government can send a proposal to the Central
Government to confer ST status to a group(s). Then, it is examined by the Registrar General of
India which gives its recommendations. Those are scrutinized by the National Commission for
Scheduled Tribes which in turn gives its report to the Central Government for final decision on
it. ‘Tamng’ and ‘Limbus’ were conferred tribal status through this process.
10. The representative of Ministry of Law and Justice stated that the Sixth Schedule was a self-
contained code for the governance of tribal areas.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

39
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 20th December, 2007 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Rattan Singh Ajnala
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti
6. Shri Tapir Gao
7. Shri Naveen Jindal
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
10. Shri Sachin Pilot
11. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
12. Shri M. Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
14. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
15. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Shri Dawa Narbula, MP, Lok Sabha
Representatives of Gorkha Janmukti Morcha
1. Shri Bimal Gurung, President
2. Shri Roshan Giri, General Secretary
3. Shri Binay Tamang, Press and Publicity Secretary
4. Shri Dinesh Tamang, Executive Member
5. Shri Passang Lama, Executive Member
39

40
6. Shri Pradip Pradhan, Executive Member
7. Shri D.K. Pradhan, Executive Member
8. Shri Pemba Tshering, Executive Member
9. Dr. Harka Bahadur Chhetri, Advisor
10. Shri Anmole Prasad, Advisor
11. Shri Amar Lama, Advisor
12. Shrimati Jyoti Limboo, Dooars Representative
Representatives of Communist Party Revolutionary Marxist
1. Shri R.B. Rai
2. Shri Sawan Rai
3. Shri I.K. Sharma
4. Shri Tara Mani Rai
5. Shri Govind Chhetri
6. Shri J.B. Rai
7. Shri Kishore Pradhan
8. Shri Arun Ghatani
9. Shri Norbu Lama
Representatives of All India Gorkha League
1. Shri Madan Tamang, President
2. Shri N.C. Khaling, Vice-President
3. Shri Manoj Dewan, General Secretary
4. Shri N.D. Lama, (Kalimpong G .S.)
5. Shri Pranoy Thapa, (Kurseong G.S.)
6. Shri Sanjeev Chhetri, (Siliguri G.S.)
Representatives of Gorkha Rastriya Congress
1. Shri D.K. Bomzon
2. Shri Passang Tsering
Representative of G.N.L.F. (C)
Col. D.K. Pradhan
Representatives of BJP Darjeeling Hill Committee
1. Dr. G.S. Yonzone, President
2. Shri Tika Pradhan, Vice-President
3. Shri P.B. Poudyal, General Secretary
Representatives of Bharatiya Gorkha Parisangh
1. Shri Dil Kumar Bhandari, Ex. MP, National President
2. Shri C.K. Shrestha, National Working President
3. Rev. Dr. Enos Das Pradhan, National Vice-President
4. Shri Sukhman Moktan, Secretary General

41
5. Swaraj Thapa, Vice President, Central Programme Cell
6. Prof. Munish Tamang, Secretary, Central Programme Cell
7. Brig. N.B.S. Bishta, National Convenor, Ex-Servicemen Cell
8. Commodore K.S. Rai, Chief Coordinator, Media Centre
9. Shri Rajen Pradhan, President, Darjeeling Committee
Representatives of All Gorkha Students' Union (AGSU)
1. Shri Rabi Shankar Sharma, President, Central Committee
2. Shri Kamal Chettri, President, Darjeeling Branch Committee
Representatives of All India Nepali Schedule Caste Association
1. Shri Kaman Singh Ramudamu, President
2. Shri N.B. Kali Koti, General Secretary
3. Shri Amrit Singh, Legal Advisor
4. Shri S.K. Vishwakarma
5. Shri Manoj Shanker
6. Shri Ashok Lohar
7. Shri Deepak Sonar
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and informed them that some groups
had come to appear before the Committee to put their views on the proposed Bills, namely,
Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth Schedule to
Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007. She further informed that after hearing these groups the
Committee would hear the State Government of West Bengal and the political parties on these
proposed Bills. She also welcomed Shri Amitabh Nandi who has replaced Shri. T.K. Hamza as a
member of the Committee.
3. Then, the Chairperson welcomed the invited groups and asked them to opine on the
proposed Bills.
4. Shri Anmole Prasad, representative of Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (GJM) rejected the Bills in
toto and pointed out the reasons for it, which are as follows:
(i) The sanctity of tripartite MoS signed on 6th December, 2005, as Shri Subhash Ghising
who was a party to this MoS, was not an elected representative at that time, but a
nominee of the Government of West Bengal as he had been appointed as an
‘Administrator’ of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council. The last elections of DGHC
were held in 1999 and the term of office of Shri Subhash Ghising expired in 2004
and he has been appointed as an ‘Administrator’ by West Bengal Government. Since
then, the State Government did not hold election on the pretext of law and order
problem there which was not true.
(ii) According to 2001 census, the population of tribals was 12% of total population
and it was artificially increased to 31.4% by adding two communities in it. Even then,
non-tribals still constitute majority of the population and Sixth Schedule is being
implemented in a non-tribal majority district.
(iii) In the proposed council under Sixth Schedule, the Siliguri Sub-division apart from 18
maujas and Duars region has been not included. These areas have been an integral part
of Darjeeling culturally and historically.

42
(iv) The Scheduled Castes have not been given reservation in the proposed council.
(v) In the original Sixth Schedule, it is mentioned in Section (2) sub para (6) that the
Governor shall make rules for the first constitution of Distircit Councils and Regional
Councils in consultation with the existing Tribal Councilor other representative tribal
organization within the autonomous districts or regions concerned. In the case of
proposed council where the non-tribals are in majority, the Governor will make rules
for the first Constitution in consultation with only the Tribal Councils.
(vi) The West Bengal Government has signed MoS with Shri Subhash Ghising against
whom the leaders of the Government have publicly accused of corruption and misrule.
(vii) Sin ce, the geo-strategic location of Darjeeling (in proximity with three countries)
makes it a very sensitive place, any scheme for it should be implemented with the
consensus of common people residing there.
4.1 Then he requested the Committee to recommended to hold elections to the DGHC before
taking and initiative regarding Sixth Schedule status as the representatives of people would deceive
whether Sixth Schedule status should be conferred upon Darjeeling or not? They also requested the
Committee to visit Darjeeling to assess ground realities. The representative of GNLF (C) Col. D.K.
Pradhan also rejected the proposed Bills and demanded for a separate State called “Gorkhaland”.
4.2 The representative of All India Gorkha League, Shri Madan Tamang supported the issues
raised by the representative of Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (GJM) and while citing Private Members
Bill of 1982 brought by Shri Ananda Pathak, then M.P. of Darjeeling, Shri Saman Mukherjee, MP
and Shri Somnath Chatterjee, MP in which they had supported the formation of an autonomous
region of Darjeeling within the State of West Bengal Comprising District of Darjeeling and Siliguri,
stated that these all MPs were from left Front and now the left Front Government has changed
its position and not including Siliguri in the proposed Council.
4.3 Shri N.C. Khaling, Vice-President of All India Gorkha League also opposed the proposed
Bills and cautioned the Committee that the passage of these Bills could lead to violence in the
region.
4.4 Shri R.B. Rai, an Ex M.P. also supported the views made by earlier witnesses and reiterated
the points made by them.
4.5 Shri D.K. Bomzon, representative of Gorkha Rashtriya Congress, while rejecting the
proposed Bills in spite of himself being a tribal, stated that the present M.P. of Darjeeling was not
even invited while signing MoS in 2005 despite being a people’s representative. He also opposed
the proposed Bills on the ground that in the proposed council, Duars region has not been included
despite its being a tribal dominated region.
4.6 Dr. G.S. Yonzone, President of BJP Darjeeling Hill Committee, while rejecting these proposed
Bills on the grounds opined by earlier witnesses, stated that historically, Siliguri and Duars were
never a part of West Bengal and the people residing there are culturally and linguistically different
from Bengalis.
4.7 Shri Dawa Narbula, MP, Darjeeling, at first thanked the Standing Committee for inviting him.
He mentioned that the Home Minister had made a statement in the Parliament that the proposed Bills
pertained to a sensitive issue so these Bills should be sent to the DRSC on Home Affairs to submit
a report on it. Then, he described the woes and grievances of the people like the victims of Gorkha
movement of 1980s were not compensated properly and it is mandatory for the aspirants of West
Bengal Public Service Commission from the Nepali speaking community to pass in Bengali language

43
test to be selected and to get promotion and increment but on the contrary officers coming from
the plains to Darjeeling Hill areas are not required to pass Nepali Language test. He also supported
the demand for a separate state ‘Gorkhaland’. He also lamented the State Government of West
Bengal for not holding two-tier Panchayat elections in Darjeeling. He also criticized the Bills for not
having any provision of reservation for Schedule Castes.
4.8 Shri D.K. Pradhan, Ex. MLA of West Bengal Assembly and representative of GNLF (C)
added that when the resolution favouring Sixth Schedule status was being passed in the West
Bengal Assembly, he as a MLA had protested against it by saying that it would lead to widespread
disturbances in Darjeeling as the tribals constitute only 31% of the total population there and the
people at large are against sixth schedule status. He further added that if these Bills would be
imposed on the people by Parliament, the people would protest against it tooth and nail.
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson invited the Members and witnesses for Lunch.
6. The meeting again commenced after Lunch and the Chairperson welcomed the
representatives of another lot of group who had come to appear before the Committee to put their
victims on the proposed Bills.
6.1 Shrimati Dil Kumari Bhanjari, Ex. MP and representative of Bharatiya Gorkha Parisangh first
introduced herself and her organization and stated that her organization is the only national
organization of Grokhas living across more than 22 states in India.
6.2 Shri C.K. Shrestha, working president of Bhartiya Gorkha Parisangh, opposed the proposed
Bill and stated that the aspirations of Gorkha people in India could be fulfilled only by the creation
of a separate state called “Gorkhaland” for which they have been struggling for the last 100 years.
He also described the contribution made by the Gorkhas towards the development of Indian nation
and raised the issue of Gorkha identity which is considered to be ‘Nepali’ a foreigner in mainstream
Indian psyche despite being Indian only because of not having a separate state of their own. He
added that the intention of the proposed Bills was to create hurdles in the way of revival of the
statehood demand by the people. Then, he reiterated the points raised by earlier witnesses against
the proposed Bills. He also requested the Committee to visit Darjeeling to get the true picture of
the issue involved.
6.3 Shri Kaman Singh Ramudamu, representative of All India Nepali Schedule Caste Association,
also objected to the proposed Bills as there was no provision for reservation to SCs in the proposed
Council. He also stated that even if the SCs were provided with reservation, he would oppose it
as the STs would be at the helm of affairs in the proposed council. He also reiterated the demand
for a separate State.
6.4 Shri Rabi Shankar Sharma, representative of All Gorkha Students’ Union (AGSU) rejected
the proposed Bills and demanded for establishment of a Central university in Darjeeling. Then, he
also reiterated the points made by earlier witnesses.
7. Then, the Chairperson stated that the Committee would try to visit Darjeeling to know the
opinion of people there. She also mentioned that the Committee would also hear Shri Subash
Ghising and then after discussing all these evidences collected; submit its report on these Bills.
Thereafter, the chairperson thanked the representatives of groups which appeared before the
Committee. She also informed the Members about the future course of action by the Committee.
V erbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 3.10 
P.M.

44
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 10th January, 2008 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Amitava Nandy
12. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Shree Biswakarma Samaj
1. Shri Kaman Singh Ramudamu
2. Shri Manoj Shankar
3. Shri Amrit Singh
4. Shri Vijay Rasaily
5. Shrimati S. Rasaily
Representatives of United Forum Trade Unions of Govt. Cinchona Plantations
1. Shri Praveen Gurang, General Secretary
2. Shri Raju Pradhan
44

45
Representatives of All India Tamang Buddhist Association
1. Shri Y .D. Lama
2. Shri S.B. Yonzon
Representatives of Parvatiya Bhojpuri Yuva Manch
1. Shri Anil Gupta
2. Shri Umesh Gupta
Representatives of Khas Bharatiya Hitkari Sammelan
1. Shri R.P. Nirolu
2. Shri Balbhadra Sharma
3. Shari S.P. Sharma
4. Shri Tara Pandey
5. Shri Deepak Bharti
6. Shri Tilak Kapuwal
7. Shri Ajay Bhandari
Representative of Darjeeling Zilla Bhojpuri Samaj
Shri Arun Gupta
Representatives of West Bengal Government Pensioners' Association, Darjeeling
1. Shri C.K. Pradhan
2. Shri B.B. Basnett
Representative of East and West Times International
Dr. Manas Banerjee
Representatives of Samaj Sewa Samiti
1. Shrimati Pratima Joshi
2. Shri Pemba Darjee Lama
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri Abhijit Dey, Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the
representatives of the various organizations from Darjeeling district and asked them to first
introduce themselves, thereafter, expresses their views on the Constitution (One Hundred and
Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth Schedule to Constitution (Amendment) Bill proposing
to confer Sixth Schedule status to GHC (D) and another Bill Constitution amendment to facilitate
for incorporation of proposed GHC (D) to sixth Schedule.
3. The representatives of “Shri Biswakarma Samaj” initiating the discussion opposed the
proposed Bills on the ground that the population of non-tribal people was much more than the tribal
people in Darjeeling district and stated that these two bills has been brought to put hurdles in the
way of people’s demand for separate state called “Gorkhaland”. The representatives requested the
Committee to refer the issue of formation of a separate state to the “States Reorganization
Committee”. They stated that the passage of these Bills could lead to violence as the people could
take to arms and the terrorist groups and ultra outfits could exploit the situation. They criticized
the Memorandum of settlement (MoS) signed on 6th December, 2005 as it was a bipartite
agreement between Administrator of DGHC and the Chief Secretary of the Government of West
Bengal and at the time of signing of MoS the public had not given mandate to Subhash Ghising

46
to represent them, as he was mere a caretaker Administrator, an appointee of Government of West
Bengal and not representative of people of Darjeeling. They also criticized the MoS because there
was no provision for reservation for Biswakarma Samaj (SCs) in the MoS in the proposed
GHC(D).
3.1 The representatives of “United Forum Trade Unions of Government Cinchona Plantations”
also opposed the proposed Bills on the ground that despite Darjeeling, a non-tribal majority district,
the Sixth Schedule was proposed to be conferred on DGHC there. They also criticized the Bills
for not having any provision of reservation for women and Scheduled Castes in the proposed
council. They also apprehended that the passage of these Bills could lead to violence and bloodshed.
They also invited the Committee to Darjeeling to see the ground reality and assess the grievances
of the people at the ground level.
3.2 The representatives of “All India Tamang Buddhist Association” on behalf of ‘Tamang’ tribal
Community also opposed the proposed Bills even though they themselves belonged to tribal
community and the proposed Bills were meant for protecting the tribals residing there. They stated
that the Administrator, DGHC should have consulted all the tribal communities before signing the
MoS. They also questioned the status of Shri Subhash Ghising as an administrator of DGHC as
he was an appointee of the Government of West Bengal and not elected by the people at that time.
3.3 Thereafter, the representative of “Duars Jan Sangharsh Morcha” described historical and
geographical background of Duars region and mentioned the problems being faced by the people
viz. unemployment, closure of Tea Estates, underpayment to labourers of Tea estates, under-
representation of Gorkhas and Tribals in government and administrative set up, Hindi not being
used as a medium of study in colleges etc. They opposed the proposed Bills and demanded for
a separate state by merging Duars region with Darjeeling district and requested the Committee to
visit Duars region to take the stocks of the problems being faced by the people of Darjeeling. They
also said that Duars region was a sensitive region from security point of view as it is adjacent to
Nepal and Bhutan, therefore, required adequate solution.
3.4 The representatives of “Samaj Sewa Samiti” were also against the proposed Bills. They
described the problems being faced by the Nepali Community of Darjeeling district in the state of
West Bengal and also put forward the demand for a separate state, “Gorkhaland” for lasting
solution to the issue.
3.5 The representatives of “Darjeeling Bhojpuri Samaj”, also opposed the proposed Bills because
people at large were against these Bills. They also cautioned that the passage of these Bills could
lead to violence and disturbance in the region. They also supported the demand of a separate State,
“Gorkhaland”.
3.6 The representatives of “West Bengal Government Pensioners’ Association”, Darjeeling, also
rejected the proposed Bills and put their demand for a separate state of “Gorkhaland”. They
mentioned that the state assembly of West Bengal had passed the resolutions in the years 1978 and
1982 to grant regional autonomy for the whole of Darjeeling district and the Duars area but when
a Private Member Bill was moved by erstwhile M.P. Shri Ananda Pathak of CPI (M) (Bill No. 122
of 1985), in the Parliament which could not be passed due to opposition by some parties in the
house.
3.7 The representatives of “Bhojpuri Yuva Manch” also opposed the proposed Bills and
supported the demand for a separate state called “Gorkhaland”.
3.8 The representatives of “Khas Bhartiya Hitkari Sammelan” representing the “Khas” segment
of Indian Gorkha Community, stated that the passage of these Bills would bring 31.8% of the tribal
community at the helm of affairs at the cost of majority (68.2%) non-tribal community. He further

47
said that before enacting “Bodo Territorial Council Act” under the Sixth Schedule of the
Constitution, the entire Bodo Community was conferred the status of ST but the same is not being
done in the case of Darjeeling district. They also opposed including only three sub-divisions of the
Darjeeling district and a few mauzas of siliguri in the proposed council. They further stated that
the areas of Darjeeling Tarai (Siliguri) was an integral part of Darjeeling district. They also
mentioned the fact that the Gorkha majority areas of Duars region which included Kalimpong, were
incorporated into Indian Union in 1865 through the “Sinchula Treaty” signed between then British
Government and Bhutan. Thus, these areas were never an integral part of Bengal and the making
of new State of Gorkhaland would not amount to bifurcation of West Bengal. They also opined
that the MoS does not provide autonomy and power to the local people under the Sixth Schedule
of the Constitution because most of the provisions of MoS was borrowed from Darjeeling Gorkha
Hill Council Act, 1988. He also mentioned that according to clause 8.8 of MoS, although the elected
Chairman of the proposed council would be of status of a Cabinet Minister, does not have control
over the administration organs viz. DM and SP. They objected to clause 8.2, according to which
the minority tribals would have majority in the proposed executive council. They objected to clause 2
of the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill,  2007, which proposes to change
the existing provisions of the Sixth Schedule i.e. “Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal
Areas in the states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram” to add “and the areas under the
Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the state of West Bengal.” They pointed that out the word
“Tribal” is not proposed to be added and so the proposed amendment is not in the spirit of Sixth
Schedule. They opposed the extension of the provision of Sixth Schedule in a non-tribal area as
the sixth schedule was meant only for tribal areas. They mentioned that the Indian Census of 1931
had described entire Gorkha community as a hill tribe and demanded that this community should
be conferred tribal status before moving ahead with Sixth Schedule status to the area. They also
demanded for a separate state called “Gorkhaland” for areas comprising the district of Darjeeling
and some portion of the Jalpaiguri district (Duars).
3.9 The representative of “East and West Times International” also supported the representatives
of other organizations in demand for a separate state of Gorkhaland.
4. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the organizations who appeared before the
Committee for enlightening the Committee Members with the views on the Bills.
5. The Chairperson, thereafter, informed the members that Shri Saman Pathak, M.P, Rajya
Sabha along with eight individuals and the CPI (M), Darjeeling district committee, would appear
before the Committee on the following day, 11th  January, 2008, to express their view on the Bills.
5.1 The Chairperson further informed the Members of the Committee that an All Party
Delegation of West Bengal Legislative Assembly would also appear before the Committee on
21st January, 2008.
5.2 The Committee further decided to hold a meeting on 30th January, 2008 to discuss FCR(A)
Bill, as the Committee was to give its report on FC(R) Bill during first week of the first part of
the Budge Session.
6. One Member made a submission that the most of the groups from Darjeeling district which
appeared before the Committee, were not restricting their views on the proposed Bills and referring
to irrelevant matters unrelated to the Bills.
6.1 The Chairperson assured the member that only relevant matters would be kept in record and
irrelevant matter would be expunged.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 3.10 
P.M.

48
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 11th January, 2008 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Amitava Nandy
12. Shri Sachin Pilot
13. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri Abhijit Der, Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
(1) Shri Saman Pathak, MP, Rajya Sabha alongwith following individuals:—
(2) Individuals
(i) Shri B.B. Thapa, Former Councillor, DGHC;
(ii) Shri Bharat Patel, Former Nominated Councillor, DGHC;
(iii) Shri Tara Sundas, Former Councillor, DGHC;
48

49
(iv) Shri Uttam Sharma, Former Nominated Councillor, DGHC;
(v) Shri Dambar Siwakoti, Teacher;
(vi) Shri Mani Kumar Tamang, Tamang Association; and
(vii) Shri C.B. Sinchury, Hill Scheduled Caste Association.
(3) Representatives of the CPI (M), Darjeeling District Committee:—
(i) Shri Anand Pathak;
(ii) Shri S.P. Lepcha;
(iii) Shri K.B. Watter; and
(iv) Shri R.S. Prasad
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Sh. Saman Pathak, M.P. Rajya Sabha and other
representatives from Darjeeling district and asked them to express their views before the Committee
on the proposed two Bills namely; the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment)
Bill, 2007 and Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
3. Shri Saman Pathak, M.P. Rajya Sabha expressed his thanks to the Committee for inviting
before the Committee and outlined the historical background of the Gorkha movement led by GNLF
which led to the emergence of DGHC. He expressed his full support to the Bills. He stated that
although the formation of DGHC led to end of violent movement and people were brought back
to mainstream but the functioning of DGHC could not redress the grievances of public as the
hopes and aspiration of people could not be fulfilled. That’s why, in a review meeting held on
6th December, 2005, it was reiterated that DGHC was not enough and there should be
Constitutional recognition and safeguard. He stated that the constitutional status to DGHC through
the passage of these bills could lead to the development of this area. He requested the Committee
to recommend giving representation of a Member of the proposed council in Planning Commission;
to reserve seats for the scheduled castes and women in the proposed council and to give functional
autonomy to the proposed Council on the par of councils working in North East region under the
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.
3.1 Thereafter, Anand Pathak an ex-M.P and representative of CPI (M) Darjeeling District
Committee, after describing the contribution of the of the Gorkha Community to the nation, also
supported the provisions of the Bills. He informed the Committee that a similar Bill was introduced
in the Parliament and almost all the parties including BJP except Congress had supported that Bill
but due to majority of congress in the Parliament, the Bill could not be passed.
3.2 Shri. R.S. Prasad, representative of CPI (M), Darjeeling District Committee also supported
the proposed Bills and impressed upon the Committee to recommend for reservation of seats to
women and scheduled castes. Then, another representative of CPI (M), Darjeeling District
Committee, K.B. Watter while supporting the provisions of the Bills stated that the frustration
among people of Darjeeling was due to postponement of elections for long period of time. He
further suggested to pass these Bills with some amendments like giving power to Council to
establish heavy industries; giving representation of the Council members in the West Bengal
Planning Commission and Central Planning Commission and giving specified package to this
council.
3.3 Shri B.B. Thapa, former councilor, DGHC while supporting the Bills stated that it could be
a constitutional guarantee for the people of the hill areas and ensure ethnic identity of Gorkha
community. He suggested that the power should be decentralized in the new administrative set up.
3.4 Shri Bharat Patel, former nominated councilor, DGHC after outlining the history of Gorkha
movement of 1980s, stated that only executive powers given to the DGHC in 1988 MoS could not

50
fulfill the hopes and aspirations of the hill people and the constitutional status to the council
through Sixth Schedule could lead to the development of the area. He also pointed out that the
problems of unemployment, poverty and other hardships being faced by the people of Darjeeling
district. He also supported the proposed Bills.
3.5 Shri C.B. Sinchury, representing “Hill Scheduled Castes Association” also welcomed the Bills
with suggestion that there should be provision of reservation for SCs in the council, as they
constitute 10% of the total population.
3.6 Shri Uttam Sharma, former nominated councilor, DGHC while supporting the proposed Bills
also demanded for conferment of an elected body of Gorkha Hill Council at the earliest. He also
demanded for operationalization of self-governing bodies like municipalities, panchayats, etc.
through election. He also forwarded the demand of reservation for women and SCs in the proposed
council.
3.7 Shri Dambar Siwakoti, a teacher by profession, also supported the proposed Bills by arguing
that the enactment of these Bills would solve the problems of “Gorkha Community”.
4. The Chairperson, thereafter opined that about twenty groups which appeared before the
Committee were against the Bills. She informed that even the present M.P. of Darjeeling who
belongs to Congress Party, was not in favour of the Bill.
4.1 Responding to the query of the Chairperson Shri Saman Pathak, M.P, pointed out that the
reason for the opposition of the Bill was the publicity of “in-Principle” Memorandum of Settlement
which was signed on the 6th December 2005 as the people got to know about the Bill.
4.2 The Chairperson, thereafter, intervened and pointed out that that the groups which appeared
before the Committee informed that “in-principal” MoS was not publicized and all developments
took place under the closed door conference in clandestine manner.
4.3 Shri Saman Pathak, M.P, then replied that the people were resenting because of not holding
of regular elections and the underdevelopment of the area. He further stated that the groups which
appeared before the Committee did not represent the Gorkha community. They are opposing Bills
due to different reasons and not on the merit and demerit of the Bills. The people think that the
passage of this Bill would lead to violence between tribals and non-tribals and it would create
hurdle in the way of making of a separate State called “Gorkhaland”.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.

51
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 21 January, 2008 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Shri Amitava Nandy
11. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
12. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
14. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Dr. V . K. Agnihotri, Secretary-General
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
All party delegation from the West Bengal Legislative Assembly
1. Shri Sailen Sarkar, Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs and Environment Department,
Government of West Bengal.
2. Shri Asok Bhattacharya, Minister in Charge of Municipal Affairs and Urban Development
Department, Government of West Bengal.
3. Shri Paresh Chandra Adhikary, Minister in Charge of Food and Supplies Department,
Government of West Bengal.
51

52
4. Shri Anadi Kumar Sahu, Minister of State for Labour Department, Government of West
Bengal.
5. Shri Sayed Md. Masih, Government Chief Whip.
6. Shri Rabindra Nath MandaI, M.L.A.
7. Shri Sukhmoith (Piting) Oraon, M.L.A.
8. Shri Somra Lakra, M.L.A.
9. Shri Chhotan Kisku, M.L.A.
10. Shri Nirmal Das, M.L.A.
11. Shri Santosh Rana, M.L.A.
12. Shri Brahmanoy Nanda, M.L.A.
13. Shri Samar Hazra, M.L.A.
14. Shri Rampada Samanta, M.L.A.
15. Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, M.L.A.
16. Shri Pranay Rai, M.L.A.
17. Shri Daba Prasad Sarkar, M.L.A.
18. Dr. Manas Ranjan Bhuiyan, M.L.A.
19. Shri Deba Prasad Roy, M.L.A.
20. Dr. Nirjharini Chakraborty, M.L.A.
21. Shri Goulan Lepcha, M.L.A.
22. Shri Asit Kumar, M.L.A.
2. At the onset, the Chairperson extended a warm welcome to the all party delegation of West
Bengal Legislative Assembly and introduced the members of the Committee to them. She asked the
leader of the delegation to introduce themselves before making their submissions on the provisions
of the two Bills, namely, the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 and
the Sixth Schedule to Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
3. Shri Sailen Sarkar, Minister-in-Charge of Parliamentary Affairs informed the Members that
the West Bengal Legislative Assembly had unanimously adopted a Resolution on “Inclusion of
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India”. He presented a
copy of resolution to the Committee. He also presented a memorandum to the Committee.
3.1 Shri Asok Bhattacharya, Minister-in-Charge of the Municipal Affairs and Urban Development
Department also stated that the West Bengal Legislative Assembly had adopted an unanimous
resolution regarding inclusion of Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council in the Sixth Schedule on
16th March, 2006. Again on 19th of December 2006, before the introduction of these two Bills,
the West Bengal Legislative Assembly had adopted unanimous by a Resolution for inclusion of
Gorkha Hill Council areas in the Sixth Schedule. Shri Bhattacharya requested the Committee to
submit its report in favour of these Bills at the earliest so that the elections could be held and the
new council under Sixth schedule could be set up which would help in restoring peace and
normalcy in Darjeeling hill area.
3.2 Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, MLA, thanked the Chairperson for granting the all party delegation
an opportunity to interaction with the Committee and stated that it was the delay in passage of
these Bills, that had caused frustration among the people and they got confused and went
against these Bills. She requested the Committee to recommend these Bills to Parliament at the

53
earliest so that those could be passed in both Houses of Parliament in the first leg of the Budget
Session, 2008.
3.3 Shri Deba Prasad Roy, MLA, mentioned that the “Gorkha Hill Council” under the State Act
did not have the constitutional sanctity. He stated that since the present DGHC was not a
constitutionally recognized body, a lot of confusion took place between the State Government and
the DGHC in terms of power sharing. He further pointed out that there was confusion and anxiety
among the people of Darjeeling as they perceived that without constitutional status, the DGHC
would not have autonomous status. He further viewed that the constitutional sanctity granted
through Sixth Schedule would satisfy their sentiments and enable the Autonomous District Council
to understand how much, power and functions would be enjoyed by them as per the provisions
of the constitution. He stated that if the passage of these Bills was delayed, it could lead to unrest
among the people as they had already started demanding a separate homeland called “Gorkhaland”.
3.4 Shri Nirmal Das, MLA, while supporting the proposed Bills stated that it was necessary for
maintaining peace and harmony amongst the people of West Bengal as a whole and particularly in
the hill region of Darjeeling as the same would lead to the development of the region. He then
requested the Committee to facilitate the passage of these Bills in Parliament at the earliest
opportunity.
3.5 Shri Sayed Md. Masih, Government Chief Whip, requested the Committee to recommend
the Bills for being passed in the first leg of the Budget Session. He pleaded that passage of these
Bills was necessary to end the turbulence in the hill area. In response to the objections that the
percentage of tribals in Darjeeling was less than non-tribals, he cited the case of Bodoland
Territorial Council which was granted the status of Sixth Schedule and argued that the population
of tribals was 38% in the case of “Bodoland Territorial Council” and in Darjeeling district, it was
about 31% according to the 2001 Census. So the difference between the two was not larger
enough to raise objections. He added that the interest of the non-tribals had been protected by
giving them reservation of seats and provision for special nominees including women.
4. Shri Pranay Rai, MLA, after giving a historical background to the Gorkhaland Movement,
stated that DGHC Accord signed on 22-23 August, 1988, could not fulfill the hopes and aspirations
of the people as socio-economic development and educational upliftment of the Gorkhas of
Darjeeling could not take place. He said that Bodoland was conferred constitutional status within
a short span of less than four months but in the case of Gorkha Hill Council two years had passed
since the signing of tripartite agreement on 6th December, 2005 but the Bills were yet to be passed.
He emphasized that there were provisions in the MoS to protect the rights of non-tribals. He
requested the Committee to expedite the passage of the Bills in the first part of the Budget Session
as the delay would go against the interest of the nation.
5. When the Chairperson enquired about the views of the opposition parties in the West Bengal
Legislative Assembly, Shri Sailen Sarkar , Minister-in-Charge of Parliamentary Affairs, replied that
the resolution in support of inclusion of DGHC in the Sixth Schedule was adopted unanimously by
the Assembly.
5.1 The Chairperson informed the representatives of the West Bengal Legislative Assembly that
after taking evidence of all the groups and stake-holders, there would be an in-house discussion
and then the Committee would give its report.
5.2 The Chairperson also informed the delegation thereof the Committee would be visiting
Siliguri, Darjeeling and Kolkata from 6th to 8th February 2008, to assess the ground solution there
and hear the representatives of West Bengal Government and Administration DGHC as well as cross
section of the society. The Chairperson also mentioned that the Committee would issue a press

54
communique asking interested individuals/organizations to give their willingness to the concerned
DC to appear before the Committee during its proposed visit.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 P.M.

55
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 7th February, 2008 in Room No. 62, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri N. Jothi
8. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Rattan Singh Ajnala
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri Raghunath Jha
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
14. Shri Amitava Nandy
15. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
16. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
17. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Addl. Secretary (CS)
3. Shri D.K. Sikri, Additional Secretary and RGI
55

56
4. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Shrimati Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Deptt. of Legal Affairs
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Government Counsel
Legislative Department
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairperson warmly welcomed the Members and informed them the
agenda of the meeting of that day. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed Administrator, Darjeeling
Gorkha Hill Council (DGHC) who was one of the signatories to the Darjeeling Accord 1988 as well
as the T ripartite Agreement i.e. Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) 2005. After introducing the
Members of the Committee to the Administrator, DGHC, the Chairperson asked him to express his
views on the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007.
3. The Administrator, DGHC apprised the Committee Members of the issues concerning the
Darjeeling Accord and the Bills under the consideration of the Committee. He expressed his opinion
as under:—
(i) Undue delay in implementing the provisions of MoS leading to non fulfillment of
expectations from the leadership;
(ii) Sixth Schedule is being opposed by the disgruntled people and only a few section of
the people have started the movement stating that Sixth Schedule could cause division
among various communities of Gorkhas;
(iii) Reservation for Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes community was opposed
(by the Administrator) vehemently at the time of signing of MoS, any reservation, if
required at all, should be confined to the category of 5 members to be nominated by
the Governor;
(iv) Traces of international spying network having the ulterior motive of annexing
Darjeeling and removal of Administrator, DGHC would pave the way for gaining
ground by the international spying network who have sinister design and mission and
Opposing the proposed Bills amounts to support to the international spying network
seeking to balkanize.
(v) Original demand of GNLF was a separate State of Gorkhaland. However, due to
amicable settlement Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council became the reality which
functioned for fifteen to sixteen years and DGHC practically worked as only a
developmental agency;
(vi) The Government of West Bengal and the Government of India took undue time to
agree to confer the status of Sixth Schedule to Gorkha Hill Council;

57
(vii) Either the existing DGHC be upgraded by entrusting more power by conferring Sixth
Schedule status or special provision under Article 371J of the Constitution may be
considered;
(viii) As per Census 1931, all the Gorkha communities were Hill tribes. But thereafter the
“Limbus” community has been conferred tribal status while “Rai” community was left
out. Similarly, “Tamang” was given tribal status, while “Gurung” has been considered
as non-tribal community;
(ix) Conferment of Sixth Schedule to the proposed Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling on the
pattern of Bodoland Territorial Council with sufficient and appropriate power would
ensure sustenance and survival of Darjeeling.
3.1 Responding to the Member’s queries, the Administrator, DGHC gave the following replies:
(i) Provision for election to the DGHC and Panchayat Bodies was there in sub-clause (ii)
of Clause 10 of the Agreement under Interim Administration and it was contemplated
that election would be conducted just after the signing of MoS. However, that did not
happen;
(ii) Duars should also be included in the Council; and
(iii) He was not satisfied with the draft MoS and registered his protest.
4. The Chairperson, thereafter, welcomed the Chief Secretary of West Bengal and other
officers accompanying him. After introducing the Members of the Committee, the Chairperson
stated the objectives of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the
Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007. Thereafter, the Chairperson asked
the Chief Secretary to apprise the Committee of the views of the Government of West Bengal on
the two Bills under consideration of the Committee.
5. The Chief Secretary, while expressing the views of the Government of West Bengal, stated
that the two Bills were in line with the tripartite MoS signed by the Government of India,
Government of West Bengal and the Administrator, DGHC on December 6, 2005. Thereafter, the
Government of West Bengal was fully in agreement with the provisons of the Bills including the
setting up of an Interim Council till the election to autonomous district council under the Sixth
Schedule was held.
5.1 Responding to a query of a Member of the Committee as to how Shri Subhash Ghising
could be considered as the true representative of the people of Darjeeling as he was merely an
appointee of the State Government at the time of the signing of MoS, the Chief Secretary stated
that since Shri Subhash Ghising was the undisputed leader of the hill region of Darjeeling,
therefore, the State Government’s stand was that if at all any agreement was to be signed it should
be with Shri Subhash Ghising.
5.2 Another Member draw the attention of the Chief Secretary to the clause 10 of MoS which
inter alia  provides for holding election to DGHC and Panchayat Bodies in the DGHC areas in
accordance with relevant provisions of the Constitution/existing laws of Central/State Governments,
in the interregnum between the MoS and the Constitution amendment, and was asked to explain
the reasons for not holding the election. The Chief Secretary replied that the State Government was
anticipating that the Constitution amendment and the parliamentary acts would be carried through
quickly. Therefore, it was not considered necessary to conduct the election as per said provision
of MoS which was subsequently amended on 22nd March, 2005 to incorporate a provision for
appointment of Administrator and also for providing extension of his term by six months at a time.

58
5.3 Responding to the Committee’s query whether at any given point of time during the fifteen
years of functioning of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, any resolution seeking conferment of
the Sixth Schedule or Statehood was passed, he told the Committee that he was unaware of any
such resolution. Replying to another query of the Committee Member whether any exercise was
undertaken to examine the constitutional sanctity of the two Bills. The Chief Secretary replied that
the requisite action was undertaken by the Ministry of Horne Affairs which in turn consulted the
Ministry of Law and Justice for expert legal opinion.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.50 
P.M.

59
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, 18 February, 2008 in Committee Room “A”,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ilyas Azmi
6. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
7. Shri Tapir Gao
8. Shri Raghunath Jha
9. Shri Ajit Jogi
10. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
11. Shri Amitava Nandy
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
13. Shri Sachin Pilot
14. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Addl. Secretary (CS)
3. Shri D.K. Sikri, Additional Secretary and RGI
4. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary
59

60
Representative of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Shrimati Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Deptt. of Legal Affairs:
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Government Counsel
Legislative Department
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the chairperson warmly welcomed the members and informed them that the
meeting of the day convened for in-house discussion on the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
Bills. She mentioned that the two diametrically opposite views had been received by the Committee
on these Bills, One set of groups emphasized for an early passage of the Bills while another group
vehemently opposed the passage of these Bills. Both groups were of the view that there would be
law and order problem if their viewpoints were ignored. In this background, the Chairperson asked
Members to give their suggestions as to how to proceed with drafting of the Committee’s Report.
3. One Member expressed his support to the Bill and opined that the Bills should be passed
and the implications/problems, which might arise, could be handled later on according to the
circumstances.
4. Another Member favoured for giving more power and autonomy to the Council but at the
same time opposed conferring 6th Schedule status to the Council.
5. One Member was of the opinion that the solution would have to be found within the State
of West Bengal. The Bills were a step forward to meet the aspirations of the hill people. In his
view there should not be any delay in passing of the Bills.
6. The other Member drew attention on the fact that all the witnesses, who are opposing the
Bills were splinter group, who had been together when the resolution on the subject was passed
in the legislation assembly of West Bengal. He opined that the Committee should not take any
decision which could hold it responsible for any unforeseen circumstances that might take place.
According to him, Parliament and the Government should be allowed to decide the matter in the
light of all the facts and submissions, which had been brought before the Committee. He was not
in favour of taking up of clause by clause consideration of the Bill by the Committee.
7. One Member pointed out the trend of polity towards creation of smaller States and stated
that even many political organizations were in support of smaller states. He stated that and
Gorkhaland had been the demand of the people since long and supported the creation of a separate
state of Gorkhland.
8. Another Member stated that the passionate and the long pending demand of Gorkhaland
have to be looked at from a broader view. He was not sure that separate State would satisfy all
the needs and aspirations of the people. He suggested that recommendation on the Bills should be
such which must not lead to further division within the State.
9. Another Member submitted that the existing system of DGHC was not satisfying the
aspirations of the people. A number of people, who deposed before the Committee were against the

61
Bills but the State Government of West Bengal was in favour of an early passage of these Bills.
He suggested that the Committee should respect the sentiments of the people on the one hand and
also the elected Government on the other hand. He felt that the Committee should go by the
Tripartite Agreement and views of the State Government.
10. One another Member opined that the Bill has a lot of implications for present and future
generations. He made a reference to a book written by Justice Hansaria, wherein it was mentioned
that the special provisions to Assam and North East were given right from Lord Clive period for
two reasons. One reason was that it was not possible to administer this area properly from Calcutta
and second one was that the region was the main source of timber, ivory, wax, etc. He further
opined that Sixth Schedule is not applicable on the other side of Brahmaputra and the passage of
the Bills and giving sixth schedule status to a non North east area could set a new precedent and
it could lead to domino effect in the non North east region of the country. He averred that
Mr. Gheising was an undisputed leader when he signed Darjeeling Accord in 1988 but at that time
of signing of MoS he was an administrator. He had no locus standi as he was a Government
nominee. According to him the spirit of the Constitution was being changed by giving Sixth
Schedule status to Darjeeling. He cautioned that most of the Tribal areas were under Maoist control
and if the tribal areas of Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Chhatttisgarh, Jharkhand or Bihar demands Sixth
Schedule status, it wouldbe difficult to deny it to them.
11. Another Member opined the passage of these Bills could not solve the problem of the people
of Darjeeling and favoured the creation of a separate State as it cold fulfil aspirations of the people
and keep extremism at bay.
12. The Chairperson desired that the Committee should make unanimous recommendation. On
the clause by clause consideration issue of not taking up of clause-by-clause consideration, she
stated that procedure which was be followed. Regarding demand and creation of Gorkhaland, She
stated that Gorkhaland was not a brief of the Committee and it could not go beyond the provisions
of the Bills. She added that the committee could only suggest for amendment in the Bills.
12.1 Outlining the contours of the recommendations, the Chairperson stated that the operative
part of the Report may mention that law and order is the responsibility of State Government and
the Committee enquired several times both from the State Government as well as Central
Government whether the law and order would not deteriorate with the passage of the Bills as the
evidence before the Committee was overwhelmingly contrary. She pointed out that both the
Governments have stated that they would handle the law and order problem and since the
Committee does not have any mechanism to assess the ground realities without visiting the area
itself, the opportunity which was denied to it. The Committee wanted to visit to Darjeeling, but
was advised to review its decision on the grounds that there might be law and order problem. She
further stated that the Committee could, therefore, recommend that before placing the Bills before
the Parliament, Government should again ensure that the law and order situation in the area remain
under control.
12.2 Regarding opening of Pa ndora Box of such demands from other States as there were already
such resolutions from States Governments of Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur and such demand
may get further momentum and regarding legal sustainability of extending its application beyond NE
Region, the chairperson stated that the Home Secretary might be asked to give clarification on the
issue. She also stated that on the basis of assurance given by the State Government of West Bengal
as well as Union Government of India on the issue such as law and order, opening of Pandora
Box, legal sustainability, the Committee might recommend for passage of the Bill.
13. Another Member opined that the whole exercise of evidence and deliberations before the
Committee on the Bill would be rendered futile if the Committee accept the submissions of the

62
Central and State Government despite the contrary evidence. Then the Chairperson clarified that
one of the Bill being Constitutional Amendment Bill, two-third majority in the House would be
required and Members would go through the Report of the Committee. She informed that the Home
Secretary assumed that those who were against the bills were actually fence sitters and they would
fall in line once the Bills were passed and election for the new council was held. She viewed that
without visiting Darjeeling, the Committee has no ground to reject the official view of Government.
14. In post Lunch Session, the Chairperson informed the Members that the Home Secretary,
Legislative Secretary and Law Secretary had been invited for clarification on the issue raised in the
deliberations of the Committee on the Bills. She further informed that the clause-by-clause
consideration on the Bills would be held the next day.
14.1 Then, the Chairperson welcomed the representative of MHA. The Chairperson stated that
the Home Minister wanted to get these Bills passed without being referred to the Committee. She
cited the following statement made by the Home Minister:
“infact, the hurry in passing the Bill was because of the fear that if there are delays, it
may lead to a deteriorating situation in that sensitive area.”
14.2 She further stated that the State Government of West Bengal was also in favour of an only
passage of Bill. She mentioned that the Committee was requested to examine and give its report
within one month so that the Bills could be passed early during the Budget Session but the evidence
before the Committee was contrary to the views expressed by the Government. Except some
political parties, all were opposing the Bills and saying that if Bills were passed, there would be
bloodshed. She added that If the Bills would have been passed immediately after signing of MoS,
the situation would have been different because Shri Ghising was then the undisputed leader but
during the last two years, credibility of Shri Ghising had gone down substantially and he was no
longer an undisputed leader as another group called “Gorkha Jan Mukti Morcha” has splitted out
of GNLF. She asked the Home Secretary whether he thinks that with the passage of Bills, there
would be peace and the aspirations of the people would be fulfilled.
15. The Home Secretary submitted that there are some groups having an opinion that passage
of these Bills could lead to bloodshed and creation of a separate State of Gorkhaland was the only
solution. He stated that the assessment of the ministry was that this opinion might not be really
correct. Commenting on the advice of West Bengal Government on the proposed visit of the
Committee, the Home Secretary submitted that there was an element of apprehension at that point
of time that the visit of the Committee could heighten the emotions of the people of the area as
it was a sensitive issue. He informed that the first tripartite discussions took place in 2001 when
it was inter-alia  decided that the council would sent its proposal for inclusion of this council into
the Sixth Schedule through the State Government but for the same reason it took a long time and
when the tripartite agreement took place, people were aware of it and a lot of representations
mainly on the issue of reservation for Scheduled Castes were received which were examined by
the Central Government in consultation with the State Government. He further stated that the State
Government was of the opinion that it would not be appropriate to disturb the unanimity and
consensus which had been arrived at after prolonged interaction and deliberations. The Home
Secretary further submitted that as a result of prolonged dialogue of over 20 years, two thing have
emerged; one Statehood demand is not accepted and two; the best solution after considering
various options has been to include the area under the Sixth Schedule.
15.1 Commenting on the possibility of judicial scrutiny after passage of these Bills and legal
sustainability of the Bills, the Law Secretary put forward his considered view that Article 244 does
not anywhere say that Sixth schedule was only confined to tribal areas only and constitutionality
there was no problem in implementing it into the State of West Bengal.

63
15.2 W ith regard to the issue concerning working of international spying network in the area, as
raised by Shri Ghising, the Home Secretary stated that the Government was continuously looking
at any of these kinds of possibilities The Government did not have any specific information of this
kind. If there is any information of that kind, it would be seriously and promptly acted upon.”
15.3 The Home Secretary informed the Committee that one of the options evaluated was to insert
an Article 371 (J) in the Chapter 21 of the Constitution to give special status to this council area;
however, it was not acceptable to the Gorkha Hill Council. Regarding mandate of holding of
elections within a time bound period, the Home Secretary submitted that there was a provision in
the amendment that elections would be held within six months, however, it was not mandated.
16. One Member enquired whether at any point of time, the matter of giving special status
under fifth schedule was discussed with Shri Ghising or State Government of West Bengal, if so,
the reaction of Shri Ghising and the State Government. The Home Secretary stated that he would
have to go through the entire tripartite minutes to get the information but to the best of his
knowledge, the issue was not discussed or even contemplated. The Law Secretary supplemented
that the Fifth Schedule did not offer any autonomy in a real sense. There was no law making
powers available under fifth schedule status.
16.1 Commenting on the issues regarding conferring Sixth Schedule opening of Pandora Box and
resolutions of Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur Government for inclusion under Sixth schedule, the
Home Secretary stated that the proposals from Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur were under
consideration and had to be considered in the light of other factors. He opined that he did not
forsee any kind of reaction if the Sixth Schedule status is given to Darjeeling and he was quite
sure is his own assessment.
16.2 Regarding media reports on Second State Reorganization Commission, the Home Secretary
stated that there was no such statement issue or indicated by the Government or the Ministry of
Home Affairs and no decision has been taken in the matter.
17. Regarding inordinate delay in bringing the legislation before the Parliament, the Home
Secretary submitted that after signing of MOS, certain proceeding were required to the completed
viz. the finalization of the list of mouzas and villages of Siliguri sub-division to be transferred to
the Council and this work could be accomplished by 12.12.2006. After finalization of mouzas,
representations were received particularly from the point of view of the demand for reservation of
seats for the Scheduled Castes. These was also referred to the State Government and it was only
in April, 2007 that the State Government conveyed that it was not possible to submit a harmonized
view in consultation with Shri Subhas Ghising who was demanding that there should not be any
reservation. He, however, admitted that it has taken much longer time than it should have taken.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
18. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.

64
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 19 February 2008 in Committee Room “A”,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri Raghunath Jha
10. Shri Ajit Jogi
11. Shri Amitava Nandy
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Addl. Secretary (CS)
3. Shri D.K. Sikri, Additional Secretary and RGI
4. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Abhijit Dey, Deputy Secretary
7. Shri I.C. Aggarwal, Assistant RGI
64

65
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Deptt. of Legal Affairs
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Government Counsel
Legislative Department
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda for the day i.e., clause-by-clause consideration of the Constitution (One Hundred and
Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2007.
3. The Committee thereafter proceeded with clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The
Committee first took up the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007:
4. Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007:
Clause 2
4.1.1 This clause seeks to amend clauses (1) and (2) of Article 244 of the Constitution by
substituting the words “and Mizoram” with the words “Mizoram and the areas under the Gorkha
Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal”.
4.1.2 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 3
4.2.1 This clause seeks to insert a new clause after clause (6) in Article 332.
4.2.2 Clause 1,  Enacting Formula, and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2007” and ‘Fifty-eighth” substituted by “2008” and
“Fifty-ninth”, wherever those appeared.
4.2.3 The Committee pointed out printing mistakes in line 8 and accordingly recommended that
the words “in clause (6), after” should read as “after clause (6)”. The representative of the
Legislative Department pointed out that a corrigendum has already been issued to that effect.
4.2.4 The Comm ittee noted the statement of the representative of the Legislative Department and
adopted the clause.
5. The Committee thereafter took up the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment)
Bill 2007.
6. Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2007:
Clause 2
6.1.1 Sub-clause (3) of clause 2 provides for insertion of following proviso in paragraph 1,  after
sub-paragraph (2) of the Sixth Schedule:—
“Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to the areas under the
Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal”.

66
6.1.2 Sub-paragraph (2) in paragraph 1 of Sixth Schedule provides that if there are different
Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, the Governor may, by public notification, divide the
area inhabited by them into autonomous regions. The Committee noted that by adding the special
proviso, the power of the Governor would be restricted.
6.1.3 The Committee took note of the following clarification given by the Ministry on the
necessity of the proviso and the implications thereof:—
“Sub-paragraph (I) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule makes provisions about
autonomous districts for tribal areas enumerated in the table appended to paragraph 20 of
the Schedule. Sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 makes provision enabling the Governor to
divide such area or areas into autonomous regions if there are different Scheduled Tribes
in an autonomous district. Sub-paragraph (I) of paragraph 2 makes provision for the
composition of District Councils in terms of the total number of elected and nominated
members.
These provisions have remained unaltered with reference to Autonomous Hill Councils
in respect of various areas which have been constituted under the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution from time to time. However in the case of the Bodoland Territorial Council,
the following two distinctive pr ovisions were made:—
(i) a provision was made whereby nothing in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 would
apply to the Bodoland Territorial Areas District; and
(ii) specific provision was made in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 through a
proviso indicating the composition of the Council which was different from the
general composition stipulated in sub-paragraph (I) of paragraph 1.
These changes were necessitated on account of the fact that the decision to include
the areas of Bodoland Territorial Areas District had been arrived at as a part of an Accord
in which, inter alia, the specific territories to be covered and the composition of the
Council were also decided.
In the case of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council also the proposal to bring it under
the Sixth Schedule follows Tripartite discussions between Government of India, Government
of West Bengal and Shri Subash Ghisingh (President, GNLF and Administrator, DGHC) and
a Memorandum of Settlement in which specific provisions were made pertaining to the area
to be brought under the Council (which was part of the District of Darjeeling) and the
composition of the Council. Keeping this in view similar provisions as in the case of the
Bodoland Territorial Council have been made with reference to non-application of sub-
paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule.
The underlying logic is that where, on the basis of an Accord or Settlement specific
provisions regarding the area and composition of the Council have been made in the
Constitution, the existing provision in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 enabling the
Governor to divide such area or areas into autonomous regions would no longer be required”.
In view of the above clarification of the Ministry, the Committee adopted sub-clause (3)
without any change.
6.1.4 The Committee then took up sub-clause (4) of clause 2, which seeks to insert following
proviso after sub-paragraph (1) in paragraph 2 ofthe Sixth Schedule:—
“Provided that the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal shall
consist of not more than thirty-three members, of whom twenty-eight shall be elected on

67
the basis of adult suffrage out of whom ten shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes,
fifteen for non-tribal communities, three open for all communities and the remaining five,
of which at least two shall be women, having same rights including voting rights and
privileges as other members, to be nominated by the Government from amongst the
unrepresented communities of the areas under the Council.”
6.1.5 The proposed proviso makes provision for reservation of seats in the proposed Council,
which is in the nature of a local body. The Committee took note of the fact that the Constitution
(Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992
provide for reservation of not less than one third seats for women in Panchayati Raj institutions
and urban local bodies. This special provision had also been incorporated in the Cantonment
Act, 1924 by a recent amendment. The Committee felt that this constitutional reservation had not
been provided in the elected category of the members of the Council.
6.1.6 The Committee, accordingly, felt that thirty three per cent reservation for women should be
provided in the composition of the proposed Council. Provision already exists for reservation of
two seats for woman out of five nominated seats. The Committee, felt that nine seats (three out
of ten seats reserved for ST, five out of fifteen seats reserved for non-tribals and one out of three
open seats) should be reserved for women, out of the twenty eight elective seats.
6.1.7 The Committee further noted from the composition of the Council that there was no
provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes. The Committee was of the view that Darjeeling Hill
areas had substantial SC population and there was no reason why reservation to SC should not be
provided in the Council which is a constitutional requirement. The Committee was not convinced
by the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the SC population was not sufficient to provide
reservation to them and felt that necessary reservation to SC should be provided in the Council.
The Committee recommended that necessary amendments, may, accordingly be made in sub-
clause (4).
6.1.8 Subject to the above, Clause 2 was adopted.
Enacting Formula and the Title
6.1.9 Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2007” and ‘Fifty-eighth” substituted by “2008” and
“Fifty-ninth”, whenever those occurred.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.10 
P.M.

68
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 27 February, 2008 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri Raghunath Jha
11. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
12. Shri Amitava Nandy
13. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
14. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
15. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
16. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt draft One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report on the Constitution (One Hundred
and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Sixth Schedule to Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
2.1 After some discussion the Report was adopted with some modifications suggested by
Members. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to carry out the necessary modifications.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report along with Evidence tendered before it on
the Bills in both Houses of Parliament during the ongoing Budget Session on 28th February, 2008.
The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri Prasanta Chatterjee and Shri V .
Narayanasamy, to present the Report along with Evidence to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Sachin Pilot
68

69
and in his absence, Shri Amitava Nandy, to lay a copy of the Report along with Evidence on the
Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Chairperson then thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation in
completing the examination of the Bills within a short period of time and finalizing the report
thereon. On behalf of the Committee, she also placed on record a deep sense of appreciation for
the good work done by the Secretariat while assisting it.
5. One member of the Committee, Shri Amitava Nandy praised the efforts of the Chairperson
for evolving consensus in the Committee in finalizing its observations/recommendations.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.

70

71
ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
30 NOV ., 2007
Bill No. 94 of 2007
THE SIXTH SCHEDULED TO THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India in its application to
the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall, in its
application to the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of
West Bengal, have effect subject to the following modifications,
namely:—
(1) In the Sixth Schedule, in the heading, for the words
“and Mizoram”, the words “Mizoram and the areas under the
Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal”
shall be substituted.
73
Short title.
ANNEXURE-I
Amendment of
Sixth Schedule to
the Constitution.

74
(2) In paragraph 1, in sub-paragraph (1), after the word “Schedule”, the
words “and the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West
Bengal” shall be inserted.
(3) In paragraph 1, after sub-paragraph (2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to the areas
under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal.”.
(4) In paragraph 2, after sub-paragraph (1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West
Bengal shall consist of not more than thirty-three members, of whom
twenty-eight shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage out of whom ten
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, fifteen for non-tribal communities,
three open for all communities and the remaining five, of which at least two
shall be women, having same rights including voting rights and privileges as
other 15 members, to be nominated by the Governor from amongst the
unrepresented communities of the areas under the Council.”.
(5) In paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph (3), after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the District Council constituted for the hill areas
of Darjeeling District in the State of West Bengal shall be called the Gorkha
Hill Council, Darjeeling and it shall comprise of such areas including all the
mouzas under Darjeeling, Kurseong and Kalimpong Sub-divisions of Darjeeling
District, eighteen mouzas of Siliguri Sub-division, which shall be transferred
to Kurseong Sub-division, as may be notified in the Official
Gazette by the Government of West Bengal.”.
(6) In paragraph 3, for sub-paragraph (3), the following sub-paragraph shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3A
or sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3B or sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3C,
all laws made under this paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3A or
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3B or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3C
shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him,
shall have no effect.”.
(7) After paragraph 3B, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
‘3C. Additional Powers of the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling to
make laws.— (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 3, the
Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal within its areas
shall have power to make laws with respect to: ( i) Land and Land Revenue
including allotment, occupation or use, or setting apart of land other than any
land which is a reserved forest, for the purpose of agriculture or grazing,

75
or for residential or other non-agricultural purposes, or for any other purpose
likely to promote the interest of the inhabitants of any village, locality or
town provided such allotment, occupation or use, or setting apart, of land
is subject to the provisions of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
(West Ben. 10 of 1956) and the rules made thereunder; ( ii) Management and
settlement of land including markets and market sheds controlled by the
Darjeeling Improvement Fund; ( iii) Management of any forest, not being a
reserved forest, [ Explanation.— “Reserved Forest” shall mean a reserved
forest as constituted under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927)];
(iv) Agriculture; (v) Soil Conservation; ( vi) Animal Husbandry and 5 V eterinary
services; ( vii) Cooperation; ( viii) Fisheries; ( ix) Irrigation, drainage and
embankments, floods and landslide protection; ( x) Water Resources
Investigation and Minor irrigation; ( xi) School Education including primary
education, secondary education, higher secondary education (including
vocational training); (xii) College Education including Agricultural and Technical
colleges, except Government and Government sponsored colleges;
(xiii) Adult Education and library services; ( xiv) Health and Family Welfare;
(xv) Labour and Employment; ( xvi) Panchayats and Rural Development;
(xvii) Public Health Engineering; ( xviii) Public Works Department and Public
Works (Roads) excluding State Highways and National Highways;
(xix) Cottage and small scale Industries including Sericulture, handloom and
Textiles, Handicrafts and Khadi and Village Industries; ( xx) Minor Minerals
and Mineral development subject to the provisions of Entry 23 of List-II of
the Seventh Schedule; ( xxi) Rural Electrification; ( xxii) Renewable Sources of
Energy including water-power (subject to Entry 56 of List-I and entry 38 of
List-III of the Seventh Schedule; ( xxiii) Relief; ( xxiv) Women and Child
Development and Social Welfare; ( xxv) Welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and other Backward classes; ( xxvi) Food and Civil Supplies;
(xxvii ) Sports and Youth Welfare; ( xxviii ) Tourism; ( xxix ) Transport;
(xxx) Municipalities and Municipal Services; ( xxxi) Town and Country
Planning; ( xxxii) Welfare of Minorities; ( xxxiii) Information and Cultural
Affairs; ( xxxiv) Museums, Ancient and Historical Monuments other than
those declared by Parliament to be of National importance; ( xxxv) Pounds
and prevention of cattle trespass; ( xxxvi) Management of burial grounds
and cremation grounds; (
xxxvii ) Management of markets and fairs;
(xxxviii) Planning and Development; ( xxxix) Statistics; ( xl) Printing and
Stationery; ( xli) Registration of Births and Deaths; ( xlii) Lotteries (subject to
the provisions of Entry 40 of List-I of the Seventh Schedule); ( xliii) Weights
and Measures subject to the provisions of Entry 50 of List-I of the
Seventh Schedule; ( xliv) Theatres and Dramatic Performances subject to
the provisions of Entry 60 of List-I; Sports, entertainment and amusements;
(xlv) Intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives, subject to the provisions of
Entry 84 of List-I of the Seventh Schedule:
Provided that nothing in such laws shall—
(a) extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges of
any citizen of India including his land rights within the areas under
Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal on the date

76
of commencement of the Sixth Schedule to the constitution
(Amendments Act, 2007, and
(b) disallow any citizen of India from acquiring land either by
way of inheritance, allotment, settlement or by any other way of
transfer if such citizen is otherwise eligible for such acquisition of land
within the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State
of West Bengal.
(2) All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in
so far as they relate to matters specified in List-III of the Seventh Schedule,
be submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve the same for
the consideration of the President.
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the said law or that he
withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law
to the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling, together with the message requesting
that the said Council will reconsider the law or any specified provisions
thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any
such amendments as he may recommend in his message and when the law
is so returned, the said Council shall consider the law accordingly within a
period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if the
law is again passed by the said Council with or without amendments it shall
be presented again to the President for his consideration.’.
(8) In paragraph 4,—
(i) in sub-paragraph (6), for the word “proviso”, the words “second proviso”
shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-paragraph (6), the following sub-paragraph shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(7) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal constituted under the third proviso to
sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.”.
(9) In paragraph 6, after sub-paragraph (2), the following sub-paragraph
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The language and medium of instruction in educational institutions
in the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West
Bengal shall not be changed without approval of the Government of West
Bengal.”.
(10) In paragraph 10,—
(i) in sub-paragraph (4), for the word “proviso”, the words “second proviso”
shall be substituted;

77
(ii) after sub-paragraph (4), the following sub-paragraph shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(5) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal constituted under the third proviso to
sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.”.
(11) After paragraph l2B, the following paragraph shall be inserted,
namely:—
“12C. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature
of the State of West Bengal to the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling
in the State of West Bengal. —(1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—
(a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of West Bengal in
respect of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3C
of this Schedule as matters with respect to which the Gorkha Hill
Council, Darjeeling may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of
the State of West Bengal prohibiting or restricting the consumption of
any non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling unless in either case the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling
having jurisdiction over its areas, by public notification so directs, and
the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in giving such direction with
respect to any Act may direct that the Act shall in its application to
the areas under Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling or any part thereof,
have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as it thinks fit;
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any
Act of the Legislature of the State of West Bengal to which the
provisions of clause ( a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply shall not
apply to the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling, or shall
apply to the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling or any
part thereof subject to such exceptions or modifications as he
may specify in the notification;
(c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament,
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal, or shall apply to the Gorkha
Hill Council, Darjeeling or any part thereof subject to such exceptions
or modifications as he may specify in the notification.
(2) Any direction given under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph may be
given so as to have retrospective effect.”.
(12) In paragraph 19, after sub-paragraph (4), the following sub-paragraph
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) As soon as possible after the commencement of the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007, an Interim Executive Council for
the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal shall be

78
formed by the Governor from amongst representatives of the Government of
West Bengal and the existing Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, and shall
provide adequate representation to the non-tribal communities in that
area:
Provided that the Interim Executive Council shall be for a period of
six months during which endeavour to hold the election to the Council shall
be made.”.

79
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The provisions of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution have evolved a
separate scheme for the administration of the tribal areas in the S tates of Assam,
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura through the District Councils or Regional
Councils. The provisions in paragraphs 1 to 17 of the said Sixth Schedule relate
to the administration of the autonomous areas under that Schedule. The Councils
are vested with legislative powers on specified subjects and are allotted certain
sources of taxation. They have also been given powers to set up and administer
their system of justice and maintain administrative and welfare services in
respect of land, revenue, forests, education, public health etc. So far, the
application of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution has not been extended to
any other State of the Union, besides North-Eastern States.
2. Two Memoranda of Settlement (came to be known as ‘Darjeeling
Accord’) signed between the Government of India, Government of West Bengal
and the Gorkha National Liberation Front (GNLF) on 22-23 August, 1988 had
put an end to the violent agitation launched by the GNLF primarily demanding
creation of a separate State of Gorkhaland, and paved the way for fulfillment of
socio-economic and political aspirations of the hill people of Darjeeling district.
An autonomous hill council, viz., Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council (DGHC) was set
up through the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988 enacted by the
Government of West Bengal on 15.10.1988, with full executive control on
certain subjects. The DGHC has a council of 42 members with 28 elected and
14 nominated members and with a term of five years.
3. The Darjeeling Accord however, could not fulfill the aspirations of the
hill people of Darjeeling and GNLF has been agitating for the past few years for
conferring constitutional status on the Nepali dominated areas in the Darjeeling
hill areas. A number of tripartite meetings between Government of India,
Government of West Bengal and GNLF were held to resolve the issues and it
emerged that the only solution lies in according Sixth Schedule status to certain
areas of Darjeeling District within the State of West Bengal under exceptional
circumstances as was done in the case of Bodo land Territorial Council (BTC)
within the State of Assam. An exception was made for BTC and the area was
accorded Sixth Schedule status even though the members of the Scheduled Tribe
communities (STs) were not in majority and reportedly comprised only 38 per
cent of the population of the area. However, certain safeguards for the Non-
Tribals residing in the BTC areas were provided and the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution was accordingly amended. As per the sample check carried out
during 22-26 October, 2005 by the Registrar-General of India, the total ST
population constituted about 31.4 per cent of the total population of existing
DGHC areas.
4. An ‘In Principle’ Memorandum of Settlement (MOS) was signed on
06.12.2005 between the Government of India, Government of West Bengal and
Administrator, Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council (DGHC) for creating an
autonomous self governing Council under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
79

80
for the hill areas of Darjeeling District within the State of West Bengal following
due consultative, legislative and constitutional processes by the State and Central
Governments, so as to fulfil the economic, educational and linguistic aspirations,
socio-cultural and ethnic identity of the hill people, duly protecting the rights of
the non-tribals, and to speed up the infrastructure development in the hill areas
of Darjeeling District. In terms of the MOS, the existing DGHC will be replaced
by an autonomous self governing Council called Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling
(GHC) in the State of West Bengal under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
The State Government, at an appropriate time, will dissolve the DGHC and repeal
the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988 to pave the way for creation of
GHC.
5. With a view to meet the aspirations of the people of the hill areas of
Darjeeling District and in pursuance of the MOS dated 06.12.2005, it is proposed
to—
(i) create an autonomous self governing Council called the Gorkha
Hill Council, Darjeeling (GHC) under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
within the State of West Bengal, which shall have legislative, administrative
and financial powers in respect of specified subjects; and
(ii) provide for adequate safeguards for the non-tribals to ensure that
any law as may be made by the GHC will not, in particular:—
(a) extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges
enjoyed by any citizen including his land rights within the areas under
the GHC at the commencement of the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007; and
(b) bar any citizen from acquiring land either by way of
inheritance, allotment, settlement or by way of transfer if such citizen
is otherwise eligible for such bona fide  acquisition of land within the
areas under GHC.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIVRAJ V . PATIL.
The 23rd November, 2007.

81
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C ONSTITUTION OF I NDIA
** * * *
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Article 244(2) and 275(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the States of
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram
1. Autonomous districts and autonomous regions.— (1)
Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, the tribal areas in each
item of Parts I, II and IIA and in Part III of the table appended to
paragraph 20 of this Schedule shall be an autonomous district.
(2) If there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous
district, the Governor may, by public notification, divide the area or
areas inhabited by them into autonomous regions.
** * * *
2. Constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils.—
(1) There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district
consisting of not more than thirty members, of whom not more than
four persons shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be
elected on the basis of adult suffrage.
** * * *
(3) Each District Council and each Regional Council shall be a
body corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of
(name of district )” and “the Regional Council of ( name of region )”,
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the
said name sue and be sued.
Provided that the District Council constituted for the
North Cachar Hills District shall be called as the North Cachar
Hills Autonomous Council and the District Council constituted
for the Karbi Anglong District shall be called as the Karbi
Anglong Autonomous Council.
Provided further that the District Council constituted for
the Bodoland Territorial Areas District shall be called the Bodoland
Territorial Council.
** * * *
3. (1) * * * * *
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph
3A or sub-paragraph  (2) of paragraph 3B, all laws made under this
paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph (1)
of paragraph 3B shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and,
until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
81
Powers of the
District Councils
and Regional
Councils to
make laws.

82
** * * *
4. Administration of justice in autonomous districts and
autonomous regions.
(1) * * * * *
(6) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial
Council constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph
2 of this Schedule.
** * * *
10. Power of District Council to make regulations for the
control of money-lending and trading by non-tribals.—
(1) * * * * *
(4) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial
Council constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph
2 of this Schedule.
** * * *

83
83
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India in its application to the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal.
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
30 NOV ., 2007
Bill No. 95 of 2007
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and
Seventh Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. In article 244 of the Constitution, in clauses ( 1) and ( 2),
for the words “and Mizoram”, the words “Mizoram and the areas
under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in the State of West
Bengal”, shall respectively be substituted.
3. In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause (6), after the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(7) Subject to the provisions of clauses ( 1) and ( 3), in
the Legislative Assembly of the State of West Bengal, the
representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in
the constituencies included in the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling, so
notified, and existing prior to the constitution of the Gorkha Hill
Council, Darjeeling, shall be maintained.”.
85
ANNEXURE-II
Short title.
Amendment of
article 244.
Amendment of
article 332.

86
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
An ‘In Principle’ Memorandum of Settlement (MOS) was singed on
6.12.2005 between the Government of India, Government of West Bengal and
Administrator, Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council (DGHC) for creating an
autonomous self governing Council under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
for the hill areas of Darjeeling District within the State of West Bengal following
due consultative, legislative and constitutional processes by the State and Central
Government, so as to fulfill the economic, educational and linguistic aspirations,
socio-cultural and ethnic identity of the hill prople duly protecting the rights of
the non-tribals, and to speed up the infrastructure development in the hill areas
of Darjeeling District. In terms of the MOS, the existing DGHC will be replaced
by an autonomous self governing Council called the Gorkha Hill Council,
Darjeeling (GHC) in the State of West Bengal under the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution. The State Government, at an appropriate time, will dissolve the
DGHC and repeal the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988 to pave the way
of creation of GHC.
2. Clause ( 2) of article 244 of the Constitution provides that the provisions
of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal areas in the
States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. In pursuance of the MOS
dated 6.12.2005, it is proposed to amend article 244 of the Constitution so as
to bring the administration of the areas under the GHC in the State of West
Bengal within its amibit.
3. Article 332 of the Constitution provides for reservation of seats for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the
States. For the autonomous districts in the State of Assam, a provision in clause
(6) of article 332 has been made so as to protect the rights of non-tribals. Under
clause ( 6), the then existing representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam from the
Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District was kept intact. Similarly, to protect
the rights of non-tribals in the Gorkha Hill Council in Darjeeling, in pursuance
of the MOS dated 6th December, 2005, the existing representation of the
Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of West Bengal from the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council is proposed
to be kept intact. It is, therefore, proposed to insert a new clause after the
existing clause ( 6) of article 332 of the Constitution.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIVRAJ V . PATIL.
The 23rd November, 2007
86

87
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE C ONSTITUTION OF I NDIA
** * * *
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244. (1) * * * * *
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Scheduled shall apply to the
administration of the tribal areas in the State of Assam, Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram.
** * * *
87
Administration
of Scheduled
Areas and
Tribal Areas.

88
88
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

89
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS/POLITICAL PARTIES/GROUPS WHO DEPOSED
BEFORE THE DRSC ON HOME AFFAIRS
During various sittings of the Committee on 13th and 20th December, 2007, 10th, 11th and
21st January, 2008 and 7th and 18th February, 2008 in connection with the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One Hundred and Seventh Amendment)
Bill, 2007, following witnesses deposed before the Committee:—
A. Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Additional Secretary
Shri D.K. Sikri, Additional Secretary and RGI
Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary (CS)
Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary (NE)
Shri I.C. Agarwal, Assistant RGI
B. Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
C. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs
Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Law Secretary
Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Government Counsel
D. Representative of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Shrimati Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Individuals/Organisations who deposed before the Committee
E. Sitting MPs
Shri Dawa Narbula, MP, Lok Sabha
Shri Saman Pathak, MP, Rajya Sabha
F. Representatives of Gorkha Janmukti Morcha
Shri Bimal Gurung, President
Shri Roshan Giri, General Secretary
Shri Binay Tamang, Press and Publicity Secretary
Shri Dinesh Tamang, Executive Member
Shri Passang Lama, Executive Member
Shri Pradip Pradhan, Executive Member
Shri D.K. Pradhan, Executive Member
Shri Pemba Tshering, Executive Member
Dr. Harka Bahadur Chhetri, Advisor
Shri Anmole Prasad, Advisor
Shri Amar Lama, Advisor
Shrimati Jyoti Limboo, Dooars Representative
89

90
G . Representatives of Communist Party Revolutionary Marxist
Shri R.B. Rai, Ex-MP
Shri Sawan Rai
Shri I.K. Sharma
Shri Tara Mani Rai
Shri Govind Chhetri
Shri J.B. Rai
Shri Kishore Pradhan
Shri Arun Ghatani
Shri Norbu Lama
H. Representatives of All India Gorkha League
Shri Madan Tamang, President
Shri N.C. Khaling, Vice President
Shri Manoj Dewan, General Secretary
Shri N.D. Lama, (Kalimpong G .S.)
Shri Pranoy Thapa, (Kurseong G.S.)
Shri Sanjeev Chhetri, (Siliguri G.S.)
I. Representatives of Gorkha Rashtriya Congress
Shri D.K. Bomzon
Shri Passang Tsering
J. Representatives of G .N.L.F. (C)
Col. D.K. Pradhan
Shri D.K. Pradhan (Ex. MLA)
K. Representatives of BJP Darjeeling Hill Committee
Dr. G.S. Yonzone, President
Shri Tika Pradhan, Vice-President
Shri P.B. Poudyal, General Secretary
L. Representatives of Bharatiya Gorkha Parisangh
Shrimati Dil Kumari Bhandari, Ex. MP, National President
Shri C.K. Shrestha, National Working President
Rev. Dr. Enos Das Pradhan, National Vice President
Shri Sukhman Moktan, Secretary General
Shri Swaraj Thapa, Vice President, Central Programme Cell
Prof. Munish Tamang, Secretary, Central Programme Cell
Brig. N.B.S. Bishta, National Convenor, Ex-Servicemen Cell
Commodore K.S. Rai, Chief Coordinator, Media Centre
Shri Rajen Pradhan, President, Darjeeling Committee
M. Representatives of All Gorkha Students’ Union (AGSU)
Shri Rabi Shankar Sharma, President, Central Committee
Shri Kamal Chettri, President, Darjeeling Branch Committee
N. Representatives of All India Nepali Scheduled Caste Association
Shri Kaman Singh Ramudamu, President
Shri N.B. Kali Koti, General Secretary

91
Shri Amrit Singh, Legal Advisor
Shri S.K. Vishwakarma
Shri Manoj Shanker
Shri Ashok Lohar
Shri Deepak Sonar
O. Representatives of Shree Biswakarma Samaj
Shri Kaman Singh Ramudamu
Shri Manoj Shankar
Shri Amrit Singh
Shri Vijay Rasaily
Shrimati S. Rasaily
P. Representatives of United Forum Trade Unions of Government Cinchona Plantations
Shri Praveen Gurang, General Secretary
Shri Raju Pradhan
Q. Representatives of All India Tamang Buddhist Association
Shri Y .D. Lama
Shri S.B. Yonzon
R. Representatives of Duars Jana Sangharsa Morcha
Shri Manoj Tamang, General Secretary
Shri Manoj Tigga, President
Shri Dhanu Murmu, Vice-President
Shri Sukhman Morktan, Chief Patron
S. Representatives of Parvatiya Bhojpuri Yuva Manch
Shri Anil Gupta
Shri Umesh Gupta
T . Representatives of Khas Bharatiya Hitkari Sammelan
Shri R.P. Nirolu
Shri Balbhadra Sharma
Shri S.P. Sharma
Shri Tara Pandey
Shri Deepak Bharti
Shri Tilak Kapuwal
Shri Ajay Bhandari
U. Representative of Darjeeling Zilla Bhojpuri Samaj
Shri Arun Gupta
V. Repr esentatives of West Bengal Government Pensioners’ Association, Darjeeling
Shri C.K. Pradhan
Shri B.B. Basnar
W. Repr esentative of East and West Times International
Dr. Manas Banerjee
X. Representatives of Samaj Sewa Samiti
Shrimati Pratima Joshi
Shri Pemba Darjee Lama

92
Y. Representatives of the CPI (M), Darjeeling District Committee
Shri Anand Pathak, Ex-MP
Shri S.P. Lepcha, Ex-MP
Shri K.B. Watter
Shri R.S. Prasad
Z. Individuals
Shri B.B. Thapa, Former Councillor, DGHC
Shri Bharat Patel, Former Nominated Councillor, DGHC
Shri Tara Sundas, Former Councillor, DGHC
Shri Uttam Sharma, Former Nominated Councillor, DGHC
Shri Dambar Siwakoti, Teacher
Shri Mani Kumar Tamang, Tamang Association
Shri C.B. Sinchury, Hill Scheduled Caste Association
ZA. Representatives of All Party Delegation from the West Bengal Legislative Assembly
Shri Sailen Sarkar, Minister in charge of the Parliamentary Affairs and Environment Departments
Shri Asok Bhattacharya, Minister in Charge of the Municipal Affairs and Urban Development
Department
Shri Paresh Chandra Adhikary, Minister in charge of the Food and Supplies Department.
Shri Anadi Kumar Sahu, Minister of State for Labour Department
Shri Sayed Md. Masih. Chief Government Whip
Shri Rabindra Nath Mandal, M.L.A.
Shri Sukhmoith (Piting) Oraon, M.L.A.
Shri Somra Lakra, M.L.A.
Shri Chhotan Kisku, M.L.A.
Shri Nirmal Das, M.L.A.
Shri Santosh Rana, M.L.A.
Shri Brahmanoy Nanda, M.L.A.
Shri Samar Hazra, M.L.A.
Shri Rampada Samanta, M.L.A.
Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, M.L.A.
Shri Pranay Rai, M.L.A.
Shri Daba Prasad Sarkar, M.L.A.
Dr. Manas Ranjan Bhunia, M.L.A.
Shri Deba Prasad Roy, M.L.A.
Dr. Nirjharini Chakraborty, M.L.A.
Shri Goulan Lepcha, M.L.A.
Shri Asit Kumar, M.L.A.
ZB. Representative of Darjeeling Gorkha Hills Council
Shri Subash Ghisingh, Administrator
ZC. Representatives of Government of West Bengal
Shri Amit Kiran Deb, Chief Secretary
Shri P.R. Roy, Additional Chief Secretary
Shri P.K. Pradhan, Principal Secretary, Urban Development Deptt.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.