PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 134
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION 
(REGULATION) BILL, 2006

177
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION
(REGULATION) BILL, 2006
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-259

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—23
4. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 24—27
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 29—56
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................ 57— 176
I. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 ................................................ 59—104
II. Press Communique dated 9th February, 2007 on the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Bill, 2006 .............................................................................................. 105
III. Gist of views/suggestions of individuals on the Bill and comments of the
Ministry of Home Affairs thereon .......................................................................... 106—144
IV . Gist of views/suggestions of Members of the Committee/various
organisations and political parties on the Bill and comments of the
Ministry of Home Affairs thereon; and ................................................................. 145—174
V . List of Individuals/Organisations who appeared before the Committee ........... 175—176

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
22. Shri T.K. Hamza
23. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Vacant
27. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report on the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Bill, 2006 (Annexure I) .
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006,
as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 18 December 2006 and pending therein, to the Committee for
examination and report within three months. Due to preoccupation of the Committee with other
urgent and pressing work relating to Bills and legislative business, extension of time upto the last
week of the Monsoon Session (2007) was initially granted by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for
presentation of the Report. Further extensions were granted by the Chairman, the last being upto
the first week of the Monsoon Session, 2008.
3. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 has been brought to consolidate the law to
regulate the acceptance and utilization of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by certain
individuals or associations or companies and to prohibit acceptance and utilization of foreign
contribution or foreign hospitality for any activities detrimental to the national interest and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill also seeks to repeal the present Act,
namely, The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
4. The Committee issued a Press Communique  (Annexure II)  on the Bill on 9th February
2007 inviting views/suggestions on the Bill. In response thereof, a large number of memoranda
were received. After scrutiny, 52 memoranda were found relevant and forwarded to the Ministry
of Home Affairs for their comments. The Committee also sought views/suggestions of various
political parties on the Bill and received the same from six political parties (Annexure IV) .
5. The Committee in its meeting held on 12th June, 2007, heard the presentation of the Home
Secretary, Government of India on the Bill and held preliminary discussion thereon. The Committee
in its meeting held on 20th June 2007 decided to hear non-official witnesses including
representatives of RBI, SBI, ICICI and HDFC Banks as well as some NGOs on the Bill.
5.1 In its sittings held on 16th and 17th July, and 3rd October 2007, the Committee heard the
views of Dr. Bimal Jalan, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha and ex-Governor, RBI and
representatives of the following organizations on the Bill:
(i) Reserve Bank of India;
(ii) State Bank of India;
(iii) ICICI Bank;
(iv) HDFC Bank;
(v) Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India;
(vi) National Council of Churches in India;
* Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 43741 dated 22nd December, 2006.

(vii) National Council of YMCA of India;
(viii) Representatives of V oluntary Action Network India; and
(ix) Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
5.2 The Committee in its sitting held on 6th November, 2007 and 9th January, 2008 heard the
representatives of Planning Commission on the compatibility of the Bill vis-a-vis National Policy on
V oluntary Sector, a policy document of V oluntary Sector Cell, Planning Commission, Government
of India. The Committee also heard Heads of the four expert groups who had worked on the draft
policy in its meeting held on 9th January 2008.
6. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill its meetings held on
15th and 16th May, 2008.
6.1 The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 29th July, 2008 and
adopted the same.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable
contributions made by the witnesses who deposed before it and facilitated the Committee in
formulating its views on the Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
29 July, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 has been brought with a view to regulate
the acceptance, utilization and accounting of foreign contribution and acceptance of foreign
hospitality by a person or association of companies and to prohibit acceptance and utilization of
foreign contribution or foreign hospitality for any activities detrimental to the national interest and
to replace the present Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
1.1 The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006, inter-alia seeks to:—
(i) consolidate the law to regulate, acceptance and utilization of foreign contribution or
foreign hospitality and prohibit use of the same for any activities detrimental to the
national interest;
(ii) prohibit organizations of political nature, not being political parties from receiving
foreign contribution;
(iii) bring association or company engaged in production or broadcast of audio news or
audio visual news or current affairs programme through any electronic mode or any
other electronic form, or any other mode of mass communication under the purview
of the Bill;
(iv) prohibit the use of foreign contribution for any speculative business;
(v) cap administrative expenses at fifty per cent of the receipt of foreign contribution;
(vi) exclude foreign funds received from relatives living abroad;
(vii) make provision for intimating grounds for refusal of registration or prior permission;
(viii) provide arrangement for sharing of information on receipt of foreign remittances by
the concerned agencies, to strengthen monitoring;
(ix) make registration valid for five years with a provision for renewal for a further period
of five years at a time;
(x) provide for suspension and for cancellation of registration after due enquiry and giving
reasonable opportunity of being heard; and
(xi) make provision for compounding of certain offences.
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULA TION) ACT, 1976
2. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 was enacted to regulate the acceptance and
utilization of foreign contribution or hospitality with a view to ensuring that our parliamentary
institutions, political associations, academic and other voluntary organizations as well as individuals
working in important areas of national life may function in a manner consistent with the values of
a sovereign democratic republic. The Act was amended in 1984 to extend its provisions to cover
second and subsequent recipients of foreign contribution and to the members of higher judiciary,
besides introducing the system of grant of registration to the associations receiving foreign
contribution.
2.1 As stated in the statement of Objects and Reasons of the present Bill, significant
developments have taken place since the enactment of the Act of 1976 and its amendment in 1984

2
such as change in internal security scenario in the country, ever increasing influence of voluntary
organizations, spread of use of communication and information technology, quantum jump in the
amount of foreign contribution being received resulting growth in the number of registered
organizations. This, according to the Government, has necessitated large scale changes in the
existing Act.
NEED FOR NEW LEGISLATION
3. The Ministry of Home Affairs informed this Committee that since the amendment of FCRA,
1976 in 1984, the need for a comprehensive review of the Act had been felt due to various factors
including (i) recommendations made in the Forty-fifth Report of Estimates Committee of the Eighth
Lok Sabha in 1986-87; (ii) recommendations made by the Group of Ministers on Reforming the
National Security System in 2001;  (iii) difficulties faced in the operation of the act because of large
growth in the number of registered organizations and the volume of annual inflow of foreign
contribution, and (iv) concerns expressed by Members of Parliament resulting in large number of
parliament assurances on amendment of Act, pending for fulfillment.
3.1 This Committee was also informed that as a run-up to the new legislation, the Ministry of
Home Affairs had organized a national seminar on FCRA on 24th and 25th June, 2005 which was
attended by more than 500 delegates representing various stakeholders. The suggestions given by
the stakeholders were considered in detail and suitably incorporated in the draft Bill which proposes
to replace the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
PRESENTATION ON THE BILL
4. The Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs made a power-point presentation
on the Bill before the Committee on 12th June, 2007. He stated that the Bill seeks to consolidate
the law to regulate the acceptance and utilization of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by
certain individuals or associations or companies. The Bill also prohibits acceptance and utilization
of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality for any activities detrimental to national interest. The
following salient points were put forth in support of the Bill :—
(i) this Bill is to facilitate foreign contribution for genuine activities;
(ii) transparency in decision making process is the major thrust of the proposed Bill;
(iii) the Bill strengthens the monitoring of receipt and utilization of foreign contribution;
(iv) it prevents diversion of foreign contribution for activities detrimental to national
interest;
(v) foreign contribution if intended for genuine activities can be received either by
registration or obtaining prior permission of the Central Government;
(vi) the preamble of the Bill outlines the emphasis on consolidating the law to regulate
receipt and utilization of foreign contribution and foreign hospitality, and to prohibit
acceptance and utilization thereof for activities detrimental to national interest;
(vii) income from or interest accrueq on foreign contribution is included in the definition
of ‘foreign contribution’ to bring about clarity and ease in accounting;
(viii) amount received as fee, payment in lieu of goods and services rendered, etc. is
excluded from definition of ‘foreign contribution’ to facilitate normal business
activities;
(ix) individuals are also allowed to receive foreign contribution for carrying out genuine
activities;

3
(x) relatives are out of purview of the Act to facilitate normal family remittances;
(xi) electronic media is included in the prohibited category since it plays an important
role in influencing public opinion;
(xii) use of foreign contribution or any income arising out of it for speculative business
is not allowed to ensure that foreign contribution is utilized for genuine welfare
activities;
(xiii) administrative expenses have been capped at fifty percent of the foreign
contribution to prevent diversion of funds from core welfare activities, and to
ensure good governance;
(xiv) grounds for refusal of applications for registration/prior permission are spelt out to
reduce discretion;
(xv) grounds for refusal of registration/prior permission would be intimated to bring in
transparency;
(xvi) registration for a period of five years with a provision for renewal for five years
is to ensure weeding out of defunct organizations;
(xvii) provision has been made for cancellation/suspension of registration to ensure
compliance of law, and proper monitoring of receipt and utilization of foreign
contribution;
(xviii) foreign contribution is to be received in single bank account and utilization is
allowed from multiple accounts as suggested by the stakeholders;
(xix) provision for reporting of receipt of foreign remittances through banking channels
to strengthen monitoring.
ORAL EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES/MEMORANDA FROM PUBLIC
5. The Committee heard a number of witnesses on the Bill including Dr. Bimal Jalan, Member
of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) and former Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI), representatives of
RBI, State Bank of India (SBI), ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank and representatives of various NGOs and
other organizations like Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India, National Council of Churches in
India, National Council of YMCA of India. Witnesses, who deposed before the Committee, have
expressed the following major viewpoints/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill:—
5.1 Suggestions of Dr. Bimal Jalan : Dr. Jalan appeared before the Committee on
16th July, 2007 and expressed his viewpoints on the Bill. He stated that the NGOs, particularly
small organizations engaged in social, health and educational work for disadvantaged sections of the
society were highly concerned about the implications of this Bill. His main concern was about
cumbersome and bureaucratic administrative provisions in the Bill and requested for review of this
aspect with a view to simplifying them. He also made the following suggestions :—
(i) there should be an “automatic route” for registration of NGO’s which receive grants
from Ministries/public sector units/organizations controlled by Central and State
Governments. Registration should be automatically granted to such institutions within
seven days after filing of applications along with a certificate that those are
government-aided. No further information or enquiry is necessary. Similar “automatic
routes” have been set up by Ministry of Finance and other economic ministries for
granting permission in other areas;

4
(ii) accounts of all registered NGOs should be annually audited by qualified Chartered
Accountants as per normal procedure. However, there should be no fifty per cent limit
on administrative expenditure as provided in the Bill. In respect of service
organizations, most of the expenditure could be in the form of salaries allowances for
field-work, and it is not possible to differentiate between administrative expenses and
other expenses, like salaries;
(iii) the validity of registration should be for ten years and not five years;
(iv) except in respect of suspected terrorist activities, there should be no power with the
government for search, seizure and discretionary inspection of NGOs as provided in
the Bill. In respect of terrorist activities such powers should be exercised under anti-
terrorism laws and not under FCR Act Chapter V of the present Bill should be deleted
altogether;
(v) for NGOs, which are not government aided, registration certificates should, be issued
within 30 days. There should be provision for electronic filing so that NGOs do not
have to visit the Ministry for physical filing or follow-up purposes;
(vi) if any NGO is suspected of indulging in illegal activities, the government should have
the power to cancel registration after giving due notice. ‘However, any other penal
action should be taken under laws ‘which are already in place (such as, Foreign
Exchange Management Act);
(vii) the provision in the Bill providing for reporting of foreign remittances by the banks
should be deleted as it will put additional burden on the Banks. The Act should provide
that where there is evidence of suspicious activities, any information, which is
required, will be supplied to the Ministry and penal action may be taken against the
banks not furnishing the required information;
(viii) FCR Act should principally address issues like prohibited class, e.g., political parties,
Member of Parliaments, educational institutions, institutions which government does
not want to be aided by the international agencies, auditing of accounts;
(ix) there is little possibility of FCRA route being used for terror funding as there are other
channels of transferring funds meant for creating internal disturbances, terrorism etc.
Making the provisions in the FCR Bill stringent may result in stifling the legitimate
activities of the NGOs more than their illegitimate activities. It can also impose burden
on NGOs dependent on small grants received from abroad; and
(x) State-aided agencies, Government-funded agencies, official agencies which are
providing funds to any State-recognized agency or anybody who is receiving funds
from official, bilateral/multilateral donors, recognized by the Ministry of Finance, may
be exempted from the purview of FCRA.
5.2 Views of the representatives of Banks: — The Committee heard the views of the Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India, the Chairman, State Bank of India and the representatives of
ICICI and HDFC Banks on 16th July, 2007. The views expressed by them have been summarized
as under:—
(i) definition. of ‘foreign source’ may be modified to exclude Indian companies where
the foreign holding is in excess of fifty percent.
(ii) cancellation of permission to receive foreign contribution may be advised through
interact to avoid delay in receipt of communication in this regard by the bank.

5
(iii) five years restriction for renewal could be dispensed with because this can be
monitored on a regular basis through an electronic system and a unique identification
number.
(iv) there is already a system of reporting suspicious transactions by the bank branches
directly to the Financial Intelligence Unit. Any cash transaction above Rs. 10 lakh or
small transactions aggregating more than Rs. 10 lakh in a month is also reported.
There should be a threshold limit beyond which bank may report. A threshold limit of
Rs. 5 lakh or above may be fixed.
(v) the banks could report certain identified types of remittances but it is difficult to
report all types of foreign remittances.
(vi) voluminous data on foreign remittances will put an extra burden on the financial
institutions, which will increase cost of the banks. It will also divert the focus on
monitoring of suspicious transactions.
(vii) registration number allotted by the Ministry of Home Affairs should be unique and a
relative bank’s code be incorporated in the registration number so that use of the same
certificate for opening an account in different branches of different banks would not
be possible.
(viii) monitoring of entire foreign remittances will slow down the foreign fund flow through
legitimate channels and encourage hawala channels.
5.3 Views of representatives of NGOs and other organizations: The Committee received
several memoranda from various organizations/institutions/individuals. The Committee invited some
of them to appear before it to hear their views/suggestions on the Bill. The list of witnesses is at
Annexure V . The gist of views given in the written memoranda and those expressed by the
witnesses in their oral evidence, are given as under:—
(i) preamble of the Bill should be amended. The use of negative expression- ‘to prohibit’
has the potential to curb the freedom of voluntary sector, which works for the
betterment of the poor. Therefore, the term ‘prohibition’ should be deleted;
(ii) definition of ‘foreign source’ may be modified suitably, so as to exclude Indian
companies with more than fifty percent foreign holding from the purview of the
definition of “foreign source”,
(iii) ‘organisation of political nature’ may be kept in the ‘prior permission category’
instead of putting them in the ‘prohibited category’;
(iv) procedure which has been laid down in the proposed Bill to declare an organization
as being an organization of a political nature puts no onus on the Government, after
an inquiry, to inform the organization whether it has been declared as an organization
of a political nature or not;
(v) the term ‘political nature’ is very subjective. The Government should specify as to
what constitutes an organization of political nature.
(vi) provision under Clause 8(i)(a) prohibiting investment of foreign contribution in
speculative business, may be dropped. According to Section 11(5) of the Income.
Tax Act, there are certain statutory investments in which an NGO can park its funds.
Both the Acts should be synchronized in a manner that one does not contradict the
other;

6
(vii) the restriction of fifty per cent on administrative expenditure may not be practical and
may have a negative effect on the utilization of funds. Further, administrative
expenses cannot be clearly defined;
(viii) the statutory prohibition of fifty per cent should be in the rules and not in the statue;
(ix) there is no time limit for the Government within which it shall grant registration or
renew registration, as per the provisions of clauses 1 and 16 (3), respectively. The
time limit of ninety days may be provided to bring about transparency and
accountability;
(x) registration should be granted liberally and monitoring should be made more effective
since certifying/fulfilling of conditions for grant of registration/prior permission is a
time consuming exercise;
(xi) one of the conditions for grant of registration stipulates that an organization has not
indulged or involved in activities aimed at conversion through inducement or force,
either directly or indirectly, from one religious faith to another. These expressions are
not defined and if these undefined expressions become cause for rejecting an
application for registration, then it will have negative effect;
(xii) another condition for grant of registration is that an organization has not created
communal tension or disharmony in any district or any part of the country. This is
again very broad and undefined expression which may give wide discretion to the
concerned authorities;
(xiii) in Clause 12(3)(a)(ii), the term ‘inducement’ may be replaced by ‘deceit or fraud’ and
the term ‘indirectly’ may be deleted, as these terms are prone to subjective
interpretation;
(xiv) conditions for registration such as activities, not detrimental to national interest; not
involving conversion through inducement or force; not to create communal tensjon
or disharmony; undertaking meaningful activity; any pending prosecution for any
offence; sovereignty and integrity; are very subjective areas and leave room for wide
discretion. These conditions lead to vesting powers with authorities and give scope
for corruption;
(xv) clause 12(3) refers to ‘meaningful activity’. This prevents a new person from
undertaking a good work and also prevents a person presently undertaking a
particular activity from expanding to newer programmes;
(xvi) ‘meaningful activity’ is very subjective, the negative interpretation of which may
discourage the voluntary sector;
(xvii) the words “harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic, regional groups, caste
or communities” mentioned in clause 12(3)(f)(vi) have broad connotations and may
lead to subjective decisions;
(xviii) there is no need for proposed renewal of registration as there are several monitoring
provisions in the Bill;
(xix) the provision of validity of registration certificate for five years will lead to
uncertainty for an organization. The Bill has enough provisions to ensure proper
working such as suspension, seizure and also regular submission of accounts,
auditing etc. This time limit should be removed;

7
(xx) furnishing a certificate from an officer of the bank or authorized person in foreign
exchange on details of foreign contribution received, is not necessary in view of the
provision in the Bill requiring annual report from banks on foreign contribution
received;
(xxi) when an organization ceases to exist or its license is suspended, the funds, after
selling off assets, should go to another organization, doing a similar service;
(xxii) the provision for appeal provided in Clause 31 should not be limited to certain
clauses only and should be made applicable to all sections;
(xxiii) there is no criteria specified or mentioned as to on what ground the Central
Government can exempt a particular organization or individual from the operation of
clause 50. Procedure for grant of exemption under this clause should be included to
bring transparency;
(xxiv) there is no need for a new legislation because enough monitoring is being done
through the Income Tax Act, reporting to the Ministry of Home Affairs, etc. For
national security concerns, amendments with stringent conditions may be brought in
the existing Acts to protect national interest and to curb terrorist activities; and
(xxv) the Bill should be an enabling one and not prohibitive to facilitate the voluntary sector
to do or continue to do what they have been doing. The intended purpose of the Bill
to prevent mis-utilisation of foreign contribution is already being taken care by
FEMA, PMLA and IT Act, etc. The Bill should not be mixed up with the objects of
curbing use of funds for terrorism.
5.4 Views of the political parties: In view of the wide implications of the Bill, the Committee
sought the views of the major National Political Parties. In response six Political Parties had send
their comments on the Bill (Annexure IV) . Views contained in the written comments submitted
by the Political Parties are briefly summarized as under:—
(i) the preamble of the Bill contains the words “to prohibit” whereas in the existing
FCRA, 1976 the words used are “to regulate”. The use of the negative expression-
“to prohibit” has the potential to curb freedom of voluntary sector and hinder its
functioning which works for the betterment of the poor and marginalized.
(ii) the Bill aims at prohibiting “activities detrimental to national interest” which is a
subjective expression and no indicator mentioned anywhere in the Bill as to what
constitute activities detrimental to national interest. Therefore, the words “and to
prohibit acceptance and utilization of foreign contribution and foreign hospitality for
any activities detrimental to the national interest and for matters connected herewith
or incidental thereto” be deleted.
(iii) the definition of “a candidate for election” in clause 2(1) (d) is not explicit as to the
time from when a person shall be considered as “duly nominated”. The words “by
filing his nomination paper with Returning Officer” be inserted after the words “duly
nominated”.
(iv) India is a democratic republic. So everyone has the right to be part of the political
process. Clause 3 (1) (f), whereby the organization of political nature is prohibited
from accepting foreign contribution as specified by the Central Government, seems
to be inconsistent with the rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India. Therefore,
Clauses 3(1)(f), 5(1) and 54 (2) (b) be deleted.

8
(v) in clause 4, the following sub-clause may be added: “(g) by way of scholarship,
stipend or any payment of like nature from any foreign source” .
(vi) cl ause 5 requires reformulation by incorporating within it a time bound post
decisional hearing after declaring an organization as an organization of a political
nature.
(vii) the term ‘any foreign hospitality’ may require a more focussed and appropriate
definition to avoid possibility of uncertainty.
(viii) a provision should be incorporated in the Bill that it shall not be necessary to obtain
any permission for accepting foreign hospitality, if such hospitality is in connection
with religious programme of an individual provided, an intimation is given to the
Central Government within a month of availing hospitality. This is justified in view
of the Fundamental Right to Freedom of Religion.
(ix) prohibition on transferring foreign contribution to other person is detrimental to the
interest of the voluntary organisations. This means that a voluntary organisation
headed by any small group or any right thinking individual will be the ultimate
sufferer because they are the people who are working in the remotest parts of the
country and they will not get the funds unless registered or have obtained prior
permission and will be caught in the quagmire of re-tapism.
(x) the cap of fifty percent on administrative expenses is very high and should be
reduced to twenty-five percent. Government should also have the power to relax the
provision in appropriate cases.
(xi) clause 9(a) prohibits certain persons or organizations from receiving foreign
contribution. Such persons/organizations should be given reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
(xii) clause 11 (3)(ii) restricts the area or areas in which foreign contribution shall be
accepted and utilized, with the prior permission of Central Government. This is
unjust, discriminatory and unconstitutional as it violates the right to equality.
(xiii) clause 12 does not prescribe any period within which the Government is to dispose
of an application for registration or prior permission. New provisions in this clause
may be added prescribing a time period of ninety days for disposing of an application
for registration or prior permission. Otherwise the applicant should be deemed to
have been granted registration or prior permission.
(xiv) the Bill does not define the words ‘inducement’, ‘indirectly’, “not engaged or likely
to engage to propagate sedition etc” leaving it to the subjective interpretation of the
authorized official. These words should be appropriately defined.
(xv) clause 12 (3)(a)(vi) states that the authorized officer is required to be satisfied that
the organization is “not likely to use foreign contribution for personal gains or divert
it for undesirable purposes”. This should also not be left to the subjective assessment
of the concerned official and should be appropriately defined. In certain cases, an
affidavit can be sought.
(xvi) clause 12 (3)(a)(iii) provides reasons for non-registration of an organization if it is
involved in certain activities. It mentions about ‘communal tension’ or ‘disharmony’
as grounds for disallowing registration and does not mention about any organization
promoting caste hatred.

9
(xvii) clause 12 (3)(b)(c) states that the official is required to determine whether the
organization intending to receive foreign funds, has ‘prepared a meaningful project’
and “meaningful activity” for the targeted group. These forward-looking statements
are liable to subjective interpretations of the officers and should be appropriately
defined. In certain cases, an affidavit can be sought.
(xviii) as per the principle of natural justice, a person cannot be held guilty until proven.
However, according to clause 12 (3)(d), even if there is a prosecution pending
against the person, he is prohibited from receiving foreign funds. This will restrict
the number of organizations from obtaining FCRA registration since false cases and
accusations can be levelled against social activists who are working on the right
issues on behalf of the marginalized communities.
(xix) in Clause 12(3)(g), it needs to be clarified that the acceptance of foreign contribution
shall not lead to incitement of an offence by the applicant. The words ‘by the
applicant” may be inserted after the word “offence”.
(xx) clause 12(4) be deleted as the applicant should always have the right to know the
reasons for refusal of his application.
(xxi) clause 16 should contain a provision wherein a person who was made application for
renewal of a registration certificate, within 6 months before the expiry of the period
of the certificate, it should be deemed to have been renewed in the absence of a
decision of the Central Government, before the expiry of the period of the certificate.
(xxii) all organizations receiving foreign contribution should submit yearly audited accounts
to the Government, which should also be published through Website.
(xxiii) clause 38 provides for prohibiting an association from receiving foreign contribution
for a period of three years from the date of second conviction. It should be
amended. Any organization which is convicted of any offence under the Act should
be prohibited from accepting foreign contribution for a period of five years from the
date of first conviction.
(xxiv) a balance should be maintained between national security concerns and the need to
provide a transparent regime for flow of funds for charitable purposes.
(xxv) there are possibilities of by-passing FCRA requirements by channelling the funds
through commercial firms as consultant fees, exports etc. There is a need to plug
the loopholes by appropriate amendments.
(xxvi) it has often been seen that foreign contributions received for noble activities, are
surreptitiously and clandestinely diverted for subversive purpose. Here the question
is, who will be monitoring the corpus of the foreign contribution. Hence the need
of the hour is to make more specific and stringent provisions in the Bill to prevent
such activities.
NATIONAL POLICY ON VOLUNTARY SECTOR VIS-A-VIS THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION
(REGULATION) BILL, 2006
6. During the course of examination of the Bill, representatives of some NGOs who appeared
before the Committee submitted that the provisions of the Bill were not in conformity with the
‘National Policy on V oluntary Sector’ formulated by the Planning Commission. The Committee
noted that the proposal to repeal the FCRA, 1976 and to replace it with a new Act, was considered
and approved by the Cabinet on 9th November, 2006 whereas the National Policy had been in
circulation in draft form since May, 2005, which was notified by the Planning Commission on

10
31st July, 2007. The Committee, in view of the concerns raised in different quarters, decided to
hear the representatives of the Planning Commission in the matter.
6.1 Principal Adviser and Deputy Adviser, Planning Commission appeared before the Committee
on 6th November, 2007 to place the views of the Commission on the proposed Bill vis-a-vis the
National Policy on V oluntary Sector. The Principal Adviser during the course of evidence stated that
there is no conflict between the Bill and the Policy, as far as the Planning Commission is
concerned. He further stated that there is only one major suggestion of the Planning Commission
namely; there should be a mechanism of joint consultations where representatives of the
Government and concerned NGOs may sit together from time to time and suggest changes to make
the FCRA simplified and easier to operate.
6.2 On a query, whether the Planning Commission took into consideration, the recommendations
of the Estimates Committee of Lok Sabha and the Kudal Commission while drafting the policy, the
Principal Adviser stated that four experts groups had been constituted and all the concerned
documentation was taken into account while drafting the Policy. However, the Planning Commission
in its written reply had informed as under:
“while drafting the Policy, inputs available in various documents, such as, the earlier Five
Year Plans, Action Plan for collaborative relationship between Government and Voluntary
Agencies, Report of the Steering Committee on Voluntary Sector for the Tenth Plan, a
write-up on the Role of the Civil Society, which appeared in the Tenth Plan Document, and
the Kudal Commission Report (1987) on Gandhi Peace Foundation and other organizations
were utilized. Shri Sanjay Aggarwal, Account-Aid, who was chairing the Expert Group on
Legal and Operating Environment and Financing Issues set-up for revising the Policy, had
also consulted the Kudal Commission Report. However, the Forty-fifth Report of the
Estimates Committee of the Ministry of Home Affairs presented to the Eighth Lok Sabha
could not be referred to, while drafting the Policy”.
6.2.1 The Committee, therefore, decided to hear the views of the Heads of four experts’ group
and the Secretary, Planning Commission.
6.3 Secretary, Planning Commission alongwith Senior Adviser, V oluntary Action Cell (VAC) and
other representatives of the Commission appeared before the Committee on 9th January, 2008. The
Deputy Adviser (V AC), made a powerpoint presentation before the Committee. During the course
of presentation he stated that the first draft of the policy was prepared by the Planning Commission
during the year 2003 on the recommendations of the joint machinery for collaborative relationship
between Government and V oluntary Sector, under the Chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission. The draft policy was then revised after a meeting of 40 experts on the voluntary
sector, to improve it. It was also decided to constitute four expert groups to further improve upon
the draft policy. The expert groups then met to further modify the policy and on the basis of
changes suggested by the groups, a Cabinet Note was prepared. Meanwhile, the draft policy was
circulated to concerned Ministries/Departments for obtaining their comments. The draft policy
was also forwarded to all States/UTs. The Cabinet considered and approved the policy on
7th May, 2007 and it was notified in the Gazette of India on 31st July, 2007.
6.4 The Deputy Adviser (V AC), Planning Commission further added that the National Policy on
V oluntary Sector 2007 was considered as a significant step towards recognition of the contribution
of the voluntary sector, as it provided legitimacy to the voluntary sector, as well as brought the
desired accountability on their part. He also added that the policy inter-alia provided for review
of FCRA from time to time and simplifying its provisions relating to voluntary organizations.
According to him, the basic objectives of the policy are as under:—

11
(i) to create an enabling environment for V oluntary Organisations that stimulates their
enterprise and effectiveness and safeguards their autonomy.
(ii) to enable V oluntary Organisations to legitimately mobilize necessary financial resources
from India and abroad.
(iii) to identify systems by which the Government may work together with V oluntary
Organisations on the basis of the principles of mutual trust and respect, and with
shared responsibility.
(iv) to encourage V oluntary Organisations to adopt transparent and accountable systems of
governance and management.
6.5 The Committee also heard the heads of expert groups, who had worked on the draft policy
on 9th January, 2008. Commenting on the provisions contained in the policy vis-a-vis the FC(R)
Bill, 2006, the Secretary, Planning Commission as well as the heads of expert groups stated that
the Bill was not incongruous to the National Policy on V oluntary Sector. He also made the following
submissions:—
(i) the Policy only makes a broad suggestion that the provisions of FCRA should be
simplified and reviewed from time to time in consultation with the voluntary
organizations, so that its implementation becomes effective;
(ii) the Policy was formulated in a participatory spirit, involving a number of voluntary
organizations and other stakeholders, over a number of consultations;
(iii) the Policy also suggests having Joint Consultative Forums/Groups of all concerned
Ministries/Departments, as well as at State and District levels having representatives of
voluntary organizations and Government to discuss mutual concerns on a regular basis;
(iv) it is expected that once such a Consultative Forum is set up by the Ministry of Home
Affairs, problems faced by voluntary organizations would be reviewed and resolved on
a regular basis.
6.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs, responding to the views of the Planning Commission, stated
that the National Policy of V oluntary Sector not only advocates for liberal policy of Government
for the growth and development of the voluntary sector but also speaks of tightening administrative
and penal procedure to ensure that the incentives were not misused. It was stated that the proposed
Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives by putting in place an improved monitoring mechanism and
that it was not contrary to the policy. It rather seeks to facilitate voluntary organizations engaged
in bonafide activities.
MAJOR ISSUES RAISED, RESPONSES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS AND
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. Several issues/suggestions were raised/made in the written memoranda submitted to the
Committee and in the oral deposition of the witnesses and by the Members of the Committee. A
statement showing gist of suggestions made and comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs thereon
is placed at Annexure-III. The following are some of the major issues raised and the responses
of the Ministry of Home Affairs thereon:
7.1 Foreign Source
Suggestion
7.1.1 Definition of ‘Foreign Source’ may be modified to exclude Indian companies where the
foreign holding is in excess of fifty per cent since such foreign holding is permitted under FDI
or FII norms.

12
Comments of the Ministry
7.1.2 The definition of ‘foreign source’ provided in the Bill is along the lines of the provision
contained in Section2(1)(e) of the existing FCR Act, 1976. The said provision in the Bill would not
affect the normal operations of Indian companies with foreign holding of more than fifty per cent
which would be governed by various regulations pertaining to foreign investment. The context of
FCRA is different and it is felt that retaining the existing provision would not impact negatively on
those who may want to receive foreign contribution from such companies for their legitimate
activities.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.1.3 The Committee feels that the definition of ‘foreign source’ is vague in relation to
the status of the Indian companies with more than fifty percent foreign holding. The
Committee has been given to understand that such foreign holding is permitted under FDI
or FII norms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Indian companies, where the
foreign holding is in excess of fifty percent, may be excluded from the purview of the
definition of ‘foreign source’ and accordingly the definition may be modified.
7.2 Provision for Scholarship, Stipend etc.
Suggestion
7.2.1 In clause 4, the following sub-clause be added:
“(g) by way of scholarship, stipend or any payment of like nature from any foreign
source.”
Comments of the Ministry
7.2.2 The Home Secretary during the course of his oral evidence stated asunder:
“......we are not providing anything in the Bill, which means that if he is receiving a
stipend, he can continue to receive it however  the Ministry will certainly consider the
recommendations of the Committee.”
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.2.3 The Committee noted that clause 4, as presently worded, does not specifically exclude
the receipt of foreign scholarship or stipend by Indian citizens studying in Indian or foreign
academic institutions from the prohibition as laid down in clause 3. According to the
Committee, scholarship/stipend for academic pursuit ought not to be curbed, directly or
indirectly. In this context, the Committee noted that section 7 of FCRA, 1976 does lay down
a procedure for giving intimation to Central Government about receipt of scholarships/
stipend or any payment of like nature from any foreign source. That section also waives the
requirement of giving information if the annual value of such Scholarship/stipend or any
payment of like nature, does not exceed the prescribed limit.
7.2.4 The Committee is therefore of the considered view that clause 4 may be suitably
amended so that the recipients of scholarship/stipend or any payment of like nature from
bonafide foreign source do not face any problem in that regard.

13
7.3 Time-bound Post Decisional Hearing
Suggestion
7.3.1 Clause 5 requires reformulation by incorporating a time bound post-decisional hearing after
declaring an organization as an organization of a political nature not being a political party.
Comments of the Ministry
7.3.2 Clause 5(2) of the Bill deals with the procedure for notifying an organization of a political
nature and reads as under:
“Before making an order under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall give the
organization in respect of whom the order is proposed to be made, a notice in writing
informing it of the ground or grounds, on which it is proposed to be specified as an
organization of political nature under that sub-section.”
7.3.3 There is, therefore, a provision for giving notice before declaring an association as an
organization of political nature. Further, Clause 5(3) provides the association with an opportunity
to make a representation against the said notice within a period of thirty days and thereby, the
association is provided with a reasonable opportunity of being heard. In view of this provision,
there is no necessity for keeping a provision for post decisional hearing. It is also mentioned that
a set of guidelines to define an organization of political nature not being a political party, will be
included in the rules to be framed under the Act.
7.3.4 The Home Secretary further clarifying the position during the course of his oral evidence,
observed as under:
“in clause 5(3) there is a provision of 30 days for notice period and that period may be
increased. This is in case of a person wanting to represent against such a proposal. Now
there is no time-frame mentioned here for the decision of the authority thereafter. In this
case, my suggestion and humble observation is that this thing starts with a notice being
given to such a person to say why it should not be prohibited. In other words, this clause
starts with the giving of a notice to somebody that why not you should be banned.”
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.3.5 The Committee took note of the fact that clause 5(3) provides for a notice period of
thirty days for the organization to represent during the notice served to them. The
Committee, however, expresses its concern over the fact that there is no provision or a time
frame in the clause for a post-decisional hearing or in other words, there is no provision
for an appellate authority before whom an appeal may be made against the Government’s
decision. In the absence of a time frame and an appellate authority, Government may
procrastinate a decision and during this period of animated suspension, the sword of
damocles will be hanging on the organisation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
a time frame may be provided within which the Government has to take a decision on
specifying an organization of a political nature not being a political party. The clause should
also provide for an appellate mechanism to redress grievances arising out of decisions of the
Central Government under sub-clause (1).
7.4 Foreign Hospitality
Suggestion
7.4.1 Most of the Members of the Committee were of the view that the definition of ‘foreign

14
hospitality’ needs clarity. The words ‘purely casual one’ in clause 2(1)(i) being ambiguous, also
needs to be clarified.
Comments of the Ministry
7.4.2 The Ministry has submitted that the term “foreign hospitality” has been defined in clause
2(1)(i). The restriction on acceptance of ‘foreign hospitality’ as provided for in clause 6 of the Bill,
pertains to a limited category of persons viz. member of a legislature, office bearers of a political
party, judge, government servant or employees of any corporation/body owned or controlled by the
Government. As may be seen that each and every category of person/associations specified in
clause 3(1) where restrictions regarding receipt of foreign contribution have been made are not
covered by clause 6. The import of this restriction on this limited category of persons is based
on the premise that they are not expected to avail of foreign hospitality from any foreign source
in view of their official position. Seen in this light, the exception of ‘not being of a purely casual
one’ could be interpreted as being self explanatory. However, a doubt could arise with reference
to acceptance of foreign hospitality from a citizen of a foreign country who could be a friend,
particularly when any type of foreign hospitality is being offered/availed in a purely personal
capacity by a person travelling abroad. One way of resolving this doubt is to leave the question
of availing of such hospitality to the best judgment of the person concerned depending on what
kind of information has to be given to any official authority because the Bill is not seeking to
restrict people travelling abroad to meet friends, relatives etc. However, any suggestion that the
Committee might make in this regard will be duly considered. .
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.4.3 The Committee having discussed the matter at length, comes to the conclusion that
the definition of ‘foreign hospitality’ is not clear regarding the status of a person i.e.
whether in official or personal capacity, when he/she is on for eign visit. The Committee
feels that this aspect should be adequately clarified and accordingly recommends that the
words “when on official visit” may be added after the words “a person” in clause 2(1)(i).
7.4.4 Likewise, the Committee is of the view that clause 6 does not clarify the status of
a person when travelling abroad i.e. whether in personal or official capacity. The Committee
therefore also feels that the restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality provided in
clause 6 should appropriately apply to a person when one is travelling to a foreign country
in one’s official capacity.
7.5 Transfer of Foreign Contribution to others
Suggestion
7.5.1 Prohibition of transfer of foreign contribution to an other person implies that an NGO
headed by a small group or any right thinking individual, will be the ultimate sufferer because those
are the people who are working in the remotest parts of the country and they will not get the funds
unless they are registered or have obtained prior permission and will be caught in the quagmire of
red-tapism.
Comments of the Ministry
7.5.2 This provision was incorporated in the existing Act in the year 1984 and the same has been
retained in the Bill. The objective of this provision is to monitor the utilization of foreign
contribution received and also to ensure that such foreign contribution is not diverted to

15
associations whose antecedents and credentials have not been verified by the field agencies. This
would prevent diversion and mis-utilisation of foreign contribution received. However, if necessary,
this aspect could be appropriately addressed in the rules.
7.5.3 Home Secretary further clarifying the position during the course of oral evidence, stated as
under:
“Sir, we have said that it would come under rules. You have mentioned about present
system of monitoring in which there have been shortfalls and...some big NGOs are giving
something to anyone and when its complaint come to the notice, this question will rise.
Later, if certificate is to be obtained from District Magistrate that means there has to be
some disclosure. In the first instance we want to give it to someone. If we want to give
it to someone then is it not necessary to verify him. I think it is necessary...possibly, the
arrangement can be that the prior permission on behalf of that particular association could,
perhaps, be taken by the mother NGO so that the problem that is being expressed is
addressed.”
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.5.4 The Committee felt that due to the restriction as aforesaid, the ultimate sufferers
would be the smaller NGOs who are working in remotest parts of the country. They would
not get funds unless registered or have obtained prior permission and they will be victims
of red-tapism. Therefore, as observed by the Home Secretary, the larger organization or the
mother NGO which wants to give funds to smaller organizations should obtain prior
permission and clearance for such transfers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
necessary amendment may be made in this regard in clause 7, specifying or laying down
that an organization which is seeking to transfer the foreign contribution to any other
organization, it should obtain prior permission from the Central Government.
7.6 Administrative Expenditure
Suggestion
7.6.1 Section 8(l)(b) of the Bill is restricting the utilization of foreign contribution for
administrative expenses not exceeding fifty percent of such contribution. The restriction of fifty
percent on administrative expenses may not be practical and may have a negative effect on the
utilization of funds. Further, administrative expenses have not been defined. If at all the restriction
is to be retained, then it should be in the rules and not in the statue. Extent of funds to be used
for administrative purposes should be left to the donor and donee to decide. These expenses would
not be detrimental to the national interest and are outside the objects specified in the preamble of
the Bill. On the other hand, it also suggested that the cap of fifty percent on administrative
expenses was very high and should be brought down to twenty five percent. Further, Government
should have the power to relax the ceiling in appropriate cases.
Comments of the Ministry
7.6.2 The basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the foreign contribution received for specific
tasks is not utilized for activities other than the stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of fifty per cent on administrative expenses has been provided in the proposed Bill as per
the recommendations of ‘GoM’ to prevent diversion of foreign contribution from the core activities
of the association and also to encourage good governance in the voluntary sector. The limit is
considered reasonable keeping in view the diverse nature of the activities undertaken by the NGOs.

16
As an illustration, associations engaged in educational and research activities will have higher
proportion of administrative expenses. The term ‘administrative expenses’ could be defined in the
Rules.
7.6.3 Home Secretary further clarifying the position during the course of oral evidence, stated as
under:
“if the Committee is of the view that administrative expenditure should be defined and then
it should be further reduced, we will most certainly consider this and reduce it.”
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.6.4 The Committee is inclined to agree with the view that in the absence of the
definition of “administrative expenses”, it would be difficult to identify the items of
expenditure under that head. The Committee therefore recommends that the term
“administrative expenses” may be appropriately defined in the Bill.
7.6.5 Having regard to the two opposing viewpoints on the proposed cap on administrative
expenditure and also having regard to the various pros and cons of the matter, the
consensus in the Committee was in favour of endorsing the provision of the ceiling of fifty
percent, of foreign contribution received in a financial year, to meet administrative
expenses, which according to the Committee is a reasonable restriction.
7.7 Time limit for Registration and Grant of Certificate
Suggestion
7.7.1 Clause 12 does not prescribe any period within which the Central Government is to dispose
of an application for registration or prior permission. New provision in this clause may be added
prescribing a period of ninety days for disposing of an application for registration or prior
permission. If no decision is communicated to the applicant, registration or prior permission would
be deemed to have granted.
7.7.2 Clause 16 is silent on the scenario when a person having applied for renewal of certificate
of registration within six months before the expiry of the period of the certificate, does not get
intimation either about renewal or refusal of renewal, by the expiry date of the certificate. It has
been suggested that a deeming provision should be incorporated to the effect that in case no
intimation is received by the applicant by the expiry date of the certificate, it shall be deemed that
the certificate has been renewed.
Comments of the Ministry
7.7.3 V erification of antecedents and activities of the recipient association and the donor(s) is
conducted through designated field agencies. In some cases, a detailed verification of antecedents/
activities of recipient associations and donors is required, which is a time consuming process.
However, a broad timeframe within which applications will have to be considered/cleared may be
prescribed in the rules or guidelines to be framed for implementation of this provision of the Bill.
7.7.4 Home Secretary, further clarifying the position during the course of oral evidence, stated
as under:
“...suppose some application of registration or permission have come up then we may need
to make enquiries in some cases, even about the donor. So, it may take a little bit of time.
You had desired that we should make provisions for prescribing a time limit either in the

17
rules or somewhere else...even for renewal we can make some provision of that kind.
Madam, in the last meeting a point was raised that six months before the date of renewal
comes to an end, he should be required to give application. If it does not happen during
that period, it will be deemed to have been renewed, or, it will remain as a provisional
registration We will certainly make some provisions whereby this concern of the honourable
Committee may be adequately addressed”
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
7.7.5 The Committee observes that clause 12 which is quite exhaustive, does not caste any
obligation upon the Central Government to dispose of an application for grant of certificate
of registration or for prior permission. Thus an applicant may be kept waiting indefinitely
for a decision by the Central Government. The Committee is of the considered view that
the Government should consider prescribing a time limit of ordinarily ninety days for taking
a decision on an application for grant of certificate of registration or giving prior
permission. The Committee is further of the considered view that in case of delay in grant
of certificate or prior permission, beyond the normal period of ninety days, it shall be the
duty of the central Government to record the reasons for such delay in waiting on the lines
of the provisions of sub-clause (4) of clause 12.
7.7.6 The Committee therefore, recommends that the Government should adequately
address the suggestion made by it in the preceding para.
7.7.7 The Committee also recommends that in sub-section (c) of sub-clause (3) of clause
12, the word “meaningful” should be omitted as the expression is liable to be interpreted
subjectively. The Committee further recommends that the word ‘people’ appearing in the
said sub-section, may be substituted by the word ‘society’, which is a better expression, with
reference to the context.
7.7.8 Like in the case of grant of certificate of registration or prior permission, the
Committee feels that in the absence of a time limit for renewal of registration, the
applicant may be kept waiting indefinitely for a final decision. The Committee observed that
there should be a time limit for the purpose of renewal of registration, which could be
ordinarily up to ninety days from the date of application, made under sub-clause (1) of
clause 16. The Committee therefore recommends that the Government should adequately
address the suggestion made in this regard.
7.8 Reporting of Suspicious Transactions
Suggestion
7.8.1 There is already a system of reporting suspicious transactions by the banks’ branches
directly to the Financial Intelligence Unit. Any cash transaction above Rs.10 lakh or small
transactions aggregating more than Rs.10 lakh in a month is also reported. There should be a
threshold limit beyond which the bank may report. A threshold limit of Rs.5 lakh or above may
be considered.
Comments of the Ministry
7.8.2 The threshold limit for reporting of foreign remittance by Banks is proposed to be kept at
Rs.10 lakh and may be finalized at the time of formulation of rules under the Act. The Financial
Intelligence Unit shall be the nodal agency for collection of information pertaining to receipt of
foreign contribution beyond a threshold limit and repeated transactions, even if the amount is

18
slightly less than, or aggregates to a cumulative amount,. which may be slightly less than the
threshold limit. Sufficient measures will be taken to avoid additional burden on the reporting
entities.
7.8.3 Home Secretary further clarifying the position during the course of oral evidence, stated as
under:
“...it is proposed that to have each and every remittance reported is not required and there
would be a threshold limit which would be defined. The threshold limit would be Rs.l0 lakh.
It there is a fund flow of more than Rs.10 Lakh in a transaction or in repeated
transactions, then only, the bank will inform the Financial Intelligence Unit. That is also
part of further strengthening of the financial monitoring. If anything is found to be
suspicious by the bank or the Financial Intelligence Unit, they will report it to the
appropriate authority.”
Observation of the Committee
7.8.4 The Committee recommends that there should be a threshold limit of Rs. 10 lakh
for reporting by banks to specified authority and each bank may be asked to report every
foreign remittance above that limit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
proposed threshold limit may be incorporated in clause 17(2) (a).
Clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill
8. The Committee took up the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sittings held on
15th and 16th May, 2008 wherein the Home Secretary, Secretary, Legislative Department and
Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs were present.
Clause 2
8.1 The clause seeks to define the various terms/expressions used in the Bill.
8.1.1 Clause 2 (1)(i) defines ‘foreign hospitality’.
8.1.2 The issue has already been discussed in this report at paras 7.4.1 and 7.4.2. The
Committee recommends that the words ‘when on official visit’ may be added after the words
‘a person’ in sub-section (i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2.
8.1.3 Clause 2 (1)(G) defines ‘foreign source’.
8.1.4 The status of Indian companies with foreign holdings of more than fifty per cent, in
relation to this definition, has been discussed in paras 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 of this report. The
Committee recommends that such Indian companies may be excluded from the purview of
the definition of ‘foreign source’ and that sub-section (vi) of sub-clause (j) may be suitably
amended.
8.1.5 Clause 2 (1)(k) deals with definition of ‘legislature’.
8.1.6 Having regard to the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the Committee is of the view that
Municipal Councils (for small urban areas) and the Panchayati Raj Institutions should also
be covered by the definition of ‘legislature’. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
sub-clause (k) may be amended accordingly.
8.1.7 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, clause 2 is adopted.

19
Clause 3
8.2 This clause provides for prohibition to accept foreign contribution by certain persons or
associations.
8.2.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 4
8.3 This clause provides that the prohibition to accept foreign contribution under clause 3 shall
not apply in case where such contribution is accepted by way of salary, wages or other
remuneration from any foreign source or by way of payment in the ordinary course of business
transacted in India by the foreign source; or by way of payment in the course of international trade
or commerce or in the ordinary course of business transacted outside India or as an agent of
foreign source in relation to any transaction made by such foreign source with the Central
Government; or State Government or by way of gift or presentation made to him as a member
of any Indian delegation if such gift or present was in accordance with the rules made by the
Central Government with regard to the acceptance or retention of such gift or presentation; or by
way of remittance received in the ordinary course of business through any official channel, post
office or any authorized person in foreign exchange under the Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999; or by way of payment received from the relative of any person referred to in clause 3.
However, in case any foreign contribution received by any person specified under this clause,
such contribution shall be deemed to have been accepted in contravention of the provisions of
clause 3.
8.3.1 The issues connected with this clause have been discussed in paras 7.2.1 and 7.2.2
of the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in paras
7.2.3 and 7.2.4 ibid.
8.3.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations contained in paras 7.2.3 and 7.2.4, the
clause is adopted.
Clause 5
8.4 This clause lays down the procedure to notify an organization of a political nature.
8.4.1 The issues connected with this clause have been discussed in paras 7.3.1 to 7.3.4 of
the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in para
7.3.5 ibid.
8.4.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in para 7.3.5, the clause is
adopted.
Clause 6
8.5 This clause provides for restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality.
8.5.1 The issues connected with this clause have been discussed in paras 7.4.1 and 7.4.2
of the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in paras
7.4.3 and 7.4.4 ibid.
8.5.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in para 7.4.4, the clause is
adopted.
Clause 7
8.6 This clause prohibits the transfer of foreign contribution to any other person.

20
8.6.1 The issues raised in relation to this clause have been discussed in paras 7.5.1 to 7.5.3
of the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in para
7.5.4 ibid.
8.6.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in para 7.5.4, the clause is
adopted.
Clause 8
8.7 This clause contains restriction to utilize foreign contribution for administrative purposes.
8.7.1 The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.6.1 to 7.6.5 of the Report.
8.7.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in paras 7.6.4 and 7.6.5, the
clause is adopted.
Clause 9
8.8 This clause confers power upon the Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign
contribution, etc. in certain cases.
8.8.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 10
8.9 This clause confers power upon the central Government to prohibit payment of currency
received in contravention of the proposed legislation.
8.9.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 11
8.10 This clause contains provisions relating to registration of certain persons with the Central
Government.
8.10.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 12
8.11 This clause seeks to provide for grant of certificate of registration.
8.11.1 The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.7.1 to 7.7.8 of the Report.
8.11.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in paras 7.7.5, 7.7.6 and 7.7.7, the
clause is adopted.
Clause 13
8.12 The clause confers power upon the Central Government to suspend the certificate of
registration up to one hundred and eighty days.
8.12.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 14
8.13 This clause contains provisions relating to cancellation of certificate of registration.

21
8.13.1 The Reserve Bank of India has suggested that the cancellation of permission to
receive foreign contribution may be advised through the website of the Ministry of Home
Affairs to avoid delay in receipt of communication in this regard by the Bank. The
Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed to consider the suggestion at the time of
framing of rules.
8.13.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 15
8.14 This clause contains provisions relating to management of foreign contribution of person
whose certificate has been cancelled.
8.14.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 16
8.15 This clause contains provisions relating to renewal of certificate.
8.15.1 The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.7.2 to 7.7.8 of the Report.
8.15.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in para 7.7.8, the clause is
adopted.
Clause 17
8.16 This clause contains provisions relating to foreign contribution through banks.
8.16.1 The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.8.1 to 7.8.4 of the Report.
8.16.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in para 7.8.4, the clause is
adopted.
Clauses 18-22
8.17 These clauses contain provisions relating to furnishing intimation to the Central Government
regarding granting of certificate of registration etc., maintenance of accounts by every person who
has been granted a certificate of registration or given prior permission under the proposed
legislation, provisions relating to audit of accounts, intimation by candidate for election and disposal
of assets created out of foreign contribution.
8.17.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clauses 23-27
8.18 These clauses contain provisions relating to inspection of accounts or records, seizure of
accounts or records, seizure of article or currency or security received in contravention of the
proposed legislation and disposal of seized articles or currency or security.
8.18.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clauses 28-30
8.19 These clauses contain provisions relating to confiscation of article or currency or

22
security obtained in contravention of the proposed legislation, adjudication and procedure for
confiscation.
8.19.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clauses 31-32
8.20 These clauses contain provisions relating to appeal and revision of orders by the Central
Government.
8.20.1 Both the clauses are adopted without any change.
Clause 33
8.21 This clause provides for punishment of imprisonment for a term which may be extended
to three years or with fine or with both for making false statement, declaration or delivering false
accounts.
8.21.1 The Committee noted that section 177 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) prescribes punishment
of simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 6 months, or with fine which may extend
to Rs. 1000, or with both, to a person who furnishes false information to any public servant. The
Committee also notes that section 181 of IPC prescribes the punishment to a person for giving
false statement on oath or affirmation to public servant etc., which may extend to 3 years, and
shall also be liable to fine. The classification of offences under the said sections of IPC is
comparable to those included in clause 33. In this context, the Committee observed that the
punishment prescribed under that clause is not in consonance with sections 177 and 181 of IPC.
The Committee therefore recommends that clause 33 may be re-visited so that it is in tune with
the said sections of IPC.
8.21.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clauses 34-37
8.22 These clauses provide for penalty for article or currency or security obtained in
contravention of clause 10; punishment for contravention of any provision of the proposed
legislation; confers power upon the court to impose additional fine where article or currency or
security is not available for confiscation; provides for penalty for offences where no separate
punishment has been provided under the proposed legislation.
8.22.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clause 38
8.23 Clause 38 deals with prohibition of acceptance of foreign contribution. It provides for
punishment of debarring a person from accepting any foreign contribution for a period of three
years for the second or subsequent convictions under clauses 35 and 37.
8.23.1 The Committee felt that in a second or subsequent conviction, a person should be
debarred from accepting any foreign contribution for five years instead of three years, as
provided in the Clause. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary amendment
may be made in Clause 38 accordingly.
8.23.2 Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.

23
Clauses 39-41
8.24 These clauses provide for offences by companies; bar to prosecution of offences under the
Act; and composition of certain offences.
8.24.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clauses 42-54
8.25 These clauses provides for miscellaneous provisions covering inter-alia power to call for
information or document, investigation into cases under the Act, protection of action taken in good
faith, power of Central Government to give directions, power to make rules, power to exempt in
certain cases etc.
8.25.1 The clauses are adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
8.26 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2006” and ‘Fifty-seventh” to be
substituted by “2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, wherever these occur.

24
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—
AT A GLANCE
FOREIGN SOURCE
The Committee feels that the definition of ‘foreign source’ is vague in relation to
the status of the Indian companies with more than fifty percent foreign holding. The
Committee has been given to understand that such foreign holding is permitted under FDI
or FII norms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Indian companies, where the
foreign holding is in excess of fifty percent, may be excluded from the purview of the
definition of ‘foreign source’ and accordingly the definition may be modified. (Para 7.1.3)
PROVISION FOR SCHOLARSHIP, STIPEND ETC.
The Committee noted that clause 4, as presently worded, does not specifically exclude
the receipt of foreign scholarship or stipend by Indian citizens studying in Indian or foreign
academic institutions from the prohibition as laid down in clause 3. According to the
Committee, scholarship/stipend for academic pursuit ought not to be curbed, directly or
indirectly. In this context, the Committee noted that section 7 of FCRA, 1976 does lay down
a procedure for giving intimation to Central Government about receipt of scholarships/
stipend or any payment of like nature from any foreign source. That section also waives the
requirement of giving information if the annual value of such scholarship/stipend or any
payment of like nature, does not exceed the prescribed limit.
The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that clause 4 may be suitably
amended so that the recipients of scholarship/stipend or any payment of like nature from
bonafide foreign source do not face any problem in that regard. (Para 7.2.3, 7.2.4)
TIME-BOUND POST DECISIONAL HEARING
The Committee took note of the fact that clause 5(3) provides for a notice period of
thirty days for the organization to represent during the notice served to them. The
Committee, however, expresses its concern over the fact that there is no provision or a time
frame in the clause for a post-decisional hearing or in other words, there is no provision
for an appellate authority before whom an appeal may be made against the Government’s
decision. In the absence of a time-frame and an appellate authority, Government may
procrastinate a decision and during this period of animated suspension, the sword of
damocles will be hanging on the organisation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
a time-frame may be provided within which the Government has to take a decision on
specifying an organization of a political nature not being a political party. The clause should
also provide for an appellate mechanism to redress grievances arising out of decisions of the
Central Government under sub-clause (1). (Para 7.3.5)
FOREIGN HOSPITALITY
The Committee having discussed the matter at length, comes to the conclusion that
the definition of ‘foreign hospitality’ is not clear regarding the status of a person i.e.
whether in official or personal capacity, when he/she is on for eign visit. The Committee
feels that this aspect should be adequately clarified and accordingly recommends that the
words “when on official visit” may be added after the words “a person” in clause 2(1)(i).
24

25
Likewise, the Committee is of the view that clause 6 does not clarify the status of
a person when travelling abroad i.e. whether in personal or official capacity. The Committee,
therefore, also feels that the restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality provided in
clause 6 should appropriately apply to a person when one is travelling to a foreign country
in one’s official capacity. (Para 7.4.3, 7.4.4)
TRANSFER OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION TO OTHERS
The Committee felt that due to the restriction as aforesaid, the ultimate sufferers
would be the smaller NGOs who are working in remotest parts of the country. They would
not get funds unless registered or have obtained prior permission and they will be victims
of red-tapism. Therefore, as observed by the Home Secretary, the larger organization or the
mother NGO which wants to give funds to smaller organizations should obtain prior
permission and clearance for such transfers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
necessary amendment may be made in this regard in clause 7, specifying or laying down
that an organization which is seeking to transfer the foreign contribution to any other
organization, it should obtain prior permission from the Central Government. (Para 7.5.4)
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE
The Committee is inclined to agree with the view that in the absence of the
definition of “administrative expenses”, it would be difficult to identify the items of
expenditure under that head. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the term
“administrative expenses” may be appropriately defined in the Bill.
Having regard to the two opposing viewpoints on the proposed cap on administrative
expenditure and also having regard to the various pros and cons of the matter, the
consensus in the Committee was in favour of endorsing the provision of the ceiling of fifty
percent, of foreign contribution received in a financial year, to meet administrative
expenses, which according to the Committee is a reasonable restriction. (Para 7.6.3, 7.6.5)
TIME LIMIT FOR REGISTRATION AND GRANT OF CERTIFICATE
The Committee observes that clause 12 which is quite exhaustive, does not caste any
obligation upon the Central Government to dispose of an application for grant of certificate
of registration or for prior permission. Thus an applicant may be kept waiting indefinitely
for a decision by the Central Government. The Committee is of the considered view that
the Government should consider prescribing a time limit of ordinarily ninety days for
taking a decision on an application for grant of certificate of registration or giving prior
permission. The Committee is further of the considered view that in case of delay in grant
of certificate or prior permission, beyond the normal period of ninety days, it shall be the
duty of the Central Government to record the reasons for such delay in waiting on the lines
of the provisions of sub-clause (4) of clause 12.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should adequately
address the suggestion made by it in the preceding para.
The Committee also recommends that in sub-section (c) of sub-clause (3) of clause
12, the word “meaningful” should be omitted as the expression is liable to be interpreted
subjectively. The Committee further recommends that the word ‘people’ appearing in the
said sub-section, may be substituted by the word ‘society’, which is a better expression, with
reference to the context.
Like in the case of grant of certificate of registration or prior permission, the
Committee feels that in the absence of a time limit for renewal of registration, the

26
applicant may be kept waiting indefinitely for a final decision. The Committee observed that
there should be a time limit for the purpose of renewal of registration, which could be
ordinarily up to ninety days from the date of application, made under sub-clause (1) of
clause 16. The Committee therefore recommends that the Government should adequately
address the suggestion made in this regard. (Para 7.7.5, 7.7.6, 7.7.7, 7.7.8)
REPORTING OF SUSPICIOUS TRANSACTIONS
The Committee recommends that there should be a threshold limit of Rs. 10 lakh
for reporting by banks to specified authority and each bank may be asked to report every
foreign remittance above that limit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
proposed threshold limit may be incorporated in clause 17(2) (a). (Para 7.8.4)
Clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill
Clause 2
The issue has already been discussed in this report at paras 7.4.1 and 7.4.2. The
Committee recommends that the words ‘when on official visit’ may be added after the words
‘a person’ in sub-section (i) of sub-clause (I) of clause 2. (Para 8.1.2)
8.1.3 Clause 2 (1) (j) defines ‘foreign source’.
The status of Indian companies with foreign holdings of more than fifty per cent, in
relation to this definition, has been discussed in paras 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 of this report. The
Committee recommends that such Indian companies may be excluded from the purview of
the definition of ‘foreign source’ and that sub-section (vi) of sub-clause (j) may be suitably
amended. (Para 8.1.4)
Definition of ‘legislature’.
Having regard to the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the Committee is of the view that
Municipal Councils (for small urban areas) and the Panchayati Raj Institutions should also
be covered by the definition of ‘legislature’. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
sub-clause (k) may be amended accordingly. (Para 8.1.6)
Procedure to notify an organization of a political nature.
The issues connected with this clause have been discussed in paras 7.3.1 to 7.3.4 of
the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in para
7.3.5 ibid. (Para 8.4.1)
Restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality.
The issues connected with this clause have been discussed in paras 7.4.1 and 7.4.2
of the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in paras
7.4.3 and 7.4.4 ibid. (Para 8.5.1)
Prohibition of transfer of foreign contribution to any other person
The issues raised in relation to this clause have been discussed in paras 7.5.1 to 7.5.3
of the Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained in para
7.5.4 ibid. (Para 8.6.1)

27
Restriction to utilize foreign contribution for administrative purposes
The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.6.1 to 7.6.5 of the Report. (Para 8.7.1)
Grant of certificate of registration.
The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.7.1 to 7.7.8 of the Report. (Para 8.11.1)
Cancellation of certificate of registration.
The Reserve Bank of India has suggested that the cancellation of permission to
receive foreign contribution may be advised through the website of the Ministry of Home
Affairs to avoid delay in receipt of communication in this regard by the Bank. The
Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed to consider the suggestion at the time of
framing of rules. (Para 8.13.1)
Renewal of certificate
The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.7.2 to 7.7.8 of the Report. (Para 8.15.1)
Foreign contribution through banks
The issues raised and observations/recommendations of the Committee are contained
in paras 7.8.1 to 7.8.4 of the Report. (Para 8.16.1)
Punishment of imprisonment for making false statement, declaration or delivering false
accounts.
The Committee noted that section 177 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) prescribes
punishment of simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 6 months, or with fine
which may extend to Rs. 1000, or with both, to a person who furnishes false information
to any public servant. The Committee also notes that section 181 of IPC prescribes the
punishment to a person for giving false statement on oath or affirmation to public servant
etc., which may extend to 3 years, and shall also be liable to fine. The classification of
offences under the said sections of IPC is comparable to those included in clause 33. In
this context, the Committee observed that the punishment prescribed under that clause
is not in consonance with sections 177 and 181 of IPC. The Committee therefore
recommends that clause 33 may be re-visited so that it is in tune with the said sections of
IPC. (Para 8.21.1)
Prohibition of acceptance of foreign contribution
The Committee felt that in a second or subsequent conviction, a person should be
debarred from accepting any foreign contribution for five years instead of three years, as
provided in the Clause. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary amendment
may be made in Clause 38 accordingly. (Para 8.23.1)
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2006” and ‘Fifty-seventh” to be
substituted by “2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, wherever these occur. (Para 8.26)

MINUTES

30

31
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, June 12th, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
10. Shri Biren Singh Engti
11. Shri Tapir Gao
12. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
14. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary
3. Shri G.S. Patnaik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Anuj Sharma, Deputy Secretary
5. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and recapitulated
the work done by it on the Cr.PC Amendment Bill, 2006. She then apprised Members that as
per practice, the Home Secretary will make a presentation on the various provisions of the FCR
31

32
Bill, 2006. She also informed the Members that the Committee would take up in-house discussion
on that Bill on 20th and 21st June, and the clause-by-clause consideration of the former Bill on
5th and 6th July 2007, respectively.
2.1 The Chairperson then informed that the Committee would undertake its study visit to
Lakshadweep and Diu, tentatively, from 5th to 10th October, 2007 in connection with the
examination of Administration of UTs without legislatures.
3. The Chairperson welcomed the Home Secretary along with his colleagues to the meeting of
the Committee and apprised him about the procedure followed by the Committee after a Bill is
referred to it for examination and report. She requested the Home Secretary to compare the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 with the existing Act in his presentation, giving the reasons for
necessitating the Bill; the new provisions in the Bill and benefits likely to accrue from them and
the provisions of the existing Act which had been dropped in the Bill. She also informed him that
since the Bill was important and of public interest, a press communique had been issued by the
Secretariat soliciting views/suggestions from individuals/organizations in response to which a large
number of memoranda had been received from different quarters.
4. The Additional Secretary in the Ministry then made a comprehensive power point
presentation covering inter alia the imperatives for piloting the Bill, its focus, history of foreign
contribution and the FCRA, 1976, amendments brought in 1984, recommendations of Estimates
Committee and Group of Ministers on reforming the National Security System, for changes in
FCRA, 1976, the operational difficulties in the existing Act, consultations done for the new Bill, its
salient features and the suggestions of various organizations on the Bill.
5. The Chairperson then raised a query pertaining to giving opportunity to an organization of
being heard at the time of registration as well as deregistration. She also felt that the grounds for
deregistration should be given in writing as was being done in case of grounds of refusal of
registration. The Additional Secretary responded to the query as well as suggestion of the
Chairperson and stated that these were provided in clauses 13 and 14 of the Bill.
6. One Member raised several queries which inter alia included the flow of foreign
contribution and the procedure regarding permission for soliciting the foreign contribution. The
Member also enquired about the benefits which the new provision would bring for the genuine
contributors and the recipients under FCRA.
7. Another Member raised several issues relating to the definition of certain terms appearing
in the Bill. He also wanted to know about the number of cases in which foreign contribution was
used for activities detrimental to national interest and the action taken against the people involved
in those cases; the number of recommendations made by the Estimates Committee which have been
accepted; the existing mechanism for monitoring of recipients and the problems faced; the law for
preventing the receipt and utilization of unauthorized foreign contribution.
8. The Chairperson also suggested for updating all the information in the website of the
Ministry of Home Affairs relating to foreign contributions such as organizations registered, and
those deregistered for want of information sought and sources of receipt of foreign contribution
etc., if the same do not exist at present.
9. The representatives of the Ministry replied to some of the queries of Members and assured
the Committee to furnish written replies to other queries.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 1.21 
P.M.

33
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 20th June, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri T.K. Hamza
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
11. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
12. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
13. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary
3. Shri G . S. Patnaik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Anuj Sharma, Deputy Secretary
5. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
33

34
2. The Chairperson recapitulating the previous meeting in which the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs made a detailed presentation on the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Bill, 2006, mentioned that the question-answer session which had remained inconclusive would be
resumed on the Bill in the meeting. She then welcomed the Home Secretary along with his
colleagues to the continued question-answer session. The Members thereafter asked questions and
sought clarifications on the various provisions of the Bill.
3. One Member raised the issue of scope and interpretation of National interest. He also
expressed his apprehension that organizations concerning minority communities were likely to be
the target of misuse of the Bill. He was of the view that details of donor organization/individuals
should be made public.
3.2 Another Member raised the issue of monitoring of the organizations, as to whether the MHA
would like to take help from State Governments for the purpose and whether the Ministry could
evolve a process for getting certificates from State Governments regarding the organizations
receiving foreign contribution on the lines it was being done with the NGOs which was funded
by various departments of the Government. The Home Secretary replied to the queries.
4. Responding to the points the Home Secretary stated that the term National interest had been
used only in the long title of the Bill and not in any other substantive clause of the Bill. He agreed
to the view that details of donors be made public and assured that the Ministry would examine this
issue to see its practicability and viability.
5. Another Member raised the point of monitoring machinery/mechanism to ensure that
Foreign Contribution received had been utilized for the purpose it had been mentioned in the
registration. Responding to the query, the Home Secretary explained that though it may not be
possible to monitor all the 30,000 organizations but a mix of mechanism like recipients of Foreign
Contribution beyond a threshold limit, some top recipients in each State and cases where there was
a complaint were to be monitored to ensure that Foreign Contribution had been utilized for the
purpose it was meant.
6. One member felt that 50% limit on administrative expenses was too high and was likely to
be misutilised and questioned its rationale.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. After a brief discussion the Committee decided to have oral evidence of experts like former
RBI Governors; Dr. Bimal Jalan who happened to be a member of the Council of States and
Dr. C. Rangarajan and the present Governor, Shri Y .V . Reddy; Chairpersons of two commercial
banks one public sector (SBI) and one private sector’ (ICICI) on some specific aspects relating
to banking transaction referred in the Bill. The Committee also decided to have the views of the
political parties on the Bill. The Committee also decided to hear some NGOs that have submitted
written Memoranda on the Bill.
A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

35
XXX
THIRTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 16th July, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Raghunath Jha
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Bimal Jalan, MP, Rajya Sabha
2. Shri V . Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, RBI
3. Shri O.P. Bhatt, Chairman, SBI
4. Shri A.D. Chaudhary, CGM, Banking Operations, SBI
5. Shri Rajender Sehgal, Country Head, Financial Institutions and Government Business Group,
HDFC Bank Ltd.,
6. Ms. Madhuri Puri Buch, Executive Director, ICICI Bank Ltd.
7. Shri Pramod Rao, Sr. General Manager, ICICI Bank Ltd.
35

36
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Ashim Khurana, Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Anuj Sharma, Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to hear Dr. Bimal Jalan, MP (RS) and former Governor,
RBI and the representatives of RBI, SBI, HDFC Bank and ICICI Bank on the provisions of Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006. She then welcomed Dr. Bimal Jalan to the meeting of the
Committee and invited him to share his views on the Bill.
3. The witness thanked the Chairperson and the Committee for giving him the opportunity to
share his views with it. He then referred to the changes which had taken place since the enactment
of the FCRA, 1976 and mentioned that in the present context no illegal activities would possibly
take place or funds transmitted through FCRA route because of many other routes/channels were
available for influx of foreign currency for financing activities detrimental to unity and integrity of
the country. He, therefore, suggested that the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 should
confine itself to the basic issues such as persons ineligible to receive foreign contributions,
registration of recipients of foreign funds, etc. He felt that FCRA should be so simple that any
information received about any organization could be tracked easily. He also suggested deletion of
certain chapters of the Bill as he felt those were uncalled for. He stated that the Bill should be made
positive rather then negative.
4. The Chairperson and Members raised some queries to the witness which were responded
to by him.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of RBI and SBI to the meeting and
invited them to submit their views on the FCR Bill, 2006 and particularly clause 17 of the Bill. She
also reminded the witnesses 8about the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of the
deliberations in the Committee till it submits its report to Parliament.
6. The Deputy Governor, RBI, thanked the Chairperson and the Committee for giving him the
opportunity to express the views of RBI on the Bill. He then stated that the Government brought
the Bill in consultation with the RBI as far as provisions pertaining to the banking industry were
concerned. However referring to clause 17 of the Bill, he felt that the foreign exchange transactions
would include NRI deposits, FCNR deposits, etc. and if all these transactions were to be included,
the data would be so voluminous that finding suspicious transactions would be impossible and in
the process the focus would be lost. He felt that it would not serve the intended purpose. He also
shared the views with the Committee that the remittances coming though NRI, FCNR deposits
were very important for the country as they were non-debt remittances and that by implementing
clause-I7 of the Bill such remittances would be discouraged and Hawala and Hundi transactions
would take over. He also mentioned that the existing system of reporting suspicious transactions
by the banks’ branches directly to the Financial Intelligence Unit was enough for checking mis-
utilization or wrong utilization of foreign remittances. He also suggested that if clause 17 were to
stay there should be some threshold limit.
7. The Chairman, State Bank of India thanked the Chairperson and Members of the Committee
for giving SBI the opportunity to share its views. He then endorsed the views expressed by the
Deputy Governor, RBI on clause 17 of the Bill. He also made the following suggestions:
(a) application for registration requires providing the name of the bank through which the
contribution would be received and if the unique registration number allotted by the Ministry

37
and relative bank’s code are integrated, the use of same certificate for opening account in
different banks would not be possible;
(b) cancellation of permission to receive such contribution should be advised through the
website to expedite dissemination of such information;
(c) registration certificates which are used for opening account should be cancelled/effaced
after it is used once for opening an account in order to prevent its misuse;
(d) list of entities registered alongwith the unique registration number and other details of the
principal bankers should be made available online;
(e) banks should be allowed to decide the branches which would be designated for receiving
remittances; and
(f) banks should be allowed to procure a certificate of utilization from the account holder under
the seal of a Chartered Accountant.
8. The Chairperson and Members posed several queries to the witnesses, which were
responded to by them. Besides, the Deputy Governor, RBI assured the Committee to send written
replies to some of the queries which could not be answered.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of HDFC and ICICI Banks and
requested them to share their views on the Bill and particularly the clause 17.
10. The representative of ICICI Bank thanking the Chairperson and the Members of the
Committee for giving her the opportunity to present the views of her bank made the following
submissions:—
(i) As regards the reporting requirement under Section 17 of the Bill, if banks are
required to report all types of foreign remittances there would be voluminous flow of
information which could prove expensive to analyse. In addition, the implementation
of this kind of reporting could possibly lead to migration of some of the remittances
to the non-formal or informal system of remittances instead of the flows coming in
through the normal banking channels. This may result in a setback to the aims and
objectives of the proposed law;
(ii) In terms of utilization of the monies received in the accounts, it is within the control
of the accountholder or the beneficiary. Even though banks maintain all such
transactions the volume of such transactions in all such accounts would be very large.
(iii) B anks already report to the Financial Intelligence Unit under Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 1999 and the rules made there under. All such reporting requirements
could be harnessed by incorporating the additional information that is required under
the proposed Bill. This may be done in consultation with the banking representatives
such as Reserve Bank of India, Indian Banks Association, etc.; and
(iv) The definition of ‘foreign source’ or ‘foreign contribution’ under the Bill also includes
contributions received from the Indian Companies where foreign holding is in excess
of 50 per cent. Such foreign holding is permitted by foreign direct investment norms
or by the foreign institutional investors or other foreign investors, including NRls
under FEMA. Therefore, the definition of ‘foreign source’ could exclude this set of
companies or the definition of ‘foreign contribution’ could exclude the same.
11. The representative of HDFC Bank, while agreeing with the suggestions made by the
representative of the ICICI Bank, made the following additional submissions:

38
(i) The banks have already a system called ‘Online Tax Accounting System. If each
account which is opened has a unique identification number the information pertaining
to that account can be downloaded on the server of the Ministry of Home Affairs on
a regular basis. That would probably bring in a vigil the Bill is looking for;
(ii) If there is an electronic system and a unique identification number, the five years
restriction can be dispensed with because all these things can be scrutinized on a
regular basis; and
(iii) Presently anybody who wants to apply for permission can open an account with the
bank which initially is an inoperative account till the permission is received. Presently,
there is no provision under which the Ministry of Home Affairs has to inform the
banks that the permission has been granted or rejected. Due to this, many inoperative
accounts continue for a long time. If a system is evolved by which the permission
whether granted or rejected is informed to the bank, then such accounts can be
weeded out for which permission is not forthcoming.
12. The Chairperson and Members raised some queries, which were clarified.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
13. The Committee then adjourned at 4.48 
P.M.

39
XXXI
THIRTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 17th July, 2007 in Room No. 53, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Raghunath Jha
12. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
13. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India
1. Arch. Bishop Stanislaus Fernandes, Secretary General
2. Dr. Babu Joseph, Spokesperson
3. Dr. Julian Francis, Advocate, Supreme Court of India
Representatives of National Council of Churches in India
1. Rev. Dr. Enos Das Pradhan, General Secretary CNI Synod and Chairman, NCCI
Commission on Polity and National Governance
2. Mrs. Sharada Manohar Rao, Vice-President, NCCI
3. H.G . Bishop Pathros Mar Osthathcos, Auxiliary Bishop of Delhi, Malankara Jacobite Syrian
Orthodix Church
39

40
4. Bishop S.S. Singh, Methodist Church in India, Delhi Regional Conference
5. Rev. Fr. Jayan Thomas, Mar Thoma Church
6. Mr. Sanjay Patra, FCA, Executive Director, FMSF
7. Mr. Joselyn Martins, FCA, J.A. Martins and Co. Chartered Accountants.
Representatives of National Council of YMCA of India
1. Mr. W .I. Judson, Finance Secretary, National Council
2. Mr. J.P. Fernandes, General Secretary, YMCA, Nagpur
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairperson informed the Members of the Committee that the
representatives of Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India (CBCI) would make their submission on
the provisions of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Bill, 2006.
2.1 She then welcomed the representatives of CBCI to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them of the purpose of the meeting and the procedure followed by the Committee. She
then invited and requested them to make their submission.
3. The representatives of the CBCI thanked the Chairperson for giving the opportunity to share
the views of the Conference and made the following submissions: (i) There was no need for the
new legislation when the present Act was in place; (ii) National Policy on the V oluntary Sector,
2007, sought to encourage voluntary sector to contribute to the social, intellectual and economic
advancement of the people of India whereas the FCR Bill, 2006 was a legislation discouraging the
voluntary sector in the guise of monitoring; (iii) The Bill was prohibitive in nature; (iv) Clause 8
of the bill, restricted the utilization of foreign contribution and the provision would not be practical;
(v) The provision restricting the validity of certificate of registration for five years would have
negative effect on the voluntary sector; (vi) The objectives sought to be achieved by the Bill, can
be achieved by amending other enactments; (vii) The provision regarding bar on utilization of more
than 50% of the foreign contribution on administrative purposes was prohibitive; (viii) The criteria
for granting certificate of registration were unnecessary and vesting powers with such unlimited
or undefined expression will result in corruption; (ix) The five years limit on the registration should
be removed; (x) The assets and funds of the organization whose license was suspended, should
go to another organization doing similar service instead of the Government.
4. The Chairperson and Members raised several queries, which were replied to by the
witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of National Council of Churches in
India (NCCI) and requested them to make their submissions.
6. The General Secretary of the NCCI and other representatives thereof made the following
submissions: (i) After several rounds of discussion the organization feels that the proposed
legislation should be withdrawn, (ii) the monitoring of the foreign currency coming through NGOs
was a very small part and the preamble to the Bill only sought to address that whereas a major
part of foreign currency was being monitored by the existing laws. He suggested that the
procedure laid down in proposed clause 5 (1) of the Bill should be changed according to the
provision in the existing act; (iii) Provision under proposed clause 8 (i) (a) of the Bill should
be dropped as it would be taken care of by section 11 (5) of the Information Technology Act;

41
(iv) Use of funds for administrative purposes under section 8 (1) (b) and 8 (2) should be left to
the decision between the donor and the receiver because the term administrative expenses was very
subjective. Therefore, the provision regarding administrative expenses not to exceed fifty per cent
of the foreign contribution should be dropped; (v) Consequent upon the announcement of the
National Policy on V oluntary Sector. It is expected that in future all registration would be done in
consonance with the National Policy; (vi) The proposed clause 15 (1) regarding the management
of foreign contributions of persons whose certificate had been cancelled should be so amended that
it goes to some other organization instead of going to the Central Government.
7. The Chairperson and Members raised several queries arising out of the submissions, which
were responded to by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of National Council of YMCA of India
and requested them to make their submission.
9. The representatives of the National Council of YMCA too expressed concerns about the
provisions of the Bill which were discouraging to the NGOs. According to them the focus of the
Bill should be on improvement of financial management instead of controlling the foreign fund.
10. The Chairperson and Members raised queries, which were replied to by them.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 1.42 
P.M.

42
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 3rd October, 2007 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri N. Jothi
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
10. Shri Biren Singh Engti
11. Shri Tapir Gao
12. Shri T.K. Hamza
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Ajit Jogi
15. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
16. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Voluntary Action Network India
1. Shri Rama Reddy, President
2. Shri Paresh Tewary, CEO
3. Shri Jagadananda, Member
4. Shri Sharad Joshi, Treasurer
42

43
Representatives of Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1. Shri V . Murali, Vice Chairman, Corporate and Allied Laws Committee
2. Dr. Alok Ray, Secretary, Corporate and Allied Laws Committee
3. Shri Atul Gupta
4. Shri Sunil Jain
5. Shri Deepender Agarwal
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri S.K. Sahi, Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about the agenda of the
meeting i.e. to discuss the Foreign Contribution Regulation Bill, 2007. The Chairperson thereafter
welcomed the representatives of V oluntary Action Network India and asked them to make a
presentation on the provisions of the Bill.
3. The representatives of V oluntary Action Network India made a presentation on the Bill. The
following points were discussed during the meeting:—
(i) There should be a single law in this country to handle the foreign fund flowing into
the country. It was stated that the law should not excessively control the activities of
the civil society organizations and NGOs;
(ii) R egistration should be granted liberally and monitoring should be made more effective
since fulfilling of conditions for grant of registration/prior permission is a time
consuming exercise;
(iii) D efinition of foreign source may be modified suitably. Income arising from
investments made through foreign funding should not be treated as foreign funding as
it would become perpetual in nature and would be difficult to account for. Indian
companies with more than fifty per cent foreign holding may be kept out from the
purview of the definition of “foreign source”;
(iv) The term ‘Political nature’ being very subjective, Government should specify as to
what constitutes an organization of political nature. Organisation of political nature
may be kept in the prior permission category instead of putting them in the prohibited
category. The procedure which has been laid down in the proposed Bill to declare an
organization as being an organization of a political nature puts no onus on the
Government after an inquiry, to inform the organization whether it has been declared
as an organization of a political nature or not;
(v) There is no need for a new legislation because there is already much monitoring
being done through the Income Tax, reporting to the Ministry of  Home Af fairs, etc.
For national security concerns, amendments with stringent conditions may be brought
in the existing Acts to protect national interest and to curb terrorist activities; and
(vi) The Bill should be an enabling one and not prohibitive to enable the voluntary sector
to do or continue to do what they have been doing. The intended purpose of the Bill
to prevent mis-utilisation of foreign contribution is already being taken care of by
FEMA, PMLA and IT Act, etc.
4. Members raised some queries which were replied to.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

44
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 6th November, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
9. Shri T.K. Hamza
10. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
11. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Planning Commission
1. Shri S.N. Das, Principal Advisor
2. Dr. Lalit Kumar, Deputy Advisor
44

45
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members and apprised them that the meeting
had been convened to take evidence of Dr. S.N. Das, Principal Advisor, Planning Commission on
FC (R) Bill, 2006.
3. The Chairperson then informed the Members that the Committee had been given extension
upto the last week of the Winter Session, 2007 for presenting its report on the Bill. She however,
stated that the Committee required one sitting to hold in-house discussion on the Bill, two sittings
for clause-by-clause consideration and one more sitting for adoption of the report. The Committee
after some discussion felt that it would not be possible for it to present the report on the Bill during
the Winter Session. The Committee accordingly decided to seek further extension of time upto the
last or first week of the Budget Session, 2008 and authorized its Chairperson to approach Hon’ble
Chairperson for the purpose.
4. The Chairperson, thereafter, welcomed the Principal Adviser, Planning Commission and
asked him to clarify the inconsistencies between the provisions of the FC(R) Bill and the National
Policy on V oluntary Sector.
4.1 The Principal Adviser, Planning Commission while making his submission stressed that there
was no conflict between FC(R) Bill, 2006 and the National Policy for V oluntary Sector adopted by
Planning Commission. He quoted para 4.7 of the National Policy on V oluntary Sector which dealt
with international funding and pointed out that the Planning Commission had suggested a
mechanism of Joint Consultative Group to integrate the voluntary sector policy with FCR whereby
the representatives of the concerned Ministry and the NGOs would meet together to suggest the
changes needed in FCR law to make it simpler and easier.
4.2 The Chairperson, while citing para 4.7 of the NPVS, stated that the Government having
reviewed the FCRA was intending to make it more stringent through the Bill and it may become
a stumbling block in the way of foreign funding to voluntary sector.
4.3 Responding to the query raised by the Chairperson, the Principal Adviser, Planning
Commission replied that the stringent conditions for registration was due to security concerns and
he expressed his satisfactions that the provisions of the proposed Bill provided for the suggested
joint consultative mechanism to take care of the concern.
5. One member while citing para 4.3 of NPVS, apprehended that this might facilitate the entry
of a foreign voluntary organization to work in India. He, further, asked whether the Government
had consulted the Policy Division of the Planning Commission before introducing the FCR Bill. He
also wanted clarification about the proposed consultative mechanism and information about the
background for drafting the NPVS.
5.1 In response to the queries, the Principal Advisor, Planning Commission said that the Policy
Division of the Planning Commission had been consulted by the Ministry before introduction of the
Bill. He further replied that the proposed consultative mechanism was meant for sharing ideas,
views and pieces of information and identifying the opportunities and mechanisms of working
together of the concerned Ministry and the NGOs, and suggesting simplification of its procedural
guidelines. He also said that there had been extensive discussions over a period of four years before
formulating NPVS.
6. The Chairperson then felt that before finalising the NPVS, the Planning Commission should
have gone through the provisions of the FCR Bill as the provisions of the later could affect the
functioning of the voluntary sector.
7. The other members also raised certain queries related to the Bill and NPVS, which could
not be replied to by the Principal Advisor, Planning Commission to the satisfaction of the Members.

46
The Committee expressed their dissatisfaction over the presentation and the responses made by the
Principal Adviser and decided to hear the Member Secretary, Planning Commission, the persons
associated with the NPVS formulation as the Principal Advisor was not associated with the group
which formulated the policy. The members then asked the Principal Advisor, Planning Commission
to submit a background note on the NPVS.
8. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 
P.M.

47
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 9th January, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri N. Jothi
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Amitava Nandy
11. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(A) Representative of the Planning Commission
(i) Dr. Subas Chandra Pani, Secretary
(ii) Shrimati Manjulika Gautam, Sr. Adviser (V AC)
(iii) Shri Lalit Kumar, Dy. Adviser (VAC)
(B) Chairpersons of the four expert groups set up to draft the policy
(i) Dr. Rajesh Tandon, President, PRIA-Society for Participatory Research in Asia
(ii) Shri Sanjay Agarwal, Account Aid
47

48
(iii) Shri Ajay Mehta, ED, National Foundation of India
(iv) Shri Paresh T ewari, CEO, V ANI
(C) Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
(i) Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
(ii) Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised the
Members about agenda of the meeting. The Chairperson also informed the Members that since the
representative of the Planning Commission could not satisfy the Committee in its earlier sitting, the
Committee, as decided, had invited Member-Secretary alongwith the Chairperson of the four expert
groups constituted by the Planning Commission which have been invited to clarify the issues arising
out of the Planning Commission’s National Policy on V oluntary Sector. She however clarified that
Committee’s mandate was to know about the policy instead of commenting on its merits or
demerits.
3. The Chairperson also informed the Members that the Home Secretary would make a
presentation on the Bill in the next meetings and then clause-by-clause discussion would be held.
4. The Committee heard the Member-Secretary, Planning Commission and the heads of expert
groups. Commenting on the provisions contained in the policy vis-a-vis the FC(R) Bill, 2006, the
Secretary, Planning Commission as well as the heads of expert groups stated that the Bill was not
incongruous to the National Policy on V oluntary Sector. They also made the following
submissions:—
(i) the Policy was formulated in a participatory spirit, involving a number of voluntary
organizations and other stakeholders, over a number of consultations;
(ii) the Policy only made a broad suggestion that the provisions of FCRA should be
simplified and reviewed from time to time in consultation with the voluntary
organizations, so that its implementation becomes effective;
(iii) the Policy also suggested having Joint Consultative Forums/Groups of all concerned
Ministries/Departments, as well as at State and District levels having representatives
of voluntary organizations and Government to discuss mutual concerns on a regular
basis and it was expected that once such a Consultative Forum is set up by the
Ministry of Home Affairs, problems faced by voluntary organizations would be
reviewed and resolved on a regular basis.
6. Members raised some more queries which were replied to accordingly.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

49
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 15th May, 2008 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Ilyas Azmi
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti
6. Shri Tapir Gao
7. Shri Naveen Jindal
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
12. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Asiim Khurana, Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanthan, Law Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Meena, Additional Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Government Counsel
49

50
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
4. Shri. K. Biswal, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them
that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension of time for presentation of Report of
the Committee on Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 upto the last week of the
Winter Session (2008) and permission to the Committee to hear Chief Secretaries and other officers
of the five naxal-affected States on ‘Naxalism’. She further informed that “Working of Foreigner’s
Division in MHA” had been selected as a subject for detailed study.
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs
and Law and Justice. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 in the light of the vanous suggestions/comments received and
the Government’s responses thereto as under:
Clause 2
3.1. The Committee felt that the definition of ‘foreign hospitality’ was not clear regarding the
status of a person i.e. whether in official or personal capacity, when he/she was on foreign visit.
The Committee accordingly decided that the words “when on official visit” may be added after the
words “a person” in clause 2 (1) (i).
3.1.1 The Members were of the view that the definition of ‘Foreign Source’ may be modified to
exclude Indian companies where the foreign holding is in excess of fifty per cent since such
foreign holding is permitted under FDI or FII norms.
3.1.2 Having regard to the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Constitution
(Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the Committee was of the view that Municipal Councils
(for small urban areas) and the Panchayati Raj Institutions should also be covered by the definition
of ‘legislature’.
3.1.3 The Committee was of the view that in the absence of the definition of “administrative
expenses”, it would be difficult to identify the items of expenditure under that head. The Committee
therefore felt that the term “administrative esxpenses” may be appropriately defined under
clause 2.
3.1.4 Subject to the above observations, clause 2 was adopted.
Clause 3
3.2. The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 4
3.3 The Committee noted that clause 4, as presently worded, does not specifically exclude the
receipt of foreign scholarship or stipend by Indian citizens studying in Indian or foreign academic
institutions from the prohibition as laid down in clause 3. The Committee, felt that scholarship/
stipend for academic pursuit ought not to be curbed, directly or indirectly. The Committee took
note of the fact that section 7 of FCRA, 1976 lays down a procedure for giving intimation to
Central Government about receipt of scholarships/stipend or any payment of like nature from any

51
foreign source. That section also waives the requirement of giving information if the annual value
of such scholarship/stipend or any payment of like nature, does not exceed the prescribed limit.
The Committee therefore felt that clause 4 may be suitably amended so that the recipients of
scholarship/stipend or any payment of like nature from bonafide foreign source did not face any
problem in that regard.
3.3.1 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, clause 4 was adopted.
Clause 5
3.4 The Committee was of the view that clause 5 may be amended providing a time frame
within which Government should take decision on specifying an organization of political nature not
being a political party.
3.4.1 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, clause 5 was adopted.
Clause 6
3.5 The Committee was of the view that clause 6 does not clarify the status of a person when
travelling abroad i.e. whether in personal or official capacity. The Committee therefore felt that the
restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality provided in clause 6 should appropriately apply to
a person when one was travelling to a foreign country in one’s official capacity.
3.5.1 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, clause 6 was adopted.
Clause 7
3.6 The Committee was of the view that the clause needs to be amended laying down that an
organization which seeks to transfer the foreign contribution to any other organization should obtain
prior permission from the Central Government.
3.6.1 Subject to the above observations, clause 7 was adopted.
Clause 8
3.7 The clause was adopted without any change.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet on 16th May, 2008 at 3.00 P.M. to
consider the remaining clauses of the Bill.

52
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 16th May, 2008 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti
6. Shri Tapir Gao
7. Shri Naveen Jindal
8. Shri Amitava Nandy
9. Shri Ramchandra Pawan
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
12. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.K. Shahi, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanthan, Law Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Meena, Additional Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Government Counsel
52

53
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
4. Shri K. Biswol, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
and Ministry of Law and Justice. The Chairperson also apprised the Members that Shri Rishang
Keishing, Shri Prasanta Chatterjee and Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia has been nominated as members
of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up remaining clause-by-clause consideration of the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 in the light of the various suggestions/comments received and
the Government’s responses thereto as under:—
Clauses 9 to 11
3.1 The clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 12
3.4 The Committee was of the view that Clause does not caste any obligation upon the Central
Government to dispose of an application for grant of certificate of registration or for prior
permission within a specified time frame. Thus an applicant may be kept waiting indefinitely for
a decision by the Central Government. The Committee was of the considered view that the
Government should consider prescribing a time limit of ordinarily ninety days for taking a decision
on a application for grant of certificate of registration or giving prior permission. The Committee
was further of the considered view that in case of delay in grant of certificate or prior permission,
beyond the normal period of ninety days, it shall be the duty of the Central Government to record
the reasons for such delay in waiting on the lines of the provisions of sub-clause (4) of
clause 12. The Committee therefore recommended that Government should adequately address
these suggestions.
3.2.1 The Committee also recommended that in sub-section (c) of sub-clause (3) of clause 12,
the word “meaningful” should be omitted as the expression was liable to be interpreted subjectively.
The Committee further recommended that the word ‘people’ appearing in the said sub-section, may
be substituted by the word ‘society’ which was a better expression, with reference to the context.
3.2.2 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, clause 12 was adopted.
Clause 13
3.3 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 14
3.4 The Reserve Bank of India had suggested that the cancellation of permission to receive
foreign contribution may be advised through the website of the Ministry of Home Affairs to avoid
delay in receipt of communication in this regard by the Bank. The Committee noted that the
Ministry had agreed to consider the suggestion at the time of framing of rules.
3.4.1 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.

54
Clause 15
3.5 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 16
3.6 The Committee noted that Clause 16 is silent on the scenario when a person having applied
for renewal of certificate of registration within six months before the expiry of the period of the
certificate, does not get intimation either about renewal or refusal of renewal, by the expiry date
of the certificate. It was suggested that a deeming provision should be incorporated to the effect
that in case no intimation is received by the applicant by the expiry date of the certificate, it shall
be deemed that the certificate has been renewed.
3.8.1 Subject to the above observations, clause 16 was adopted.
Clause 17
3.9 It is brought to the notice of the Committee that there is already a system of reporting
suspicious transactions by the banks’ branches directly to the Financial Intelligence Unit. Any cash
transaction above Rs.l0 lakh or small transactions aggregating more than Rs.l0 lakh in a month is
also reported. There should be a threshold limit beyond which the bank may report.
3.9.1 The Committee was of the view that a threshold limit of Rs. 10 lakh or above may be
considered.
3.9.3 Subject to the above observations, clause 17 was adopted.
Clauses 18-22
3.10 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clauses 23-27
3.11 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clauses 28-30
3.12 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clauses 31-32
3.13 Both the clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 33
3.14 The Committee noted that section 177 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) prescribes punishment
of simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 6 months, or with fine which may extend
to Rs. 1000, or with both, to a person who furnishes false information to any public servant. The
Committee also noted that section 181 of IPC prescribes the punishment to a person for giving
false statement on oath or affirmation to public servant etc., which may extend to 3 years, and
shall also be liable to fine. The classification of offences under the said sections of IPC is
comparable to those included in clause 33. In this context, the Committee observed that the
punishment prescribed under that clause is not in consonance with sections 177 and 181 of IPC.
The Committee therefore desired that clause 33 may be re-visited so that it is in tune with the said
sections of IPC.

55
3.14.1 Subject to the above observation, the clause was adopted.
Clauses 34-37
3.15 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 38
3.16 The Committee felt that in a second or subsequent conviction, a person should be debarred
from accepting any foreign contribution for five years instead of three years, as provided in the
Clause. The Committee, therefore, desired that necessary amendment may be made in Clause 38
accordingly.
3.16.1 Subject to the above observation, the Clause was adopted.
Clauses 39-41
3.17 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clauses 42-54
3.18 The clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
3.19 The Committee adopted Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title with some changes
which were of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2006” and ‘Fifty-seventh” to be
substituted by “2008” and “Fifty-ninth”, wherever these occur.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
4. The Committee directed the Secretariat to prepare a draft report on the Bill on the basis
of its observations and place before it at its next sitting.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.

56
XXVIII
TWENTY EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 29th July, 2008 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Tiruchi Siva
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
11. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
12. Shri T.K. Hamza
13. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
16. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft 134th Report on the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006. After a brief discussion, the report was adopted with minor
modifications.
3.1 The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members of the Committee for their co-operation in
considering the Bill at its various stages and finalization of report thereon. She also thanked the
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and other concerned agencies who deposed before
the Committee. She also thanked the Secretariat’s officers and staff members for their assistance
to the Committee during consideration of the Bill and drafting of report thereon.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
56

57
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
18 DEC. 2006
Bill No. CXII of 2006
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) BILL, 2006
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
REGULATION OF F OREIGN  C ONTRIBUTION  AND F OREGIN  H OSPITALITY
3. Prohibition to accept foreign contribution.
4. Persons to whom section 3 shall not apply.
5. Procedure to notify an organisation of a political nature.
6. Restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality.
7. Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to other person.
8. Restriction to utilise foreign contribution for administrative purpose.
9. Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign contribution, etc., in
certain cases.
10. Power to prohibit payment of currency received in contravention of the Act.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTRATION
11. Registration of certain persons with Central Government.
12. Grant of certificate of registration.
13. Suspension of certificate.
14. Cancellation of certificate.
15. Management of foreign contribution of person whose certificate has been cancelled.
16. Renewal of certificate.
59

60
CHAPTER IV
ACCOUNTS , I NTIMATION , A UDIT  AND D ISPOSAL  OF A SSETS , ETC.
17. Foreign contribution through scheduled bank.
18. Intimation.
19. Maintenance of accounts.
20. Audit of accounts.
21. Intimation by candidate for election.
22. Disposal of assets created out of foreign contribution.
CHAPTER V
I
NSPECTION , S EARCH  AND S EIZURE
CLAUSES
23. Inspection of accounts or records.
24. Seizure of accounts or records.
25. Seizure of article or currency or security received in contravention of the Act.
26. Disposal of seized article or currency or security.
27. Seizure to be made in accordance with Act 2 of 1974.
CHAPTER VI
A
DJUDICATION
28. Confiscation of article or currency or security obtained in contravention of the Act.
29. Adjudication of confiscation.
30. Procedure for confiscation.
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEAL AND R EVISION
31. Appeal.
32. Revision of orders by Central Government.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES  AND P ENALTIES
33. Making of false statement, declaration or delivering false accounts.
34. Penalty for article or currency or security obtained in contravention of section 10.
35. Punishment for contravention of any provision of the Act.
36. Power to impose additional fine where article or currency or security is not available
for confiscation.
37. Penalty for offences where no separate punishment has been provided.
38. Prohibition of acceptance of foreign contribution.
39. Offences by companies.
40. Bar to prosecution of offences under the Act.
41. Composition of certain offences.

61
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
42. Power to call for information or document.
43. Investigation into cases under the Act.
44. Returns by prescribed authority to Central Government.
45. Protection of action taken in good faith.
46. Power of Central Government to give directions.
47. Delegation of powers.
48. Power to make rules.
49. Orders and rules to be laid before Parliament.
50. Power to exempt in certain cases.
51. Act not to apply to certain Government transactions.
52. Application of other laws not barred.
53. Power to remove difficulties.
54. Repeal and saving.

AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. CXII of 2006
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to consolidate the law to regulate the acceptance and utilisation of
foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by certain
individuals or associations or companies and to prohibit
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign
hospitality for any activities detrimental to the national
interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and it shall also apply
to—
(a) citizens of India outside India; and
63
Short title,
extent,
application and
commencement.

64
(b) associates branches or subsidiaries, outside India, of
companies or bodies corporate, registered or incorporated in
India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “association” means an association of individuals,
whether incorporated or not, having an office in India and
includes a society, whether registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, or not, and any other organisation, by
whatever name called;
(b) “authorised person in foreign exchange” means an
authorised person referred to in clause (c) of section 2 of the
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999;
(c) “bank” means a banking company as referred to in
clause (c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(d) “candidate for election” means a person who has
been duly nominated as a candidate for election to any Legislature;
(e) “certificate” means certificate of registration granted
under sub-section ( 3) of section 12;
(f) “company” shall have the meaning assigned to it
under clause ( 17) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(g) “foreign company” means any company or association
or body of individuals incorporated outside India and includes—
(i) a foreign company within the meaning of section
591 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(ii) a company which is a subsidiary of a foreign
company;
(iii) the registered office or principal place of
business of a foreign company referred to in sub-clause
(i) or company referred to in sub-clause ( ii);
(iv) a multi-national corporation.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause, a
corporation incorporated in a foreign country or territory
shall be deemed to be a multi-national corporation if such
corporation,—
(a) has a subsidiary or a branch or a place of
business in two or more countries or territories; or
Definitions.
21 of 1860.
42 of 1999.
10 of 1949.
43 of 1961.
1 of 1956.

65
(b) carries on business, or otherwise operates, in
two or more countries or territories;
(h) “foreign contribution” means the donation, delivery or
transfer made by any foreign source,—
(i) of any article, not being an article given to a
person as a gift for his personal use, if the market value,
in India, of such article, on the date of such gift, is not
more than such sum as may be specified from time to
time, by the Central Government by the rules made by it
in this behalf;
(ii) of any currency, whether Indian or foreign;
(iii) security as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and includes
any foreign security as defined in clause ( o) of section 2
of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
Explanation 1.— A donation, delivery or transfer of any
article, currency or foreign security referred to in this clause by
any person who has received it from any foreign source, either
directly or through one or more persons, shall also be deemed
to be foreign contribution within the meaning of this clause.
Explanation 2.— The interest accrued on the foreign
contribution deposited in any bank referred to in sub-section ( 1)
of section 17 or any other income derived from the foreign
contribution or interest thereon shall also be deemed to be
foreign contribution within the meaning of this clause.
Explanation 3.— Any amount received, by any person
from any foreign source in India, by way of fee (including fees
charged by an educational institution in India from foreign
student) or towards cost in lieu  of goods or services rendered
by such person in the ordinary course of his business, trade or
commerce whether within India or outside India or any
contribution received from an agent of a foreign source towards
such fee or cost shall be excluded from the definition of foreign
contribution within the meaning of this clause.
(i) “foreign hospitality” means any offer, not being a
purely casual one, made in cash or kind by a foreign source for
providing a person with the costs of travel to any foreign
country or territory or with free boarding, lodging, transport or
medical treatment.
(j) “foreign source” includes,—
(i) the Government of any foreign country or
territory and any agency of such Government;
(ii) any international agency, not being the United
Nations or any of its specialised agencies, the World
Bank, International Monetary Fund or such other agency
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf;
42 of 1999.

66
(iii) a foreign company;
(iv) a corporation, not being a foreign company,
incorporated in a foreign country or territory;
(v) a multi-national corporation referred to in sub-
clause ( iv) of clause ( g);
(vi) a company within the meaning of the Companies
Act, 1956, and more than one-half of the nominal value
of its share capital is held, either singly or in the aggregate,
by one or more of the following, namely:—
(A) the Government of a foreign country or
territory;
(B) the citizens of a foreign country or
territory;
(C) corporations incorporated in a foreign
country or territory;
(D) trusts, societies or other associations of
individuals (whether incorporated or not), formed
or registered in a foreign country or territory;
(E) foreign company;
(vii) a trade union in any foreign country or territory,
whether or not registered in such foreign country or
territory;
(viii) a foreign trust or a foreign foundation, by
whatever name called, or such trust or foundation mainly
financed by a foreign country or territory;
(ix) a society, club or other association of individuals
formed or registered outside India;
(x) a citizen of a foreign country;
(k) “Legislature” means—
(A) either House of Parliament;
(B) the Legislative Assembly of a State, or in the
case of a State having a Legislative Council, either House
of the Legislature of that State;
(C) Legislative Assembly of a Union territory
constituted under the Government of Union Territories
Act, 1963;
(D) Legislative Assembly for the National Capital
Territory of Delhi referred to in the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991;
(E) Municipal Corporations in metropolitan areas as
defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
1 of 1956.
20 of 1963.
1 of 1992.
2 of 1974.

67
(F) District Councils and Regional Councils in the
States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram as
provided in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution; or
(G) any other elective body as may be notified by
the Central Government, as the case may be;
(l) “notification” means notification published in the Official
Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(m) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) an association;
(iv) a company registered under section 25 of the
Companies Act, 1956;
(n) “political party” means—
(i) an association or body of individual citizens of
India—
(A) to be registered with the Election
Commission of India as a political party under
section 29A of the Representation of the People
Act,
 1951; or
(B) which has set up candidates for election
to any Legislature, but is not so registered or
deemed to be registered under the Election Symbols
(Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968;
(ii) a political party mentioned in column 2 of
Table 1 and Table 2 to the notification of the Election
Commission of India No.56/J&K/02, dated the 8th
August, 2002, as in force for the time being;
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(p) “prescribed authority” means an authority specified as
such by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;
(q) “registered newspaper” means a newspaper registered
under the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867;
(r) “relative” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 41)
of section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(s) “scheduled bank” shall have the meaning assigned to
it under clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934;
(t) “subsidiary” and “associate” shall have the meanings,
respectively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956;
1 of 1956.
43 of 1951.
25 of 1867.
1 of 1956.
2 of 1934.
1 of 1956.

68
(u) “trade union” means a trade union registered under
the Trade Unions Act, 1926;
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this
Act but defined in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 or the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 or the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
R
EGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY
3. ( 1) No foreign contribution shall be accepted by any—
(a) candidate for election;
(b) correspondent, columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner,
printer or publisher of a registered newspaper;
(c) Judge, Government servant or employee of any
corporation or any other body controlled or owned by the
Government;
(d) member of any Legislature;
(e) political party or office-bearer thereof;
(f) organisation of a political nature as may be specified
under sub-section ( 1) of section 5 by the Central Government;
(g) association or company engaged in the production or
broadcast of audio news or audio visual news or current affairs
programmes through any electronic mode, or any other electronic
form as defined in clause ( r) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of
the Information Technology Act, 2000 or any other mode of
mass communication;
(h) correspondent or columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner
of the association or company referred to in clause ( g).
Explanation .— In clause ( c) and section 6, the expression
“corporation” means a corporation owned or controlled by the
Government and includes a Government company as defined in section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
(2) ( a) No person, resident in India, and no citizen of India
resident outside India, shall accept any foreign contribution, or acquire
or agree to acquire any currency from a foreign source, on behalf of
any political party, or any person referred to in sub-section ( 1), or
both.
(b) No person, resident in India, shall deliver any currency,
whether Indian or foreign, which has been accepted from any
foreign source, to any person if he knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that such other person intends, or is likely, to
deliver such currency to any political party or any person
referred to in sub-section ( 1), or both.
16 of 1926.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
43 of 1999.
Prohibition to
accept foreign
contribution.
21 of 2000.
1 of 1956.

69
(c) No citizen of India resident outside India shall deliver
any currency, whether Indian or foreign, which has been accepted
from any foreign source, to—
(i) any political party or any person referred to in
sub-section ( 1), or both; or
(ii) any other person, if he knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that such other person intends, or is
likely, to deliver such currency to a political party or to
any person referred to in sub-section ( 1), or both.
(3) No person receiving any currency, whether Indian or foreign,
from a foreign source on behalf of any person or class of persons,
referred to in section 9, shall deliver such currency—
(a) to any person other than a person for which it was
received, or
(b) to any other person, if he knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that such other person intends, or is likely,
to deliver such currency to a person other than the person for
which such currency was received.
4. Nothing contained in section 3 shall apply to the acceptance,
by any person specified in that section, of any foreign contribution
where such contribution is accepted by him, subject to the provisions
of section 10,—
(a) by way of salary, wages or other remuneration due
to him or to any group of persons working under him, from
any foreign source or by way of payment in the ordinary
course of business transacted in India by such foreign source;
or
(b) by way of payment, in the course of international
trade or commerce, or in the ordinary course of business
transacted by him outside India; or
(c) as an agent of a foreign source in relation to any
transaction made by such foreign source with the Central
Government or State Government; or
(d) by way of a gift or presentation made to him as a
member of any Indian delegation, provided that such gift or
present was accepted in accordance with the rules made by the
Central Government with regard to the acceptance or retention
of such gift or presentation; or
(e) from his relative; or
(f) by way of remittance received, in the ordinary course
of business through any official channel, post office, or any
authorised person in foreign exchange under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999:
Persons to
whom section 3
shall not apply.
42 of 1999.

70
Provided that in case any foreign contribution received by
any person specified under section 3, for any of the purposes
other than those specified under this section, such contribution
shall be deemed to have been accepted in contravention of the
provisions of section 3.
5.(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the activities
of the organisation or the ideology propagated by the organisation or
the programme of the organisation or the association of the organisations
with the activities of any political party, by an order published in the
Official Gazette, specify such organisation as an organisation of a
political nature not being a political party, referred to in clause ( f) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 3.
(2) Before making an order under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government shall give the organisation in respect of whom the order
is proposed to be made, a notice in writing informing it of the ground
or grounds, on which it is proposed to be specified as an organisation
of political nature under that sub-section:
Provided that the Central Government may, by rules made by it,
specify the ground or grounds on which an organisation shall be
specified as an organisation of a political nature.
(3) The organisation to whom a notice has been served under
sub-section ( 2), may, within a period of thirty days from the date of
the notice, make a representation to the Central Government giving
reasons for not specifying such organisation as an organisation under
sub-section ( 1):
Provided that the Central Government may entertain the
representation after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it
is satisfied that the organisation was prevented by sufficient cause
from making the representation within thirty days.
(4) The Central Government may, if it considers it appropriate,
forward the representation referred to in sub-section ( 3) to any authority
to report on such representation.
(5) The Central Government may, after considering the
representation and the report of the authority referred to in sub-section
(4), specify such organisation as an organisation of a political nature
not being a political party and make an order under sub-section ( 1)
accordingly.
6. No member of a Legislature or office-bearer of a political
party or Judge or Government servant or employee of any
corporation or any other body owned or controlled by the Government
shall, while visiting any country or territory outside India, accept,
except with the prior permission of the Central Government, any
foreign hospitality:
Procedure to
notify an
organisation of
a political
nature.
Restriction on
acceptance of
foreign
hospitality

71
Provided that it shall not be necessary to obtain any such
permission for an emergent medical aid needed on account of sudden
illness contracted during a visit outside India, but, where such foreign
hospitality has been received, the person receiving such hospitality
shall give, within one month from the date of receipt of such hospitality
an intimation to the Central Government as to the receipt of such
hospitality, and the source from which, and the manner in which,
such hospitality was received by him.
7. No person who—
(a) is registered and granted a certificate or obtained prior
permission under this Act; and
(b) receives any foreign contribution,
shall transfer such foreign, contribution to any other person
unless such other person is also registered and granted the
certificate or obtained the prior permission under this Act.
8. ( 1) Every person, who is registered and granted a certificate
or given prior permission under this Act and receives any foreign
contribution,—
(a) shall utilise such contribution for the purposes for
which the contribution has been received:
Provided that any foreign contribution or any income
arising out of it shall not be used for speculative business;
(b) shall not defray as far as possible such sum, not
exceeding fifty per cent of such contribution, received in a
financial year, to meet administrative expenses:
Provided that administrative expenses exceeding fifty
per cent of such contribution may be defrayed with prior
approval of the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the elements
which shall be included in the administrative expenses and the
manner in which the administrative expenses referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shall be calculated.
9. The Central Government may—
(a) prohibit any person or organisation not specified in
section 3, from accepting any foreign contribution;
(b) require any person or class of persons, not specified
in section 6, to obtain prior permission of the Central
Government before accepting any foreign hospitality;
(c) require any person or class of persons not specified
in section 11, to furnish intimation within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed as to the amount of any foreign
contribution received by such person or class of persons as the
case may be, and the source from which and the manner in
which such contribution was received and the purpose for
which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was
utilised;
Prohibition to
transfer foreign
contribution to
other person.
Restriction to
utilise foreign
contribution for
administrative
purpose.
Power of
Central
Government to
prohibit receipt
of foreign
contribution,
etc., in certain
cases.

72
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1)
of section 11, require any person or class of persons specified
in that sub-section to obtain prior permission of the Central
Government before accepting any foreign contribution;
(e) require any person or class of persons, not specified
in section 6, to furnish intimation, within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed, as to the receipt of any foreign
hospitality, the source from which and the manner in which
such hospitality was received:
Provided that no such prohibition or requirement shall be
made unless the Central Government is satisfied that the
acceptance of foreign contribution by such person or class of
persons, as the case may be, or the acceptance of foreign
hospitality by such person, is likely to affect prejudicially—
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) public interest; or
(iii) freedom or fairness of election to any Legislature;
or
(iv) friendly relations with any foreign State; or
(v) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic
or regional groups, castes or communities.
10. Where the Central Government is satisfied, after making
such inquiry as it may deem fit, that any person has in his custody
or control any article or currency, whether Indian or foreign, which
has been accepted by such person in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act, it may, by order in writing, prohibit such
person from paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing with,
in any manner whatsoever, such article or currency save in accordance
with the written orders of the Central Government and a copy of such
order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the prescribed
manner, and thereupon the provisions of sub-sections ( 2), ( 3), ( 4) and
(5) of section 7 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
shall, so far as may be, apply to, or in relation to, such article
or currency and references in the said sub-sections to moneys,
securities or credits shall be construed as references to such article or
currency.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTRATION
11. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person having
a definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social programme
shall accept foreign contribution unless such person obtains a certificate
of registration from the Central Government:
Power to
prohibit
payment of
currency
received in
contravention
of the Act.
Registration of
certain persons
with Central
Government.
37 of 1967.

73
Provided that any association registered with the Central
Government under section 6 or granted prior permission under that
section of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976, as it stood
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to
have been registered or granted prior permission, as the case may be,
under this Act and such registration shall be valid for a period of five
years from the date on which this section comes into force.
(2) Every person referred to in sub-section ( 1) may, if it is not
registered with the Central Government under that sub-section, accept
any foreign contribution only after obtaining the prior permission of
the Central Government and such prior permission shall be valid for
the specific purpose for which it is obtained and from specific source:
Provided that if the person referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and
(2) has been found guilty of violation of any of the provisions of this
Act or the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976, the unutilised
or unreceived amount of foreign contribution shall not be utilised or
received, as the case may be, without the prior approval of the Central
Government.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify—
(i) the person or class of persons who shall obtain its
prior permission before accepting the foreign contribution; or
(ii) the area or areas in which the foreign contribution
shall be accepted and utilised with the prior permission of the
Central Government;
(iii) the purpose or purposes for which the foreign
contribution shall be utilised with the prior permission of the
Central Government; or
(iv) the source or sources from which the foreign
contribution shall be accepted with the prior permission of the
Central Government.
12. ( 1) An application by a person, referred to in section 11 for
grant of certificate or giving prior permission, shall be made to the
Central Government in such form and manner and along with such
fee, as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government shall, by an order, if the application is not the
prescribed form or does not contain any of the particulars specified
in that form, reject the application.
(3) If on receipt of an application for grant of certificate or
giving of prior permission and after making such inquiry as the Central
Government deems fit, it is satisfied that—
49 of 1976.
49 of 1976.
Grant of
certificate of
registration.

74
(a) the person making an application for registration or
giving of prior permission under sub-section ( 1),—
(i) is not fictitious or benami;
(ii) has not indulged in activities aimed at
conversion through inducement or force, either directly
or indirectly, from one religious faith to another;
(iii ) has not created communal tension or
disharmony in any specified district or any other part of
the country;
(iv) has not been found guilty of diversion or
misutilisation of its funds;
(v) is not engaged or likely to engage to propagate
sedition or advocate violent methods to achieve its ends;
(vi) is not likely to use the foreign contribution
for personal gains or divert it for undesirable purposes;
(vii) has not contravened any of the provisions
of this Act;
(viii) whose certificate has been suspended and
such suspension of certificate continues;
(ix) was previousty granted certificate which had
been cancelled before three years from the date of the
application for grant of certificate or registration;
(x) has not been prohibited from accepting foreign
contribution;
(b) the person making an application for registration under
sub-section ( 1) has undertaken meaningful activity in its chosen
field for the benefit of the people for which the foreign
contribution is proposed to be utilised; or
(c) the person making an application for giving prior
permission under sub-section ( 1) has prepared a meaningful
project for the benefit of the people for which the foreign
contribution is proposed to be utilised;
(d) in case the person being an individual, such individual
has neither been convicted under any law for the time being in
force nor any prosecution for any offence pending against him;
(e) in case the person being other than an individual, any
of its directors or office bearers has neither been convicted
under any law for the time being in force nor any prosecution
for any offence is pending against him;

75
(f) the acceptance of foreign contribution by the person
referred to in sub-section ( 1) is not likely to affect prejudicially—
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) the security, strategic, scientific or economic
interest of the State; or
(iii) the public interest; or
(iv) freedom or fairness of election to any
Legislature; or
(v) friendly relation with any foreign State; or
(vi) harmony between religious, racial, social,
linguistic, regional groups, castes or communities;
(g) the acceptance of foreign contribution referred to in
sub-section ( 1),—
(i) shall not lead to incitement of an offence;
(ii) shall not endanger the life or physical safety of
any person,
the Central Government may register such person and grant him
a certificate or give him prior permission, as the case may be,
subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) Where the Central Government refuses the grant of certificate
or does not give prior permission, it shall record the reasons for such
refusal or for not giving of prior permission in its order made for such
refusal or not giving prior permission and furnish a copy thereof to
the applicant:
Provided that the Central Government may not communicate the
reasons for refusal for grant of certificate or for not giving of prior
permission to the applicant under this section in cases where there is
no obligation to give any information or documents or records or
papers under the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(5) The certificate granted under sub-section ( 3) shall be valid
for a period of five years and the prior permission shall be valid for
the specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution proposed
to be received, as the case may be.
13. (1) Where the Central Government, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, is satisfied that pending consideration of the
question of canceling the certificate on any of the grounds mentioned
in sub-section ( 1) of section 14, it is necessary so to do, it may, by
order in writing, suspend the certificate for such period not exceeding
one hundred and eighty days as may be specified in the order.
(2) Every person whose certificate has been suspended shall—
(a) not receive any foreign contribution during the period
of suspension of certificate:
22 of 2005.
Suspension of
certificate

76
Provided that the Central Government, on an application
made by such person, if it considers appropriate, allow receipt
of any foreign contribution by such person on such terms
and conditions as it may specify;
(b) utilise, in the prescribed manner, the foreign
contribution in his custody with the prior approval of the
Central Government.
14. (1) The Centra1 Government may, if it is satisfied after
making such inquiry as it may deem fit, by an order, cancel the
certificate if—
(a) the holder of the certificate has made a statement in,
or in relation to, the application for the grant of registration or
renewal thereof, which is incorrect or false; or
(b) the holder of the certificate has violated any of the
terms and conditions of the certificate or renewal thereof; or
(c) in the opinion of the Central Government, it is necessary
in the public interest to cancel the certificate; or
(d) the holder of certificate has violated any of the
provisions of this Act or rules or order made thereunder.
(2) No order of cancellation of certificate under this section
shall be made unless the person concerned has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(3) Any person whose certificate has been cancelled under this
section shall not be eligible for registration or grant of prior permission
for a period of three years from the date of cancellation of such
certificate.
15.(1) The foreign contribution and assets created out of the
foreign contribution in the custody of every person whose certificate
has been cancelled under section 14 shall vest of in such authority as
may be prescribed.
(2) The authority referred to in sub-section ( 1) may, if it
considers necessary and in public interest, manage the activities of the
person referred to in that sub-section for such be period and in such
manner, as the Central Government may direct and such authority may
utilise the foreign contribution or dispose of the assets created of it in
case adequate funds are not available for running such activity.
(3) The authority referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall return the
foreign contribution and the assets vested upon it under that sub-
section to the person referred to in the said sub-section if such person
is subsequently registered under this Act.
16.(1) Every person who has been granted a certificate under
section 12 shall have such certificate renewed within six months
before the expiry of the period of the certificate.
Cancellation
of certificate.
Management
of foreign
contribution of
person whose
certificate has
been cancelled.
Renewal of
certificate.

77
(2) The application for renewal of the certificate shall be made
to the Central Government in such form and manner and accompanied
by such fee as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall renew the certificate subject
to such terms and conditions as it may deem fit and grant a certificate
of renewal for a period of five years:
Provided that the Central Government may refuse to renew the
certificate in case where a person has violated any of the provisions
of this Act or rules made thereunder.
CHAPTER IV
A
CCOUNTS, I NTIMATION, A UDIT AND D ISPOSAL OF A SSETS, ETC.
17. (1) Every person who has been granted a certificate or
given prior permission under section 12 shall receive foreign contribution
in a single account only through such one of the branches of a bank
as he may specify in his application for grant of certificate:
Provided that such person may open one or more accounts in
one or more banks for utilising the foreign contribution received by
him:
Provided further that no funds other than foreign contribution
shall be received or deposited in such account or accounts.
(2) Every bank or authorised person in foreign exchange shall
report to such authority as may be specified
(a) the amount of foreign remittance;.
(b) the source and manner in which the foreign remittance
was received; and
(c) other particulars,
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
18. (1) Every person who has been granted a certificate or
given prior approval under this Act shall give, within such time and in
such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Central
Government, and such other authority as may be specified by the
Central  Government, as to the amount of each foreign contribution
received by it, the source from which and the manner in which such
foreign contribution was received, and the purposes for which, and
the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised by him.
(2) Every person receiving foreign contribution shall submit a
copy of a statement indicating therein the particulars of foreign
contribution received duly certified by officer of the bank or authorised
person in foreign exchange and furnish the same to the Central
Govemment along with the intimation under sub-section ( 1).
Foreign
contribution
through
scheduled
bank.
Intimation.

78
19. Every person who has been granted a certificate or given
prior approval under this Act shall maintain, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed,—
(a) an account of any foreign contribution received by
him; and
(b) a record as to the manner in which such contribution
has been utilised by him.
20. Where any person who has been granted a certificate or
given prior permission, fails to furnish any intimation under this Act
within the time specified therefor or the intimation so furnished is not
in accordance with law or if, after inspection of such intimation, the
Central Government has any reasonable cause to believe that any
provision of this Act has been, or is being, contravened, the Central
Government may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted
officer, holding a Group A post under the Central Government or any
other officer or authority or organisation, as it may think fit, to audit
any books of account kept or maintained by such person and thereupon
every such officer shall have the right to enter in or upon any
premises at any reasonable hour, before sunset and after sunrise,. for
the purpose of auditing the said books of account:
Provided that any information obtained from such audit shall be
kept confidential and shall not be disclosed except for the purposes of
this Act.
21. Every candidate for election, who had received any foreign
contribution, at any time within one hundred and eighty days immediately
preceding the date on which he is duly nominated as such candidate,
shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed,
an intimation to the Central Government or prescribed authority or
both as to the amount of foreign contribution received by him, the
source from which, and the manner in which, such foreign contribution
was received and the purposes for which and the manner in which
such foreign contribution was utilised by him.
22. Where any person who was permitted to accept foreign
contribution under this Act, ceases to exist or has become defunct, all
the assets of such person shall be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions contained in any law for the time being in force under
which the person was registered or incorporated, and in the absence
of any such law, the Central Government may, having regard to the
nature of assets created out of foreign contribution received under this
Act by notification, specify that all such assets shall be disposed off
by such authority, as it may specify, in such manner and procedure
as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE
23. If the Central Government has, for any reason, to be
recorded in writing, any ground to suspect that any provision of this
Act has been or is being, contravened by—
Maintenance
of accounts.
Audit of
accounts.
Inspection of
accounts or
records.
Disposal of
assets created
out of foreign
contribution.
Inspection of
accounts or
records.

79
(a) any political party, or
(b) any person, or
(c) any organisation, or
(d) any association,
it may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted
officer, holding a Group A post under the Central Government
or such other officer or authority or organisation, as it may
think fit (hereinafter referred to as the inspecting officer), to
inspect any account or record maintained by such political
party, person, organisation or association, as the case may be,
and thereupon every such inspecting officer shall have the right
to enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour, before
sunset and after sunrise, for the purpose of inspecting the said
account or record.
24. If, after inspection of an account or record referred to in
section 23, the inspecting officer has any reasonable cause to
believe that any provision of this Act or of any other law relating to
foreign exchange has been, or is being, contravened, he may seize
such account or record and produce the same before the court,
authority or tribunal in which any proceeding is brought for such
contravention:
Provided that the authorised officer shall return such account or
record to the person from whom it was seized if no proceeding is
brought within six months from the date of such seizure for the
contravention disclosed by such account or record.
25. If any gazetted officer, authorised in this behalf by the
Central Government by general or special order, has any reason to
believe that any person has in his possession or control any article
exceeding the value specified in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( h) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 2 or currency or security whether Indian or
foreign, in relation to which any provision of this Act has been or is
being, contravened, he may seize such article or currency or security.
26. (1) The Central Government, may, having regard to the
value of article or currency or security, their vulnerability to theft or
any relevant consideration, by notification, specify such article or
currency or security which shall, as soon as may be after their
seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in such manner, as the
Central Government may, from time to time, determine after following
the procedure hereinafter specified.
(2) The article or currency or security seized shall be forwarded
without unnecessary delay to such officer as may be specified.
(3) Where any article or currency or security has been seized
and forwarded to such officer, the officer referred to in sub-
section ( 1), shall prepare an inventory of such article or currency or
security containing such details relating to their description, value or
such other identifying particulars as the officer referred to in that sub-
section may consider relevant to the identiy of the article or the
currency or security and make an application to any Magistrate for the
purposes of certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared.
Seizure of
accounts or
records.
Seizure of
article or
currency or
security
received in
contravention
of the Act.
Disposal of
seized article
or currency
or security.

80
(4) Where an application is made under sub-section ( 2), the
Magistrate shall, as soon as may be, allow the application.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every court trying
an offence under this Act, shall treat the inventory, as certified by the
Magistrate, as primary evidence in respect of such offence.
(6) Every officer acting under sub-section ( 3) shall forthwith
report the seizure to the Court of Session or Assistant Session Judge
having jurisdiction for adjudging the confiscation under section 29.
27. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
shall apply in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act to all seizures made under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
A
DJUDICATION
28. Any article or currency or security which is seized under
section 25 shall be liable to confiscation if such article or currency or
security has been adjudged under section 29 to have been received or
obtained in contravention of this Act.
29.(1) Any confiscation referred to in section 28 may be
adjudged—
(a) without limit, by the Court of Session within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the seizure was made; and
(b) subject to such limits as may be prescribed, by such
officer, not below the rank of an Assistant Sessions Judge, as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf.
(2) When an adjudication under sub-section ( 1) is concluded by
the Court of Session or Assistant Sessions Judge, as the case may be,
Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge may make such order as
he thinks fit for the disposal by confiscation or delivery of seized
article or currency or security, as the case may be, to any person
claiming to be entitled, to possession thereof or otherwise, or which
has been used for the commission of any offence under this Act.
30. No order of adjudication of confiscation shall be made
unless a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against
such confiscation has been given to the person from whom any article
or currency or security has been seized.
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEAL AND REVISION
31. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order made under
section 29 may prefer an appeal,—
1 of 1872.
2 of 1974.
Seizure to be
made in
accordance
with. Act 2 of
1974.
Confiscation
of article or
currency or
security
obtained in
contravention
of the Act.
Procedure for
confiscation.
Appeal
Adjudication
of confiscation

81
(a) where the order has been made by the Court of
Session, to the High Court to which such Court is subordinate;
or
(b) where the order has been made by any officer specified
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 29, to the Court
of Session within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such
order of adjudication of confiscation was made,
within one month from the date of communication to such person of
the order:
Provided that the appellate court may, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal
within the said period of one month, allow such appeal to be preferred
within a further period of one month, but not thereafter.
(2) Any organisation referred to in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 3, or any person or association referred to in section 6 or
section 9, aggrieved by an order made in pursuance of section 5 or
by an order of the Central Government refusing to give permission
under this Act, or by any order made by the Central Government
under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 4) of section 12, or sub-
section ( 1) of section 14, as the case may be, may, within sixty days
from the date of such order, prefer an appeal against such order to
the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the appellant
ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain,
or, where the appellant is an organisation or association, the principal
office of such organisation or association is located.
(3) Every appeal preferred under this section shall be deemed to
be an appeal from an original decree and the provisions of Order XLI
of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, as
far as may be, apply thereto as they apply to an appeal from an
original decree.
32. (1) The Central Government, may, either of its own motion
or on an application for revision by the person registered under this
Act, for revision, call for and examine the record of any proceeding
under this Act in which any such order has been passed by it and
may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and, subject
to the provisions of this Act, may pass such order thereon as it thinks
fit.
(2) The Central Government shall not of its own motion revise
any order under this section if the order has been made more than one
year previously.
(3) In the case of an application for revision under this section
by the person referred to in sub-section ( 1), the application must be
made within one year from the date on which the order in question
was communicated to him or the date on which he otherwise came
to know of it, whichever is earlier:
5 of 1908.
Revision of
orders by
Central
Government.

82
Provided that the Central Government may , if it is satisfied that
such person was prevented by sufficient cause from making the
application within that period, admit an application made after the
expiry of that period.
(4) The Central Government shall not revise any order where an
appeal against the order lies but has not been made and the time within
which such appeal may be made has not expired or such person has
not waived his right of appeal or an appeal has been filed under this
Act.
(5) Every application by such person for revision under this
section shall be accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— An order by the Central Government declining
to interfere shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed not to
be an order prejudicial to such person.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES AND P ENALTIES
33. Any person, subject to this Act, who knowingly,—
(a) gives false intimation under sub-section ( c) of
section 9 or section 18; or
(b) seeks prior permission or registration by means of
fraud, false representation or concealment of material fact,
shall, on conviction by a court, be liable to imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years or with fine or with
both.
34. If any person, on whom any prohibitory order has been
served under section 10, pays, delivers, transfers or otherwise deals
with, in any manner whatsoever, any article or currency or security,
whether Indian or foreign, in contravention of such prohibitory order,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both; and notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the court trying
such contravention may also impose on the person of convicted an
additional fine equivalent to the market value of the article or the
amount of the currency or security in respect of which the prohibitory
order has been contravened by him or such part thereof as the court
may deem fit.
35. Whoever accepts, or assists any person, political party or
organisation in accepting, any foreign contribution or any currency or
security from a foreign source, in contravention of any provision of
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine,
or with both.
Making of
false
statement,
declaration or
delivering false
accounts.
Penalty for
article or
currency or
security
obtained in
contravention
of section 10
Punishment
for
contravention
of any
provision of
the Act.
2 of 1974.

83
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the court trying a person, who, in relation to any
article or currency or security, whether Indian or foreign, does or omits
to do any act which act or omission would render such article or
currency or security liable to confiscation under this Act, may, in the
event of the conviction of such person for the act or omission aforesaid,
impose on such person a fine not exceeding five times the value of the
article or currency or security or one thousand rupees, whichever is
more, if such article or currency or security is not available for
confiscation, and the fine so imposed shall be in addition to any other
fine which may be imposed on such person under this Act.
37. Whoever fails to comply with any provision of this Act for
which no separate penalty has been provided in this Act shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine or with both.
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whoever,
having been convicted of any offence under section 35 or section 37,
in so far as such offence relates to the acceptance or utilisation of
foreign contribution, is again convicted of such offence shall not
accept any foreign contribution for a period of three years from the
date of the subsequent conviction.
39.(1) Where an offence under this Act or any rule or order
made thereunder has been committed by a company, every person
who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and
was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where
an offence under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a
firm, society, trade union or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, society, trade union
or other association of individuals, means a partner in the firm
or a member of the governing body of such society, trade union
or other association of individuals.
Power to
impose
additional
fine where
article or
currency or
security is
not available
for
confiscation.
2 of 1974.
Penalty for
offences
where no
separate
punishment
has been
provided.
Prohibition
of
acceptance
of foreign
contribution.
Offences by
companies.

84
40. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this
Act, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or
any officer authorised by that Government in this behalf.
41.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, if any offence punishable under this Act (whether
committed by an individual or association or any officer or employee
thereof), not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only,
may, before the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by
such officers or authorities and for such sums as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf.
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to an offence
committed by an individual or association or its officer or other
employee within a period of three years from the date on which a
similar offence committed by it or him was compounded under this
section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, any second or
subsequent offence committed after the expiry of a period of three
years from the date on which the offence was previously compounded,
shall be deemed to be a first offence.
(3) Every officer or authority referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
exercise the powers to compound an offence, subject to the direction,
control and supervision of the Central Government.
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall
be made to the officer or authority referred to in sub-section ( 1) in
such form and manner along with such fees as may be prescribed.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of
any prosecution, no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such
offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so
compounded.
(6) Every officer or authority referred to in sub-section ( 1)
while dealing with a proposal for the compounding of an offence for
a default in compliance with any provision of this Act which requires
by an individual or association or its officer or other employee to
obtain permission or file or register with, or deliver or send to, the
Central Government or any prescribed authority any return, account or
other document, may, direct, by order, if he or it thinks fit to do so,
any individual or association or its officer or other employee to file or
register with, such return, account or other document within such
time as may be specified in the order.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. Any inspecting officer referred to in section 23 who is
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government may, during the
course of any inspection of any account or record maintained by any
political party, person, organisation or association in connection with
the contravention of any provision of this Act,—
Bar to
prosecution of
offences under
the Act.
Composition
of certain
offences.
2 of 1974.
Power to call
for
information or
document.

85
(a) call for information from any person for the purpose
of satisfying himself whether there has been any contravention
of the provisions of this Act or rule or order made thereunder;
(b) require any person to produce or deliver any document
or thing useful or relevant to such inspection;
(c) examine any person acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case related to the inspection.
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, any offence punishable under this Act may also be
investigated into by such authority as the in Central Government may
specify in this behalf and the authority so specified shall have all the
powers which an officer-in-charge of a police station has while
making an investigation into a cognizable offence.
44. The prescribed authority shall furnish to the Central
Government at such time and in such form and manner such returns
and statements as may be prescribed.
45. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Central Government or the authority referred to section 44 or any of
its officers in respect of any loss or damage caused or likely to be
caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or, any rule or order made
thereunder.
46. The Central Government may give such directions as it may
deem necessary to any other authority or any person or class of
persons regarding the carrying into execution of the provisions of this
Act.
47. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that
any of its powers or functions under this Act, except power to make
rule under section 22, shall, in relation to such matters and subject to
such conditions, if any, may be specified in the notification, be
exercised or discharged also by such authority as may be specified.
48.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the value of the article which may be specified under
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2;
(b) the authority which may be specified under clause ( p)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 2;
(c) acceptance or retention of gift or presentation under
clause ( d) of section 4;
Investigation
into cases
under the
Act.
2 of 1974.
Returns by
prescribed
authority to
Central
Government.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Delegation
of powers.
Power to
make rules.

86
(d) ground or grounds on which an organisation may be
specified as an organisation of political nature under sub-
section ( 2) of section 5;
(e) the manner in which the administrative expenses shall
be calculated under sub-section ( 2) of section 8;
(f) the time within which and manner in which any
person or class of persons or an association may be required to
furnish intimation regarding the amount of foreign contribution
received under clause ( c) of section 9;
(g) the time within which and manner in which any
person or class of persons may be required to furnish intimation
regarding foreign hospitality under clause ( e) of section 9;
(h) the manner in which the copy of the order of the
Central Government shall be served upon any person under
section 10;
(i) the form and manner in which the application for
grant of certificate of registration or giving of prior permission
under sub-section ( 1) of section 12;
(j) the fee to be accompanied by the application under
sub-section ( 1) of section 12;
(k) the terms and conditions for granting a certificate or
giving prior permission under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 12;
(l) the manner of utilising the foreign contribution under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 13;
(m) the authority with whom the foreign contribution to
be vested under sub-section ( 1) of section 15;
(n) the period within which and the manner in which the
foreign contribution shall be managed under sub-section ( 2) of
section 15;
(o) the form and manner in which the application for a
renewal of certificate of registration shall be made under sub-
section ( 2) of section 16;
(p) the fee to be accompanied by the application for
renewal of certificate under sub-section ( 2) of section 16;
(q) the form, and manner in which the foreign remittance
received in any of the accounts of the bank or authorised
person in foreign exchange which shall be reported under sub-
section ( 2) of section 17;
(r) the time within which and manner in which the
person who has been granted certificate of registration or given
prior permission under this Act shall give intimation under
section 18;

87
(s) the form and manner in which account of any foreign
contribution and the manner in which such contribution has
been utilised shall be maintained under section 19;
(t) the time within which and manner in which a candidate
for election shall give intimation under section 21;
(u) the manner and procedure to be followed in disposing
of the assets under section 22;
(v) the limits subject to which any confiscation may be
adjudged under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 29;
(w) the fee to be accompanied along with every application
for revision under sub-section ( 5) of section 32;
(x) the form and manner for making of an application for
compounding of an offence and the fees therefor under sub-
section ( 4) of section 41;
(y) the form and manner in which and the time within
which returns and statements to be furnished by the prescribed
authority under section 44;
(z) any other matter which is required to be, or may be
prescribed.
49. Every order made under section 5 and every rule made by
the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the order or rule or both Houses agree that the order
or rule should not be made, the order or rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order or rule.
50. If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary
or expedient in the interests of the general public so to do, it may, by
order and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order,
exempt any person or association or organisation (not being a political
party), or any individual (not being a candidate for election) from the
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act and may, as often
as may be necessary, revoke or modify such order.
51. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any transaction
between the Government of India and the Government of any foreign
country or territory.
Orders and
rules to be
laid before
Parliament.
Power to
exempt in
certain cases.
Act not to
apply to
certain
Government
transactions.

88
52. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
53.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
54.(1) The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (hereafter
referred to as  the repealed Act) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to
have been done or taken under the repealed Act shall, in so far
as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act;
(b) any organisation of a political nature, not being a
political party, to whom the prior permisssion was granted
under section 5 of the repealed Act, shall continue to be the
organisation of a political nature, not being a political party,
under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) section 3 of this Act, till
such permission is withdrawn by the Central Government;
(c) permission to accept foreign hospitality granted under
section 9 of the repealed Act shall be deemed to be the permission
granted under section 6 of this Act until such permission is
withdrawn by the Central Government;
(d) any association prohibited from accepting any foreign
contribution under clause (a) of section 10 of the repealed Act,
in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
shall be deemed to be an association prohibited from accepting
any foreign contribution under section 9 of this Act;
(e) permission obtained under clause ( b) of section 10 of
the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to be the permission until
such permission is withdrawn by the Central Government;
(f) any order issued under section 12 of the repealed Act
shall be deemed to be an order issued under section 10 of this
Act;
Application of
other laws and
barred.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
saving.

89
(g) any order issued under section 31 of the repealed Act
exempting any association or any individual shall be deemed to
be an order under section 50 of this Act till such order is varied
or revoked.
(3) Save as provided in sub-section ( 2), mention of particular
matters in that sub-section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with
regard to the effect of repeal.
10 of 1897.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 was enacted to regulate
the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or hospitality with a view
to ensuring that our parliamentary institutions, political associations, academic
and other voluntary organisations as well as individuals working in important
areas of national life may function in a manner consistent with the values of a
sovereign democratic republic. The Act was amended in 1984 to extend the
provisions of the Act to cover second and subsequent recipients of foreign
contribution and to the members of higher judiciary, besides introducing the
system of grant of registration to the associations receiving foreign contribution.
2. Significant developments have taken place since 1984 such as change in
internal security scenario, an increased influence of voluntary organisations, spread
of use of communication and information technology, quantum jump in the amount
of foreign contribution being received, and large scale growth in the number of
registered organisations. This has necessitated large scale changes in the existing
Act. Therefore, it has been thought appropriate to replace the present Act by a
new legislation to regulate the acceptance, utilisation and accounting of foreign
contribution and acceptance of foreign hospitality by a person or an association.
3. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 provides, inter alia , to
(i) consolidate the law to regulate, acceptance and utilisation of foreign
contribution or foreign hospitality and prohibit the same for any
activities detrimental to the national interests;
(ii) prohibit organisations of political nature, not being political parties from
receiving foreign contribution;
(iii) bring associations engaged in production or broadcast of audio news or
audio visual news or current affairs through any electronic mode under
the purview of the Bill;
(iv) prohibit the use of foreign contribution for any speculative business;
(v) cap administrative expenses at fifty per cent of the receipt of foreign
contribution;
(vi) exclude foreign funds received from relatives living abroad;
(vii ) make provision for intimating grounds for refusal of registration or prior
permission under the Bill;
(viii ) provide arrangement for sharing of information on receipt of foreign
remittances by the concerned agencies to strengthen monitoring;
(ix) make registration to be valid for five years with a provision for renewal
thereof, and also to provide for cancellation or suspension of registration;
(x) make provision for compounding of certain offences.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIVRAJ V . PATIL.
The 12th December, 2006.
90

91
Notes on Clauses
Clause 2 .— This clause defines various expressions occurring in the Bill.
Clause 3 .— This clause, inter alia , provides for prohibition to accept
foreign contribution by certain persons or associations, namely, candidate for
election, correspondent, columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner, printer or publisher
of a registered newspaper, Judge, Government servant or employee of any
corporation, or any other body controlled or owned by the Government, member
of any Legislature, political party or office-bearer thereof, organisation of a
political nature as may be specified by the Central Government; or association
or a company engaged in the production or broadcast of audio news or audio
visual news or current affairs programmes through any electronic mode or any
other electronic form as defined in clause ( r) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of
the Information Technology Act, 2000; or any other mode of mass
communication; or correspondent or columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner of the
said association or the company. This clause further prohibits acceptance of any
foreign contribution or any foreign currency on behalf of any political party or
a person referred to in sub-clause ( i) of this clause. It is further provided that
any currency whether Indian or foreign which has been accepted from any
foreign source shall not be delivered to any person if such person intends, or
is likely, to deliver such currency to any political party or any of the aforesaid
person.
Clause 4 .— This clause provides that the prohibition to accept foreign
contribution under clause shall not apply in case where such contribution is
accepted by way of salary, wages or other remuneration from any foreign
source or by way of payment in the ordinary course of business transacted in
India by the foreign source; or by way of payment in the course of international
trade or commerce or in the ordinary course of business transacted outside India
or as an agent of foreign source in relation to any transaction made by such
foreign source with the Central Government; or State Government or by way of
gift or presentation made to him as a member of any Indian delegation if such
gift or present was in accordance with the rules made by the Central
Government with regard to the acceptance or retention of such gift or
presentation; or by way of remittance received in the ordinary course of
business through any official channel, post office or any authorised person in
foreign exchange under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999; or by way
of payment received from the relative of any person referred to in clause 3.
However, in case any foreign contribution received by any person specified
under clause 3 of the Bill for any of the purposes other than those specified
under this clause, such contribution shall be deemed to have been accepted in
contravention of the provisions of clause 3.
Clause 5 .— Item ( f) of sub-clause ( 1) of clause 3 prohibits acceptance
of foreign contribution by any organisation of a political nature specified by the
Central Government. This clause lays down the procedure to notify an
organisation of a political nature referred to in the said item ( f). This clause

92
provides that the Central Government may, having regard to the activities of the
organisation or the ideology propagated by the organisation or the programme of
the organisation or the association of the organisations with the activities of any
political party, by an order published in the Official Gazette, specify such
organisation as an organisation of a political nature not being a political party.
Before making an order, the Central Government shall give the organisation in
respect of whom the order is proposed to be made a notice in writing informing
it of the ground or grounds, on which it is proposed to be specified an
organisation of a political nature. However, the Central Government may, by
rules made by it, specify the ground or grounds on which an organisation shall
be specified as an organisation of a political nature. The organisation to whom
a notice has been served may, within a period of thirty days from the date of
the notice, make a representation to the Central Government giving reasons for
not specifying such organisation as an organisation of a political nature. The
Central Government may forward the representation to any authority to report on
such representation. The Central Government shall, after considering the
representation and the report of the authority, specify such organisation as an
organisation of a political nature not being a political party.
Clause 6 .— This clause provides for restriction on acceptance of foreign
hospitality. It provides that no member of a Legislature or office bearer of a
political party or Judge or Government servant, or employee of any corporation
shall, while visiting any country or territory outside India, accept, except with
the prior permission of the Central Government any foreign hospitality. However,
it shall not be necessary to obtain any such permission for an emergent medical
aid needed on account of sudden illness contracted during a visit outside India.
Where such foreign hospitality has been received, the person receiving such
hospitality shall give, within one month from the date of receipt of such
hospitality, an intimation to the Central Government as to the receipt of such
hospitality, and the source from which, and the manner in which such hospitality
was received by him.
Clause 7 .— This clause prohibits the transfer of foreign contribution to
any other person. It provides that no person who is registered or has obtained
prior permission under the proposed legislation and receives any foreign
contribution, shall transfer such foreign contribution to any other person unless
such other person is also registered or obtained prior permission under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 8 .— This clause contains restriction to utilise foreign contribution
for administrative purposes. This clause provides that every person, who is
registered or has obtained prior permission under the proposed legislation and
receives any foreign contribution, shall utilise such contribution for the purposes
for which the contribution is received and any foreign contribution or any
income arsing out of it shall not be used for speculative business. It further
provides that such person shall not defray as far as possible such sum, not
exceeding fifty per cent thereof received in a financial year to meet
administrative expenses. However, any sum exceeding fifty per cent of such
contribution may be defrayed with prior approval of the Central Government.
This clause also confers power upon the Central Government to prescribe the
expenses which shall be included in the administrative expenses and the manner
in which the administrative expenses referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be
calculated.

93
Clause 9 .—This clause confers power upon the Central Government
to ( a) prohibit any person or organisation not specified in clause 3 from
accepting any foreign, contribution; ( b) require any person or class of persons
not specified in clause 11, to furnish intimation within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed as to the amount of any foreign contribution
received by such person or class of persons and the source from which and the
manner in which such contribution was received and the purpose for which and
the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised; ( c) require any
person or class of persons not specified in clause 6 to obtain prior permission
of the Central Government before accepting any foreign hospitality; ( d) require
any person or class of persons specified in sub-clause ( 1) of clause 11 to obtain
prior permission of the Central Government before accepting any foreign
contribution; ( e) require any person or class of persons, not specified in clause
6, to furnish intimation, within such time and in such manner as may be
prescribed, as to the receipt of any foreign hospitality, the source from which
and the manner in which such hospitality was received. However, no such
prohibition or requirement shall be made unless the Central Government is
satisfied that the acceptance of foreign contribution by such person or class of
persons or the acceptance of foreign hospitality by such person, is likely to
affect prejudicially the sovereignty and integrity of India; or the public interest;
or freedom or fairness of election to any Legislature; or friendly relations with
any foreign State; or harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic or
regional groups, castes or communities.
Clause 10 .— This clause confers power upon the Central Government to
prohibit payment of currency received in contravention of the proposed
legislation. It provides that where the Central Government is satisfied, after
making such enquiry as it may deem fit, that any person has in his custody or
control of any article or currency, whether Indian or foreign which has been
accepted by such person in contravention of any of the provisions of the
proposed legislation, it may, by order in writing, prohibit such person from
paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing with, in any manner
whatsoever, such article or currency save in accordance with the written orders
of the Central Government and a copy of such order shall be served upon the
person so prohibited in the prescribed manner, and thereupon the provisions of
sub-sections ( 2), ( 3), ( 4) and ( 5) of section 7 of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 shall, so far as may be, apply to, or in relation to, such
article or currency and references in the said sub-clauses to moneys, securities
or credits shall be construed as references to such article or currency.
Clause 11 .— This clause contains provisions relating to registration of
certain persons with the Central Government. This clause provides that no
person having a definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social
programmes shall accept foreign contribution unless such person obtains a
certificate of registration from the Central Government. However any association
registered with the Central Government under section 6 or granted prior
permission under that section of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976,
as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed
to have been registered or granted prior permission, as the case may be, under
this Act and such registration shall be valid for a period of five years from the
date on which this section comes into force.

94
However, if a person referred to in this sub-clause is not registered with
the Cential Government, such person may accept any, foreign contribution only
after obtaining the prior permission from the Central Government and such prior
permission shall be valid for the specific purpose for which it is obtained and
for specific source from which it is obtained. If the person referred to in sub-
c1ause ( 1) or sub-clause ( 2) has been found guilty of violation of any provisions
of this Act or the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976, the unutilised or
unreceived amount of foreign contribution shall not be utilised or received, as the
case may be, without the prior approval of the Central Government.
This clause also confers powers upon the Central Government to specify
by a notification in the Official Gazette, a person or class of persons who, the
area or areas in which, the purpose or purposes for which, the source or
sources from which, the foreign contribution shall be accepted and utilised only
after obtaining its prior permission.
Clause 12 .— This clause contains provisions relating to procedure for
grant of certificate of registration. It provides that every application, for grant
of certificate or giving prior permission, shall be made to the Central
Government in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as may be
specified in rules made by the Central Government. The Central Government
shall; if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of
the particulars specified in that form, reject the application. If on receipt of an
application for registration and after making such inquiry as the Central
Government deems fit, it is satisfied that the applicant fulfils the requirements
mentioned in items ( a) to ( g) of sub-clause ( 3) of this clause, it may register
such person and grant him a certificate of registration or give prior permission
subject to such terms and conditions it may deem fit. The conditions in said
clauses ( a) to ( g) of said sub-clause ( 3), inter alia , provides that the acceptance
of foreign contribution by the person is not likely to affect prejudicially ( i) the
sovereignty and integrity of India; or ( ii) the security, strategy, scientific or
economic interest of the State; or ( iii) the public interest; or ( iv) freedom or
fairness of election to any Legislature; or ( v) friendly relation with any foreign
State; or ( vi) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic, regional
groups, castes or communities and the acceptance of foreign contribution, shall
not lead to incitement of an offence; or shall not endanger the life or physical
safety of any person.
This clause also provides that where the Central Government refuses
registration or does not give prior permission, it shall record the reasons for
such refusaI or for not giving of prior permission and furnish a copy thereof
to the applicant. However, the Central Government may not communicate the
reasons for refusal or giving of prior permission to the applicant under this
clause in cases where there is no obligation to give any information or papers
under the Right to Information Act, 2005. The certificate of registration shall be
valid for a period of five years and the prior permission shall be valid for the
specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution proposed to be
received, as the case may be.
Clause 13 .— This clause contains provisions relating to suspension of
certificate of registration. The clause confers power upon the Central
Government to suspend the certificate of registration up to one hundred and

95
eighty days, as may be specified in the order. Every person whose certificate has
been suspended shall not receive any foreign contribution during the period of
the suspension of the certificate and shall utilise the foreign contribution in his
custody with the prior approval of the Central Government. However, the Central
Government, on an application made by such person, may allow receipt of any
foreign contribution on such terms and conditions as it may specify.
Clause 14 .— This clause contains provisions relating to cancellation of
certificate of registration. The Central Government, may, if it is satisfied, after
making such inquiry as it may deem fit, by order, cancel the certificate if the
holder of the certificate has made a statement in the application for the grant of
certificate or renewal thereof, which is incorrect or false; or violated any of the
terms and conditions of the certificate or renewal thereof; or violated any of the
provisions of proposed legislation or rules or order made thereunder. No order
of cancellation of certificate shall be made unless the person concerned has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. Any person whose certificate has
been cancelled shall not be eligible for registration or grant of prior permission
for a period of three years from the date of cancellation of such certificate.
Clause 15 .— This clause contains provisions relating to management of
foreign contribution of every person whose certificate has been cancelled. It
provides that the foreign contribution and assets created out of the foreign
contribution in the custody of every person whose certificate has been cancelled
shall vest in such authority as may be specified by rules made by the Central
Government. The authority may, if it considers necessary and in public interest,
manage the activities of the person and such authority may utilise the foreign
contribution or dispose of the assets created of it in case adequate funds are not
available for running such activity. The authority referred to in sub-clause ( 1) of
this clause shall return the foreign contribution and the assets vested upon it
under that sub-clause to the person referred to in the said sub-clause if such
person is subsequently registered under this Act.
Clause 16 .— This clause contains provisions relating to renewal of
certificate. It provides that every person who has been granted a certificate of
registration shall renew his certificate within six months before the expiry of the
period of the certificate. The application for renewal of certificate shall be made
to the Central Government in such form and manner and accompanied by such
fee as may be prescribed. The Central Government may renew the certificate of
registration subject to such terms and conditions as it may deem fit and grant
a certificate of renewal for a period of five years. The Central Government may
refuse to renew the certificate in case where a person has violated any of the
provisions of proposed legislation or the rules made thereunder.
Clause 17 .— This clause contains provisions relating to foreign
contribution through scheduled bank. It provides that every person who has been
granted a certificate or given prior permission under clause 12 shall receive
foreign contribution in a single account only through such one of the branches
of a bank as he may specify in his application for grant of certificate. However,
such person may open one or more accounts in one or more banks for utilising
the foreign contribution received by him. No funds other than foreign
contribution shall be received or deposited in such account or accounts.

96
This clause also provides that every bank or authorised person in foreign
exchange shall report to such authority as may be specified, ( a) the amount of
foreign remittance; ( b) the source and manner in which the foreign contribution
was received; and ( c) other particulars, in such form and manner as may be
specified by rules made by the Central Government.
Clause 18 .— This clause contains provisions relating to giving of
intimation to the Central Government, and such other authority as may be
specified by the Central Government. Every person who has been granted a
certificate of registration or given prior approval under the proposed legislation
shall give an intimation, within such time and in such manner as may be
prescribed, to the Central Government, and such other authority as may be
specified by the Central Government giving details of the amount of each foreign
contribution received by him, the source from which and the. manner in which
such foreign contribution was received, and the purposes for which, and the
manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised by him.
It further provides that every person receiving contribution shall submit
a copy of a statement duly certified by officer of the bank or authorised person
in foreign exchange to the Central Government along with the intimation under
section 18.
Clause 19 .— This clause contains provisions relating to maintenance of
accounts by every person who has been granted a certificate of registration or
given prior permission under the proposed legislation. Every such person shall
maintain, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, an account of any
foreign contribution received by him and a record as to the manner in which
such contribution has been uilised by him.
Clause 20 .— This clause contains provisions relating to audit of
accounts. It provides that where any person who has been granted a certificate
of registration or given prior permission fails to furnish any intimation under the
proposed legislation within the time specified therefor or the intimation so
furnished is not in accordance with law or if, after inspection of such intimation,
the Central Government has any reasonable cause to believe that any provision
of proposed legislation has been, or is being, contravened, the Central
Government may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted officer,
holding a Group A post under the Central Government or any other officer or
authority or organisation, as it may think fit to audit any books of account kept
or maintained by such person and thereupon every such officer shall have the
right to enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour before sunset and
after sunrise, for the purpose of auditing the said books of account. Any
information obtained from such audit shall be kept confidential and shall not be
disclosed except for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 21 .— This clause contains provisions relating to intimation by
candidate for election. This clause requires every candidate for election, who had
received any foreign contribution, at any time within one hundred and eighty
days immediately preceding the date on which he is duly nominated as such
candidate, to give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed,
an intimation to the Central Government or the prescribed authority or both as
to the amount of foreign contribution, received by him, the source from which,

97
and the manner in which, such foreign contribution was received and the
purpose for which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was
utilised by him.
Clause 22 .— This clause contains provisions relating to disposal of
assets created out of foreign contribution. This clause provides that where any
person who was permitted to accept foreign contribution, ceases to exist or has
become defunct, all the assets of such person shall be disposed off in
accordance with the provisions contained in any law for the time being in force
and in the absence of any such law, the Central Government may, having;
regard. to the nature of assets created out of foreign contribution received under
the proposed legislation, by notification, specify that all such assets shall be
disposed off by such authority, as it may specify, in such manner and procedure
as may be prescribed.
Clause 23 .— This clause contains provisions relating to inspection of
accounts or records. It provides that if the Central Government suspect on the
ground that any provision of the proposed legislation has been or is being,
contravened by ( a) any political party; or ( b) any person, or ( c) any
organisation, or ( d) any association, it may authorise such gazetted officer
holding a Group A post under the Central Government or such other officer or
authority or organisation as it may think fit to inspect any account or record
maintained by such political party, person, organisations or association, as the
case may be, and thereupon every such authorised officer shall have the right
to enter in or upon any premises for the purpose of inspecting the said account
or record.
Clause 24 .— This clause contains provisions relating to seizure of
accounts or records. It provides that if, after inspection of an account or
record, the authorised officer has any reasonable cause to believe that any
provision of proposed legislation or of any other law relating to foreign exchange
has been, or is being contravened, he may seize such account or record and
produce the same before the court, authority or tribunal in which any proceeding
is brought for such contravention. However, the authorised officer shall return
such account or record to the person from whom it was seized if no proceeding
is brought within six months from the date of such seizure for the contravention
disclosed by such account or record.
Clause 25 .— This clause contains provisions relating to seizure of article
or currency or security received in contravention of the proposed legislation. It
provides that if any gazetted officer, authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government, has any reason to believe that any person has in his possession or
control any article exceeding the value specified, or currency or security
whether Indian or foreign, in relation to which any provision of the proposed
legislation has been or is being, contravened, he may seize such article or
currency or security.
Clause 26 .— This clause contains provisions relating to disposal of
seized article or currency or security. It provides that the Central Government
may, having regard to the value of article or currency or security, their
vulnerability to the theft or any other relevant consideration, by notification,
specify such article or currency or security which shall, as soon as may be after

98
their seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in such manner, as the Central
Government may, from time to time, determine after following the procedure
specified in the said clause.
Clause 27.—This clause provides that the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply in so far as they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act to all seizures made under the proposed legislation.
Clause 28 .—This clause contains provisions relating to confiscation of
article or currency or security obtained in contravention of the proposed
legislation. Any article or currency or security which is seized under clause 25
shall be liable to confiscation if such article or currency or security has been
adjudged under clause 29 to have been received or obtained in contravention of
the proposed legislation.
Clause 29 .—This clause contains provisions relating to adjudication of
confiscation. Any confiscation referred to in clause 28 may be adjudged without
limit, by the Court of Session within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
seizure was made; and subject to such limits as may be prescribed, by such
officer, not below the rank of an Assistant Sessions Judge, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
Clause 30 .—This clause contains provisions relating to procedure for
confiscation. This clause provides that no order of adjudication of confiscation
shall be made unless a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against
such confiscation has been given to the person from whom any article or
currency or security has been seized.
Clause 31 .—This clause contains provisions relating to appeal. This
clause, inter alia , provides that any person aggrieved by any order made under
clause 29 may prefer an appeal, where the order has been made by the Court
of Session, to the High Court to which such Court is subordinate or where the
order has been made by any officer specified under sub-clause ( b) of clause 29,
to the Court of Session within the local limits of whose Jurisdiction such order
of adjudication of confiscation was made.
Clause 32 .— This clause contains provisions relating to revision of
orders by the Central Government. This clause, inter alia , provides that the
Central Government, may, either of its own motion or on an application for
revision by the person registered under the proposed legislation, for revision, call
for the record of any proceeding in which any such order has been passed by
it and may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and, subject
to the provisions of proposed legislation, may pass such order thereon as it
thinks fit. The Central Government shall not of its own motion revise any order
under this clause if the order has been made more than one year previously. In
the case of an application for revision under this section by the person referred
to in sub-clause ( 1), the application must be made within one year from the date
on which the order was communicated to him or the date on which he
otherwise came to know of it, whichever is earlier. However, the Central
Government may, if it is satisfied that such person was prevented by sufficient
cause from making the application within that period, admit an application made
after the expiry of that period. The Central Government shall not revise any
order where an appeal against the order lies but has not been made and the time

99
within which such appeal may be made has not expired or such person has not
waived his right of appeal. Every application by such person for revision under
this clause shall be accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed.
Clause 33 .—This clause provides for punishment for making of false
statement, declaration or delivering false accounts: It provides that any person,
subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, who knowingly, ( a) gives
a false intimation under clause 9 or clause 18; or ( b) seeks prior permission or
registration by means of fraud, false representation or concealment of material
fact, shall, on conviction by a court, be liable to imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
Clause 34 .—This clause provides for penalty for article or currency or
security obtained in contravention of clause 10. It provides that if any person,
on whom any prohibitory order has been served under clause 10, pays, delivers,
transfers or otherwise deals with, in any manner whatsoever, any article or
currency or security, whether Indian or foreign, in contravention of such
prohibitory order, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. The court trying such
contravention may also impose on the person convicted an additional fine
equivalent to the market value of the article or the amount ofthe currency or
security in respect of which the prohibitory order has been contravened by him
or such part thereof as the court may deem fit.
Clause 35 .—This clause provides punishment for contravention of any
provision of the proposed legislation. It provides that whoever accepts, or assists
any person, political party or organisation in accepting any foreign contribution
or any currency or security from a foreign source in contravention of any
provision of the proposed legislation or any rule or order made thereunder, shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or
with fine, or with both.
Clause 36 .—This clause confers power upon the court to impose
additional fine where article or currency or security is not available for
confiscation.
Clause 37 .— This clause provides for penalty for offences where no
separate punishment has been provided under the proposed legislation.
Clause 38 .— This clause prohibits acceptance of foreign contribution for
a period of three years by any person in case of second or subsequent
conviction under the proposed legislation.
Clause 39 .— This clause contains provisions relating to offences by
companies. Where an offence under the proposed legislation or any rule or order
made thereunder has been committed by a company, every person who, at the
time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly. However, such person shall not be
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.

100
It further provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation
or any rule or order made thereunder has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shal1 also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shal1 be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 40 .—This clause contains provisions relating to bar on
prosecution of offences under the proposed legislation. It provides that no court
shall take cognizance of any offence under the proposed legislation, except with
the previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer authorised by
that Government in this behalf.
Clause 41 .—This clause contains provisions relating to certain offences.
It provides that any offence punishable under the proposed legislation (whether
committed by an individual or association or any officer or employee thereof),
not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, may, before the
institution of any prosecution, be, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, compounded by such officers or authorities
and for such amount as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
It further provides that no offence shall be compounded if such offence
is committed by an individual or association or its officer or other employee
within a period of three years from the date on which a similar offence
committed by it or him was compounded under this clause. It also provides that
where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no
prosecution shal1 be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender
in relation to whom the offence is so compounded.
It also provides that every officer or authority referred to in sub-
clause ( 1) of this clause while dealing with a proposal for the compounding of
an offence for a default in compliance with any provision of proposed legislation
which requires by an individual or association or its officer or other employee
to obtain permission or file or register with, or deliver or send to, the Central
Government or any prescribed autbority any return, account or other document,
may, direct, by order, if he or it thinks fit to do so, any individual or association
or its officer or other employee to file or register with, such return, account or
other document within such time as may be specified in the order.
Clause 42 .— This clause confers power upon the inspecting officer
referred to in clause 23 to call for information or require any person to produce
or deliver any document as he thinks useful or relevant to the inspection under
the proposed legislation. It also confers power upon the said officer to examine
any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.
Clause 43 .—This clause provides that any offence punishable under the
proposed legislation may also be investigated into by such authority as the
Central Government may specify in this behalf and the authority so specified
shall have all the powers which an officer-in-charge of a police station has while
making an investigation into a cognizable offence.

101
Clause 44 .— This clause requires that the prescribed authority shall
furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and manner
such returns and statements as may be prescribed.
Clause 45 .— This clause protects the action taken in good faith by the
Central Government or the prescribed authority or any of its officers. It provides
that no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government
or the prescribed authority or any of its officers in respect of any loss or
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done
or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of proposed legislation or
any rule or order made thereunder.
Clause 46 .— This clause confers power upon the Central Government to
give such directions as it may deem necessary to any other authority or any
person or class of persons regarding the carrying into execution of the
provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 47 .—This clause contains provisions relating to delegation of
powers. It provides that the Central Government may, by notification, delegate,
subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification,
such of its powers and functions under the proposed legislation (except the
power to make rules) as it may deem necessary to such authority as may be.
specified.
Clause 48 .— This clause confers power upon the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation, and in
particular for matters specified in sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause.
Clause 49 .— This clause requires laying of orders made under clause 5
and the rules made under the proposed legislation before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 50 .— This clause confers power upon the Central Government to
grant exemption in certain cases. It provides that if the Central Government is
of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the interests of the general
public so to do, it may, by order and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in the order, exempt any person or association or organisation (not
being a political party), or any individual (not being a candidate for election)
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the proposed legislation and
may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such order.
Clause 51 .—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall not apply to any transaction between the Government of India
and the Government of any foreign country or territory.
Clause 52 .—This clause provides that, the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any
other law for the time being in force.
Clause 53 .—This clause confers power upon the Central Government to
remove difficulties arising in giving effect to the proposed legislation. It provides
that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Central Government may by order, published in the official

102
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the
proposed legislation as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
However, no order shall be made under his clause after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of the proposed legislation. Every order made shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 54 .—This clause proposes to repeal the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976 and save certain matters specified in sub-clause (2) of
the said clause.

103
103
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 5 of the Bill confers power upon the Central
Government to issue orders to specify the organisation referred to in the clause
as an organisation of a political nature not being a political party referred to in
clause 3( 1).
2. Clause 48 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The matters
in respect of which rules may be made relate, inter alia , to, the value of the article
and the authority which may be specified under clause 2( 1); acceptance or
retention of gift or presentation under clause 4; ground or grounds on which an
organisation may be specified as an organisation of political nature under clause
5(2); the manner in which the administrative expenses shall be calculated under
clause 8( 2); the time within which and manner in which any person or class of
persons or an association may be required to furnish intimation regarding the
amount of foreign contribution received under clause 9; the time within which and
manner in which any person or class of persons may be required to furnish
intimation regarding foreign hospitality under clause 9; the manner in which the
copy of the order of the Central Government shall be served upon any person
under clause 10; the form and manner in which the application for grant of
certificate of registration on giving of prior permission and fee therefor under
clause 12( 1); the terms and conditions for granting a certificate or giving prior
permission under clause 12( 3); the manner of utilising the foreign contribution
under clause 13( 2); the authority with whom the foreign contribution to be vested
under clause 15( 1); the period within which and the manner in which the foreign
contribution shall be managed under clause 15( 2); the form and manner in which
the application for renewal of certificate of registration shall be made and the fees
therefor under clause 16( 2); the form and manner in which the foreign remittance
received in any of the accounts of the bank or authorised person in foreign
exchange which shall be reported under clause 17( 2); the time within which and
the manner in which the person who has been granted certificate of registration
or given prior permission shall give intimation under clause 18; the form and
manner in which account of any foreign contribution and the manner in which
such contribution has been utilised shall be maintained under clause 19; the time
within which and manner in which a candidate for election shall give intimation
under clause 21; the manner and procedure to be followed in disposing of the
assets under clause 22; the limits subject to which any confiscation may be
adjudged under clause 29( 1); the fee to be accompanied along with every
application for revision under clause 32( 5); the form and manner for making of
an application for compounding of an offence and the fees therefor under clause
41(4); the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and
statements to be furnished by the prescribed authority under clause 44; any other
matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
3. The matters in respect of which orders may be issued and the rules
may be made by the Central Government are generally matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

104
104
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to consolidate the law to regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution
or foreign hospitality by certain individuals or associations or companies and to prohibit
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality for any activities
detrimental to the national interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

105
ANNEXURE-II
PRESS COMMUNIQUE DATED 9TH FEBRUARY, 2007 ON THE
FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) BILL, 2006
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 as introduced in Rajya Sabha on
18th December, 2006 and pending therein has been referred to Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs headed by Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P. for examination
and report. The Bill propose to replace the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
2. Change in internal security scenario, increased influence of voluntary organizations, spread
of use of communication and information technology, quantum jump in the amount of foreign
contribution being received, and large scale growth in the number of registered organizations have
necessitated large scale changes in the existing Act. Therefore, the present legislation seeks to
replace the existing Act to regulate the acceptance, utilization and accounting of foreign contribution
and acceptance of foreign hospitality by a person or an association.
3. The Committee invites written memoranda containing suggestions/ views/comments of
individuals/institutions/organisations interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
4. Those desirous of submitting memoranda to the Committee may send two copies (each in
English and Hindi) thereof to Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary, Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001 {Tele: 23034252 (0) and 23012007 (fax)}  within
30 days of the date of this advertisement indicating whether they would also be interested in giving
oral evidence before the Committee.
5. The memorandum which might be submitted to the Committee would form part of its
records and would be treated as confidential and therefore should not be printed, circulated or
publicized by anyone, as such an act would constitute a breach of privilege of the Committee.
6. The Bill was published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated the
18 December 2006. Interested individuals/institutions/organisations, etc. may obtain, on written
request, a copy of the Bill from Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer, Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Cabin ‘A’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-ll000l. Its electronic text is also
available on the official website 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in by clicking the option “Bills with
Committees”.
Website:- E-mail: rs-ha@sansad.nic.in
http://rajyasabha.nic.in E-mail: rohtas@sansad.nic.in
105

106
ANNEXURE-III
GIST OF VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE/VARIOUS ORGANISATIONS AND
POLITICAL PARTIES ON THE BILL AND COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS THEREON
Sl. R.S. Name of Section/ V iews/suggestions/comments Comments of MHA
No. Sl. Individuals/ Clause
No. Organisations
12 3 4 5 6
1. 1 Dr. Lalit Shah, 1 1(i) (i) The period of validity of registration V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
Managing Trustee, should be 15 years or more. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
Anjali: Society for out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Rural Health and (ii) Registration should be renewed Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
Development, within one year after expiry period. de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
Sabarkantha, or ganizations, However, the genuine organizations
Gujarat. (iii) There should be time limit during which are complying with the provisions of
which the renewal process should be law, shall be granted renewal of registration
over. for 5 years on filing an application 6 months
prior to expiry of registration certificate. Our
(iv) If it is not a threat to national experience shows that about 40% of the
security there should not be any registered associations do not even submit
renewal instead the nation can evolve annual accounts.
policy of verifying the  voluntary agencies
to know the  genuineness of the
organisations.
12(3)(b) The prior permission or registration The registration/prior permission is granted only
should not be restricted to only those to such org anizations, which have proven
who have undertaken meaningful activities track record of carrying out specific activities.
but it should also be available those This will ensure exclusion of fly by night
who wish/intend to undertake meaningful operators.
activities.

107
12 There should  be limit of 90 days and Time frame for grant of prior permission/
180 days for grant of prior permission registration may lead to deemed sanctions in
and registration respectively. case of non verification of antecedents and
activities of the associations within statutory
time period.
18(2) There should not be any requirerment This provision has been made to ensure proper
regarding intimation as all details are monitoring of receipt and utilization of foreign
provided in FC-3 annually. contribution.
2. 2 Rev.N.S.Phawa, 3(1)(f) The word “of political nature” is Activities of political nature have been defined
Secretary, North East ambiguous
 and vague and can lead  to in Clause 5(1). Detailed guidelines have been
India Christian construing interpretation according to formulated for declaring an association to be
Council, Meghalaya. whims and fancies since it is not an organisation of political nature not being
defined. political party. These guidelines would be
suitably incorporated in the Rules after passage
of the Bill in the Parliament.
3(iii) read 3(iii) read w ith Section 3(i) (g) and (h) The Bill seeks to regulate only foreign
with runs cou nter to allowing Foreign Direct contribution i.e. the money coming without
Section Investment (FDI) in the media industry consideration. Foreign equity is out of the
3(i) (g) and runs counter to Articles 18 and 19 purview of this Bill.
and (h) of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (UDHR).
The words “speculative business”
 is not The definition of speculative business shall be
defined anywhere in the Bill and there- suitably provided in the Rules after passage of
fore, can lead to arbitrary application the Bill in Parliament. The terms not defined in
similar to l(b) in 3(ii) of Statement of the Law will have the same meaning as
Objects and Reasons. It conflicts with commonly inferred in the English language.
Income Tax Act, 1961, Section 11(5).
The new proposal may be sychronised
with Section 11(5) of Income Tax Act,
1961 or deleted.

108
12 3 4 5 6
8(1)(b) The word “administrative expenses” read Clause 8(2) Clearly provides that the elements
and 8(2). with Section 8(1) and 8(2) of FCR Bill of administrative expenses shall be prescribed
2006 is not defined at all in the Bill. by the Central Government. This provision will
enable the Central Government to modify,
amend the components of administrative
expenses as per the changing times and nature
of the organizations.
12(3)(a)(ii), The words “inducement”, “communal It is not feasible to define each and every
(iii) and tension and disharmony, “propagate word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
(v) sedition or advocate methods” are not defined in the Law will have the same meaning
defined anywhere in the Bill and there as commonly inferred in the English language.
is every apprehension that they can be
used with malafide intension. It is an
outright attempt to indirectly infringe
and curtail religious freedom as stated
in Article 18 of UDHR and Article 25-28
provided in the Constitution of India.
This should be deleted.
12(3)(d) The provision for renewal of registration V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
and 16 and not granting registration to convicted reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
individuals is aimed at adding more out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
burdens or probably to provide lording Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
over the V oluntary Sector or to make de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
it toe the line of the powers that be. organiz ations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. More over, receipt of foreign
contribution by convicted persons may not be
desirable in public interest.

109
12 Without a time frame for disposal Time frame for grant of prior permission/
of application for registration/prior registration may lead to deemed sanctions in
permission can lead to indefinite pending case of non verification of antecedents and
thereof. activities of the associations within statutory
time period.
Appeal Provision for appeal should  be included Clause 12 (4) clearly provides that reasons for
for all relevant Sections of the Bill refusal of grant of certificate shall be given.
in the Spirit of Article 32 of the This takes care of the point raised.
Constitution of India and Article 10 of
UDHR.
50 The power to exempt certain cases from This clause is taken from Section 31 of the
operation of any of the provisions of existing Act. This Section is used under
this Act without proper guidelines
 is exceptional circumstances to over come
fraught with danger of motivated difficulties due to unforeseen situations.
exemptions. This clause should be Administrative guidelines are already in place
deleted. for judicious exercise of powers under this
clause. The same shall be suitably incorporated
in the rules.
3. 3 Shri Prem Chand 5 The provision for declaring an The procedure for declaring an organization of
Bhandari, Dilshad organization of a political nature not political nature not being a political party has
Garden, Delhi-95. being a political party can be abused been provided in Clause 5 of the Bill, which
by the Government in power to harass provides sufficient safeguards to prevent abuse
or deprive its perceived opponents of of power. Detailed guidelines have been
legitimate foreign contribution. formulated for declaring an association to be
an organisation of political nature not being
political party. These guidelines would be
suitably incorporated in the Rules after passage
of the Bill in the Parliament.
2(1)(h)(i). Foreign contributions can be manipulated This Bill seeks to regulate only the foreign
by unscrupulous traders by overinvoicing contribution. Commercial transactions are out
goods and services supplied to foreign of purview of this Bill.
customers. Overinvoicing should be

110
12 3 4 5 6
treated as an offence under the Bill/Act,
since such deceitful contribution is
unauthorised
 and hidden vide explanation
3 under definition of Foreign Contribution.
2(1)(h)(i) It needs to be checked whether the The drafting has been finalized in consultation
retention of the word “Not” in the with the Ministry of Law. The same may be
definition of “Foreign Contribution” finalized in consultation with the Ministry of
occurring in line 3 of item (1) of sub Law.
clause (h) of clause 2 of the Bill is
correct or it should be deleted. Perhaps
drafting defect.
12(4). Proviso to sub clause 4 of clause 12 This provision has been made to ensure
of the Bill requires to be deleted in consistency with the Right to Information Act,
the interest of transparency of conduct 2005.
of Government business and in the light
of the latest views both the Government
and the Central Information Commi-
ssion and the vigilant public in regard
to sharing of information
 under  the
Right to Information Act.
4. 4 ICAl, Name of In the age of globalisation and liberali The name has been retained keeping in view
ICAl Bhawan, the Act -sation, the use of words ‘regulatory’ the objectives sought to be achieved. However,
Indraprastha or ‘control’ may give a wrong impre- the same may be considered based on totality
Marg, New ssion in the minds  of overseas donors... of the requirements.
Delhi-110002 The law may facilitate rather than
obstruct the inflow of foreign funds,
so long as such funds are intended
to be used for the objects permissible
under the law. The name of the new
Act may be ‘the Foreign Contribution
Management Act, 2006’.

111
Preamble The word ‘by certain individuals or The existing definition of ‘Person’ in clause
associations or companies’ appearing 2(1)(m) is appropriate since it covers
in the Preamble, may be replaced by associations also.
‘by certain persons, associations or
companies’. The definition does not
take into account
 entries like partnership
firm, associations of persons,  body of
individuals, whether incorporated or  not
or any artificial juristic person.  In view
of the above, the expression ‘person’  to
be defined in the new law may
specificalIy include inter alia ‘a partnership
firm, an association of persons, a body
of individuals, whether incorporated or
not or any artificial juristic person’.
Object of The objects of the proposed Bill may Not agreeable since it is not in line with the
the Bill. include a process of governance for the purpose of the Bill.
NGOs which is aimed at enhancing
their Financial Management capacities.
It would be better if the object of bill
is to enhance the Financial Management
capacities of NGOs.
2(1)(h) There appears to be no logic for This provision will facilitae efficient and
Explanation treating interest accrued or any other proper accounting of foreign contributions.
2. income derived from foreign contributions
to be foreign contribution under the law.
It would be an arduous task if every
organization was to report on the income
derived to it from investments made
utilizing foreign contribution. In addition,
there are
 several NPOs who are involved
in Income  Generation Programmes for
increasing their self reliance and in the
above cases; it will cause a lot of hard-
ship.

112
12 3 4 5 6
3 This clause will necessarily have to  be The existing provision is appropriate.
amended to distinguish between the
categories of persons who have been
prohibited to accept foreign contribution.
While category 3(1)(a)(b)(d)(e) may
continue, the changes may be made to
category 3(1)(c) to permit Government
servants (not Judges) and employees of
any Corporation to serve on the
governance bodies of NPOs, but not to
accept foreign contribution for personal
needs.
3(1)(f) The Bill does not State the grounds, Activities of political nature have been defined
5(1) which makes the provision vague and in Clause 5(1). Detailed guidelines have been
gives unlimited power to the Government. formulated for declaring an association to be
an organisation of political nature not being
political party. These guidelines would be
suitably incorporated in the Rules after passage
of the Bill in the Parliament.
3(1)(g) The Government has opened up the The purpose of the Bill is to ensure that the
and (h). print media to foreign direct investment foreign contribution is not utilized inter alia ,
and allowed FDI in private FM radio for influencing electoral politics.
services. In the light of this situation
where on one hand foreign stake is
allowed but foreign contribution is
prohibited is puzzling.
4 This clause may include professional The Bill seeks to regulate only foreign
fees along with payment in ordinary contribution i.e. the money coming without
course of business (or profession). The consideration. Foreign equity is out of the
gifts in foreign exchange from anyone purview of this Bill.

113
(including non-relatives) may be part of
the clause in view of the fact that the
same are now taxable in the hands of
the recipients and clause 56(2)(v) of
the Income
 Tax Act, 1961 and hence
can be monitored.
7 Many NGOs are  involved in micro credit. Micro credit is considered as an economic
They give funds to the SHGs or their activity and, therefore, is permissible.
Federations whether registered or un-
registered. It may be specified whether
this is allowed or not.
8 The term  ‘administrative expenses’ Clause 8(2) clearly provides that the elements
may be clearly defined in the law itself. of administrative expenses shall be prescribed
Alternatively, clause 48 titled “Power to by the Central Government. This provision will
make rules” may specifically include enable the Centr al Government to modify,
items and expenses within administrative amend the components of administrative
expenses. ex penses as per the changing times and
At the time of granting certification/ nature of the organizations.
registration, the Central Government may
prescribed a maximum percentage for
administrative expenses on a case to
case basis for each organisation or for
purposes.
1 1 Automatic re-registration of the V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
organisation, which has, for the past reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
5 years, been regularly
 submitting its FC out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
returns  with  no  adverse  comments Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
being  made  against  it,  may  be d e-register consistently defaulting/defunct
considered. organ izations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.

114
12 3 4 5 6
11 In clause 11(1), instead of ‘no person’, As per clause 2(1)(m) ‘person’ includes
it may refer to ‘no association’. Clause association also. Therefore, existing provision
11(2) may refer to ‘Every association’ is appropriate.
instead of ‘Every person’.
11 Clause 11 may also exclude registered V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
Trusts and NGOs with five years reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
standing from requirement of registration out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
and permission, allowing them to receive Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
foreign contribution without prior d e-register consistently defaulting/defunct
permission, under automatic route. There organizations. However, the genuine organizations
may be requirement of their receiving which are complying with the provisions of
such foreign contributions in  one single law, shall be granted renewal of registration
designated bank account and may submit for 5 years on filing an application 6 months
a post facto intimation in the prescribed prior to expiry of registration certificate. Our
form and may continue to submit six experience shows that about 40% of the
monthly audited statements of utilisation registered associations do not even submit
of such foreign contributions. annual accounts.
A threshold limit of say Rs. 10 lakhs or Such a threshold for exemption from
USD 25,000 may be provided upto which registration/prior permission may provide escape
no registration or permission under FCR route to the associations seeking foreign
be required. contribution. Once registration is granted, there
is no restriction on amount of foreign
contribution received.
5. 5 Babu Mathew, Clause 3 Activity of political nature conforming The purpose of the Bill is to ensure that the
Country Director, (1)(F) and to the Constitution of India must be foreign contribution is not utilized inter alia ,
Action Aid India, 5(1) considered as a legitimate activity under for influencing electoral politics.
New Delhi. the statute.

115
Clause 12 The grant of certificate of registration The receipt of foreign contribution by a person
may not be refused  on the ground that against whom any prosecution for any offence
any prosecution for any offence is is pending is likely to be utilized for activites
pending against the applicant. detrimental to national interest. Therefore, the
same may not be allowed.
11 (1) The provision for renewals of registration V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
may not be retained and there should reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
not be any time limit on the life span out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
of a certificate of registration. Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
oranizations. However, the genuine organizations
which are complying with the provisions of
law, shall be granted renewal of registration
for 5 years on filing an application 6 months
prior to expiry of registration certificate. Our
experience shows that about 40% of the
registered associations do not even submit
annual accounts.
3(1)(f) It should be clarified in the statute that The purpose of the Bill is to ensure that the
any non-party political activity, which foreign contribution is not utilized inter alia ,
promotes constitutional goals, will not be for influencing electoral politics.
covered by activity of a political nature.
6. 6 Vidyullata 3(1)(f) and The activities of political nature may be Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
Pandit, Secretary, 5(1) clearly defined in the Bill. to be an organisation of political nature not
Vidhayak being political party. These guidelines would be
Sansad, Thane, suitably incorporated in the Rules after passage
Maharashtra of the Bill in the Parliament.
3(1)(g) Inclusion of electronic media i.e. asso- The Bill seeks to regulate only foreign
ciations engaged in the production contribution i.e. the money coming without
of broadcast of audio/audio visual news/ consideration. Foreign equity is out of the
current affairs programme through any purview of this Bill.
electronic mode in the prohibited
category runs countered to allowing
foreign equity in media companies.

116
12 3 4 5 6
12(3)(b) ‘Meaningful Activity’ has not been It is not feasible to define each and every
clearly defined. This leaves scope for word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
for administrative discretion. defined in the Law will have the same meaning
as commonly inferred in the English language.
12(5) Renewal of registration once in  5 years Validity of registration for 5 years is considered
may be dropped since it is contrast to reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
the liberalizing spirit of Government’s out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
recent economic policies. Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.
8(1)(b) The limit of administrative expenses at Basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
50% of the total budget is draconian. foreign contribution that is received for specific
tasks is not utilized for activities other than the
stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of 50% has been provided in the
proposed Bill to prevent diversion of FC. This
provision will also encourage good governance
in the voluntary sector. This limit was
incorporated as per the decision of the GoM.
7. 7 Shri P.M. General The existing Act is sufficient and does The reasons for replacement of the Act by a
Tripathi, not require to be replaced. new Bill have been explained in the Statement
President, of Objects and Reasons.
A V ARD,
New Delhi.

117
General The Bill violates the spirit  of Govern- The Bill seeks to put in place a system of
ment’s policy of liberalization, efficient monitoring of receipt and utilization of
globalization and privatization. foreign contribution without compromising
national security.
General The Bill is regorous, harsh and negative, The Bill seeks to put in place a system of
Therefore, needs to be toned down. efficient monitoring of receipt and utilization of
foreign contribution without compromising
national security.
Preamble The negative outlook of the preamble The preamble has been drafted keeping in view
of the proposed Bill needs to be replaced the objects of the Bill.
with a positive one.
The expression ‘an organization of a Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
political nature’ should be defined declaring an association to be an organisation
precisely. of political nature not being political party.
These guidelines would be suitably incorporated
in the Rules after passage of the Bill in the
Parliament.
8(1)(a) The expression ‘speculative business’ The definition of speculative business shall be
needs to be defined. suitably provided in the Rules after passage of
the Bill in Parliament. The terms not defined in
the Law will have the same meaning as
commonly inferred in the English lanuage.
8(1)(b) The limit of administrative expenses at Basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
50% of the total budget has been foreign cont ribution that is received for specific
provided. The ceiling of 50% needs to tasks is not utilized for activities other than the
be deleted. stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of 50% has been provided in the
proposed Bill to prevent diversion of FC. This
provision will also encourage good governance
in the voluntary sector. This limit was
incorporated as per the decision of the GoM.

118
12 3 4 5 6
12 No fee for registration may be charged. Fee is nominal only. This will discourage
frivolous applications.
16 The provision of renewal  should be This provision of renewal has been provided
delected. to ensure weeding out of defunct/inoperative
organizations.
8. 8 Shri S. Trilochan 12(3)(b) ‘Meaningful Activity’ has not been clearly It is not feasible to define each and every
Sastry, IIM, defined. This leaves scope for adminis- word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
Bangalore trative discretion. defined in the Law will have the same meaning
as commonly inferred in the English language.
12(3)(d) The grant of certificate of registration The receipt of foreign contribution by a person
may not be refused on the ground that against whom any prosecution for any offence
any prosecution for any offence is is pending is likely to be utilized for activities
pending against the applicant. detrimental to national interest. Therefore, the
same may not be allowed.
13,14 Clauses 13,14 and
 15 give wide ranging These provisions have been made to ensure
and and sweeping powers to the bureau- that the foreign contribution is utilized for the
15 cracy. stated objectives of the organization and is not
The provision for inspection and seizure diverted to activities detrimental to the national
is not requied. interest. Sufficient safeguards have been
provided to avoid misuse of the provisions.
9. 9 Shri Vinay 2(d), 2(k) The candidates contesting zila parishad Inclusion of candidates contesting zila parishad
Sahasrabuddhe and panchayat elections should also be and panchayat elections in the Bill will broaden
and others of brought  under the purview of definition the scope of the Act and it may not be
Rambhau Mhalgi of legislature under Section 2(k) so that administratively possible to implement the same.
Prabodhini, candidate  for   elections  gets   a
Mumbai. com prehensive definition.
2(1)(i) The definition of foreign hospitality needs The existing definition seems to be appropriate.
to be broadened.

119
2(1)(j) The definition of foreign source needs The existing definition seems to be appropriate.
to be reconsidered.
3(1) Those who have left the Government This restriction may not serve any meaningful
service either by  way of a retirement, purpose.
resignation, dismissal or removal from
service may also be restricted from
receiving foreign contribution.
12 Organizations notified under ‘Unlawful This provision is covered under clause 12 of
Activities Prevention Act, 1967’ should the FC(R) Bill, 2006.
be banned from receiving foreign
contribution.
General NGOs receiving substantial financial This provision already exists under the RTI,
assistance from the Government are to 2005.
be treated as the ‘public authority’ and
the RTI be applicable to them to give a
common man an access to their affairs
to find out whether they are transparent
in action.
2 Any association which intends to receive This is already provided.
foreign contribution or hospitality  must
disclose its intention to receive  so in
the Memorandum of Association.
24 and 25 The authorities should be empowered to This provision already exists.
search and seizure after following
prescribed norms.
3 Statutory disclosure  of receipt of FC by This may be considered.
more than Rs.50 lakhs.
General Disclosure of nam es of NGOs operating This list is already available on the MHA’s
in J&K and North-East India. website.

120
12 3 4 5 6
10. 10 Shri Ajit Kumar 2(1)(j)(vi) An explanation be added to exclude Such an exception shall provided an escape
Shukla, and companies whose shares are listed on route. Therefore, the same may not be provided.
Gen. Secy., Free 2(1)(g) any of the stock exchange(s) in India
Thinkers Association, or whose turnover from its Indian
Patna and others operations exceeds Rs.1 crore.
8(1) The words ‘except on a temporary basis This will defeat the purpose of the provision
for a period up to one year for such and administratively also, it will be difficult to
other purpose as per the objects of the implement the same.
association’ be added before the clause
8(1)(a).
8(1)(b) Sections 8(1)(b) and 8(2) be deleted. Basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
and foreign contribution that is received for specific
8(2) tasks is not utilized for activities other than the
stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of 50% has been provided in the
proposed Bill to prevent diversion of FC. This
provision will also encourage good governance
in the voluntary sector. This limit was
incorporated as per the decision of the GoM.
8(1)(a) The words ‘not be used for speculative The existing provisions provided in the Bill are
business’
 be substituted by the words appropriate.
‘be used as per the provisions applicable
under the Income-Tax Act, 1961 and
the rules thereunder’.
12(3)(ii) The word ‘inducement’ be substituted by The existing provisions provided in the Bill are
the word ‘fraud’. The word ‘indirectly’ appropriate.
be delected.

121
12(3) and A time frame for disposing the applica- Time frame for grant of prior permission may
16(3) tions should be fixed by adding the lead to deemed sanctions and undue advantage
existing  Section  11(2)  at  both  the may be taken by associations intending to avoid
places i.e. in the proposed Bill in clauses verification of their activities and antecedents.
12(3) and 16(3).
12(5) read Sections 12(5) and 16(3) may be The existing provisions provided in the Bill are
with 16(3) deleted. appropriate.
18(2) Sections 18(2) may be deleted.
5(1) and The words ‘political nature’ should be Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
54(2)(b) defined in the Act itself. declaring an association to be an organisation
of political nature not being political party.
These guidelines would be suitably incorporated
in the Rules after passage of the Bill in the
Parliament.
11. 11 Chief Functionary, 2(1)(j)(vi) Fo reign source may be redefined Foreign source has been appropriately defined
Rilum Social Welfare in the Bill. However, the Standing Committee
Association, may consider alternate definition if so desired.
Meghalaya and
others 5(1), This provision is an infringement of This provision is in consonance with objects
54(2)(b) article 19 (1) (a) of the Bill to ensure that our Parliamentary
institutions and political associations may
function in a manner consistent with the values
of Democratic Republic.
8(1) The clear definition of administrative Clause 8(2) clearly provides that the elements
expenses may be provided of administrative expenses shall be prescribed
by the Central Government. This provision will
enable the Central Government to modify,
amend the components of administrative
expenses as per the changing times and nature
of the organizations.

122
12 3 4 5 6
8(1)(a) The words ‘not be used for speculative The existing provisions provided in the Bill are
business’ be substituted by the words appropriate.
‘be used as per the provisions applicable
under the Income-Tax Act, 1961 and
the rules thereunder’.
12(3) and Prescribed time limit should be provided. Time frame for grant of prior permission may
16(3) lead to deemed sanctions in case of non
verification of antecedents and activities of the
associations within statutory time period.
12(5) and Sections 12(5) and 16(3) may be deleted. The existing provisions provided in the Bill are
16(3) appropriate.
12. 12 Dr. Shobha 4 The Bill should exempt Civil Societies Such an exemption would provide an escape
Nerilikar, Rachna from the Prior Permission and Registration route for receipt of foreign contribution without
Trust, Nashik, for funds upto Rs. 1 crore received in following due procedure.
Maharashtra and a financial year.
others.
16 Renewal of Registered associations should V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
be done only after every 20 years. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
12 Any other fee including for registration Fee is nominal only. This will discourage
should not be levied on Civil Society frivo lous applications.
organizations.
8 FC may be allowed to be invested in The investment of foreign contribution in
Securities. securities is fraught with the danger of erosion
of capital. Therefore, the same may not be
agreed to.

123
13. 13 Madhu Basu, 16 Renewal of registration once in 5 years V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
General Secretary, may be dropped. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
Economic Rural out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Development Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
Society, Kolkata, de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
West Bengal and organiz ations. However, the genuine
others. organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.
8 The limit of administrative expenses at Basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
50% of the total budget has been foreign cont ribution that is received for specific
provided. The ceiling of 50% needs to tasks is not utilized for activities other than the
be deleted. stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of 50% has been provided in the
proposed Bill to prevent diversion of FC. This
provision will also encourage good governance
in the voluntary sector. This limit was
incorporated as per the decision of the GoM.
12(3) The restriction for grant of FCRA The existing provisions provided in the Bill are
registration to the organizations engaged appropriate.
in the activities involving conversion
through inducement is discretionary and
may lead to harassment.
2(1)(j) The definition of foreign source needs The existing provision is comprehensive and
to be looked into, since the companies elaborate. However, the Standing Committee
with more than 50% foreign share may look into all the aspects before finalizing
holding become foreign source. the same.

124
12 3 4 5 6
General The FCRA may be made redundant by FCR Bill, 2006 seeks to regulate receipt and
addressing various issues through other utilization of foreign contribution and foreign
Acts like the Unlawful Activities hospitality by specific category of persons.
Prevention Act, 1967, The Prevention The other Acts will not serve the purpose for
of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and which the Bill is introduced.
the  Foreign  Exchange  Management
Act, 1999.
14. 14 Shri Ganesh 11 and 12 The Bill should exempt the organizations Such an exemption would provide an escape
Puranik, V ani, from the requirement of Prior Permission route for receipt of foreign contribution without
Pune, and Registration for acceptance of funds foll owing due procedure.
Maharashtra upto Rs. 1 crore received in a year.
11 Registration should be permanent with V alidity of registration for 5 years in considered
no provision for renewal thereof. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.
12(3)(b) The clause
 should be deleted or modified The registration/prior permission be granted only
by inserting the words “or intend to to such organizations which have proven track
undertake” before the word “meaningful record of carrying out specific activities. This
activity” will ensure exclusion of fly by night operators.

125
12 A time limit of 4 months and 6 months Time frame for grant of prior permission/
should be included in this Clause for registration may lead to deemed sanctions in
disposal of applications for prior case of non verification of antecedents and
permission and registration respectively. activities of the associations within statutory
Sections 18 may be deleted. time period.
15. 15 President, Gram 16 The provision for renewal of registration V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
Vikas Sewa every 5 years may be deleted. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
Sansthan, out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Sultanpur, U.P. Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
and others. de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.
8(1) The ceiling on administrative
 expenditure Basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
may be reconsidered. foreign contribution that is received for specific
tasks is not utilized for activities other than the
stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of 50% has been provided in the
proposed Bill to prevent diversion of FC. This
provision will also encourage good governance
in the voluntary sector. This limit was
incorporated as per the decision of the GoM.
16. 16 Shri Arun Tyagi, General The proposed FCRA Bill is a hindrance The provisions of the Bill are to ensure that
Gram Sudhar for working of NGOs and will lead to our Parliamentary institutions and political
Samiti, M.P. corruption associations may function in a manner
consistent with the values of Democratic
Republic.

126
12 3 4 5 6
17. 17 Shrimati Gauri General The existing FC(R) Act, 1976 may be The Bill has been introduced with focus on
Sharma, Seedhi, retained, as the new Bill would cause facilitating Foreign Contribution for genuine
M.P. harassment to the NGOs. purpose without compromising National security.
18. 18 Shri Shrutiwant General There are several provisions in the Bill The Bill has been introduced with focus on
Dubey, Vision, that will cause problems for NGOs. facilitating Foreign Contribution for genuine
Seedhi, M.P. purpose without compromising National
security.
19. 19 Shri Anjani General The proposed Bill  is against the interest The Bill has been introduced with focus on
Kumar Tiwari, o f  the NGOs, This may not be facilitating Foreign Contribution for genuine
Seedhi, M.P. introduced. purpose without compromising National
security.
20. 20 Shri Jasbir Singh, General The proposed Bill  is against the interest The Bill has been introduced with focus on
Seedhi, M.P. o f  the NGOs, This may not be facilitating Foreign Contribution for genuine
introduced. purpose without compromising National
security.
21. 21 Shri Arvind, General The proposed Bill  is against the interest The Bill has been introduced with focus on
Singh, Seedhi, of the NGOs, This may not be facilitating Foreign Contribution for genuine
M.P. introduced. purpose without compromising National
security.

127
Sl. R.S. Name of Section/ V iews/suggestions/comments Comments of MHA
No. Sl. Individuals/ Clause
No. Organisations
12 3 4 5 6
1. 1 Shri K. Shivakumar, 16(1) (i) Reregistration once in 5 years  to be Validity of registration for 5 years is considered
V . K. Foundation, dropped. rea sonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
220/2, GRI Campus, out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Gandhigram- Tamil Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
Nadu de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.
General (ii) To withdraw the proposed Bill and The present Bill has been prepared after
request the Government to have dialogue consultation with various Ministries of the
with the NGOs and remove the harsh Central Government and keeping in view the
provisions
 and allow the existing Bill to suggestions given by stakeholders like NGOs,
continue. CAs, professional bodies etc.,
2. 4 Shri N.K. Perumal, 16(1) (i) Re-registration once in 5 years  to be Same as above.
Executive Secretary , dropped.
Nilgiris NGOs
Network, Gramya
Bhavan, Aruvankadu,
The Nilgiris General (ii) To withdraw the proposed Bill and
request the Government to have dialogue
with the NGOs and remove the harsh
provisions and allow the existing Bill to
continue.

128
12 3 4 5 6
3. 31. Executive Director, 2(1)(h) (i) The term  ‘any other income’ should Even in the existing FC(R) Act, 1976, any
the Alleppey not include income derived from income derived from foreign contribution is
Diocesan Charitable application of foreign contributions, which treated as foreign contribution.
and Social Welfare shall be treated as locally generated.
Society, Post Box
No. 114, Alleppey, 8(1)(b) (ii) The administrative expensed should Basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
Kerala be increased to 80%. foreign contribution that is received for specific
tasks is not utilized for activities other than the
stated objectives of the organization. Therefore,
a limit of 50% has been provided in the
proposed Bill to prevent diversion of FC. This
provision will also encourage good governance
in the voluntary sector. This limit was
incorporated as per the decision of the GoM.
16(1) (iii) No renewal of registration should be V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
required. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with he
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.
12(1) (iv) Registration Fee should be charged Fee is nominal only. This will discourage
initially at the time of Registration. frivolous applications.

129
18(2) (v) No additional certificate is required This stipulation of certification by authorized
from the Bank officer of the bank seeks to ensure correctness
of the particulars furnished in the bank
statements.
4. 20. Bishop Stephen 2(1)(h) (i) The term any other income should It is not feasible to define each and every
Athipozhiyil, Chief be deleted and defined properly. word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
Functionery, Diocese defined in the Law will have the same meaning
of Alleppey, Bishop’s as commonly inferred in the English language.
House, PB 4804,
Alappuzha, Kerala 12 and (ii) Granting and renewing registration are The MHA Website contains detailed information
(16)(1) very stringent
 and not practical and likely on all these aspects including FAQs. With the
to be misused. introduction of FCRA Online Project, the NGOs
can know the status of their applications and
even download the copies of the letters relating
to FCRA issues. Therefore, there is a total
transparency in the system leaving no scope
for misuse.
5. 21. Most Rev. Stanley 2(1)(h) (i) The term any other income should Same as above.
Roman, Chief be deleted and defined properly.
Functionary, Catholic
Diocese of Quilon, 12 and (ii) Granting and renewing registration
Bishop’s House, (16)(1) are very
 stringent and not practical  and
Tangasserri, Kollam, likely to be misused.
Kerala
6. 34. Shri Maja Daruwala, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public It is not feasible to define each and every
Director, interest has not been defined in the Bill. word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
Commonwealth defined in the Law will have the same meaning
Human Rights as commonly inferred in the English language.
Initiative, B-117,
Sarvodaya Enclave, Preamble (ii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended. The Preamble reflects the main objects sought
1st Floor, New to be achieved by the Bill. The same may be
Delhi-17 retained.

130
12 3 4 5 6
16(1) (iii) Re-registration once in 5  years to be V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
dropped. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organization. However, the genuine organizations
which are granted renewal of registration for 5
years on filing registration certificate. Our
experience shows that about 40% of the
registered asociations do not even submit annual
accounts.
20 (iv) Instead of deputing an officer, the Since this Bill is concerned with national security
Government may ask any organisation and matters incidental thereto, it is desirable
to carry out the audit. that the audits are carried out by senior officers
of the Government duly authorized to do so.
33 (v) There is no requirement for a person There is no need for such provision.
to make any statement on oath under
Section 19(c) or Section 18 of FCR
Bill.
7 5. Shri Santhosh, Project 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public It is not feasible to define each and every
Executive (Finance) interest has not been defined in the Bill. word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
Thread Siddharth defined in the Law will have the same meaning
Village, An international as commonly inferred in the English language.
HRD and Healing
Institute. Post Box 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
No. 9, Jatni, Orissa Political Nature’ is not clear. declaring an association to be an organization
of politicial nature not being political party.
These guidelines would be suitably incorporated
in the Rules after passage of the Bill in
Parliament.

131
11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has Registration under FCRA is mandatory. There
not been provided in the proposed Bill. is no concept of deemed registration.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’ The definition of speculative business shall be
are not defined in the Bill suitably provided in the Rules after passage of
the Bill in Parliament. The terms not defined in
the Law will have the same meaning as
commonly inferred in the English language.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’ Definition of the term will be incorporated in
is not defined in the Bill. the Rules after passage of the Bill in Parliament.
The terms not defined in the Law will have
the same meaning as commonly inferred in the
English language.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation It is not feasible to define each and every
has not been clearly defined. word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
defined in the Law will have the same meaning
as commonly inferred in the English language.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to Validity of registration for 5 years is considered
be dropped. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.

132
12 3 4 5 6
8. 7. Shri L. Babuji Rao, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Administrator, Rural interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Education and Action 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
for Change, Post Box Political Nature’ is not clear.
No. 159, 1 1(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Bhubaneswar. not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
9. 8. Dr. William Stanley, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Executive Secretary, interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Orissa Development 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Action Forum, N/A- Political Nature’ is not clear.
204, Neelachackra 11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Apartments, Cuttack not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Road, Bhubaneswar. 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.

133
10. 10. Dr. Shailendra B. 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Awale, Chief interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Coordinator and 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Secretary, Synodical Political Nature’ is not clear.
Board of Social 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
Services Church of not been provided in the proposed Bill.
North India, CNI 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
Bhawan, 16, Panditt are not defined in the Bill.
Pant Marg, New 8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
Delhi. is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Reregistration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
11. 12. Shri N. Samson, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Director, GRAM interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Abhyudaya Mandali, 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Dharmaram, Political Nature’ is not clear.
Nizamabad Dist. 11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Andhra Pradesh. not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Reregistration once in 5 years to
be dropped.

134
12 3 4 5 6
12. 13. Shri S.K. Patel, Chief 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Coordinator, Mukthi interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Niketan, Rani Sagar 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Para, Ward No. 12, Political Nature’ is not clear.
Pithora, Dist. 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
Mahasamund, not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Chhattisgarh. 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
13. 14. The Rev. Dr. Enos Das 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public It is not feasible to define each and every
Pradhan, General interest has not been defined in the Bill. word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
Secretary, The Synod defined in the Law will have the same meaning
of the Church of as commonly inferred in the English language.
North India, CNI
Bhawan, Post Box 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
311, 16, Pandit Pant Political Nature’ is not clear. declaring an association to be an organization
Marg, New Delhi. of political nature not being political party.
These guidelines would be suitable incorporated
in the Rules after passage of the Bill in
Parliament.
11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has Registration under FCRS is mandatory. There
not been provided in the proposed Bill. is no concept of deemed registration.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’ The definition of speculative business shall be
are not defined in the Bill. suitably provided in the Rules after passage of
the Bill in Parliament.

135
14. 16. The Rt. Revd. Probal 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Kanto Dutta, B ishop interest has not been defined in the Bill.
of the Diocese of 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Durgapur, Church of Political Nature’ is not clear.
North India, St. 11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Michael’s church, not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Aldrin Path, Bidhan 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
Nagar, Durgapur, are not defined in the Bill.
West Bengal 8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Pr eamble to the Bill to be amended
15. 19. Rt. Rev. P.K. 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Samantaroy, Bishop interest has not been defined in the Bill.
3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Political Nature’ is not clear.
11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended

136
12 3 4 5 6
16. 22. Ms. Rosemary 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Viswanath, Chief interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Functionary, 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Equations (Equatable Political Nature’ is not clear.
Tourism 11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Options), 415, 2C not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Cross, 4th Main 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
OMBR Layout, are not defined in the Bill.
Banaswadi, 8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
Bangalore. is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended
17. 23. Shri Pradeep Esteves, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
79, 5th Street, Bank interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Avenue, HRBR 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Layout, Bangalore. Political Nature’ is not clear.
11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended

137
18. 26. Ms. Neelima Khetan, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Chief Executive Seva interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Mandir, Old 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Fetahpura, Udaipur, Political Nature’ is not clear.
Rajasthan. 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended
19. 27. Bishop P Lyngdoh, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Diocese of North interest has not been defined in the Bill.
East India, Church 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
of North India, Political Nature’ is not clear.
Bishop’s Kuti, 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
Shillong, Meghalaya not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended

138
12 3 4 5 6
20. 28. Rev. Dr. Enos Das 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Pradhan, General interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Secretary, National 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Council of Churches Political Nature’ is not clear.
in India, Room 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
No.301, CNI not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Bhawan, 16, Pundit 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
Pant Marg, New are not defined in the Bill.
Delhi. 8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended
21. 29. Fr. Onil D’Souza, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Secretary, interest has not been defined in the Bill.
C.O.D.P., Mangalore 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Political Nature’ is not clear.
11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended

139
22. 30. Shri Richard Behera, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Regional Coordinator, interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Socio Economic 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Development Political Nature’ is not clear.
programme Kangra 11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Project Development not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Fund, Mission 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
Compound, Palampur are not defined in the Bill.
Dist. Kangra, 8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
Himachal Pradesh is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended
23. 32. Shri Sailesh 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Chakravarthy, interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Secretary, Society for 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Participatory Action Political Nature’ is not clear.
and Reflection, 49/53, 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
Prince Gulam not been provided in the proposed Bill.
Mohammed Shah 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
Road, Kolkata are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended

140
12 3 4 5 6
24. 33. Secretary, UNITY (A 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Federation of NGOs interest has not been defined in the Bill.
in Goa) Peaceful 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Society Campus, Political Nature’ is not clear.
Kundai, Goa. 11(2) (iii)
 Provision of deemed registration has
not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended.
25 25. Shri D.K. Manavalan, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
Executive Director, interest has not been defined in the Bill.
AFPRO, 25/1A, 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Institutional Area, Political Nature’ is not clear.
Pankha Road, D 11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
Block, Janakpuri, not been provided in the proposed Bill.
New Delhi-58. 8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended.

141
26 9. Shri K.S. Tanwar, 9 (i) Activities detrimental to the public Same as above.
MDG Information interest has not been defined in the Bill.
Resource Centre, 3(1)(f) (ii) The definition of ‘Organisation of
Dungarpur, Rajasthan. Political Nature’ is not clear.
11(2) (iii) Provision of deemed registration has
not been provided in the proposed Bill.
8(1)(a) (iv) The words ‘Speculative Business’
are not defined in the Bill.
8(1)(b) (v) The term ‘Administrative expenses’
is not defined in the Bill.
12(3)(b) (vi) ‘Meaningful Activity’ interpretation
has not been clearly defined.
16(1) (vii) Re-registration once in 5 years to
be dropped.
Preamble (viii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended.
27. 24. Fr. Jerome 2(1 )(h) (i) The term ‘any other income’ has It is not feasible to define each and every
Chamminikodath, wide implications and same should be word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
Chief Functionary, deleted. defined in the Law will have the same meaning
Archdiocese of as commonly inferred in the English language.
Verapoly, Latin
Archbishop’s House, 16(1) (ii)
 The validity period of Registration V alidity of registration for 5 years is considered
Marine Drive, limited to 5 years should be deleted. reasonable since it is intended to ensure weeding
Ernakulam. PB No. out of defunct/inoperative organizations.
2581, Cochin, Kerala Therefore, such a provision is necessary to
de-register consistently defaulting/defunct
organizations. However, the genuine
organizations which are complying with the
provisions of law, shall be granted renewal of
registration for 5 years on filing an application
6 months prior to expiry of registration
certificate. Our experience shows that about
40% of the registered associations do not even
submit annual accounts.

142
12 3 4 5 6
12(1) (iii) Charging of Fee should be deleted Fee is nominal only. This will discourage
frivolus applications.
12(3)(a) (iv) Condition for Registration should be Conditions for Registration are must to
deleted implement the spirit of the preamble.
18(2) (v) Producing bank manager’s certificate This stipulation of certification by authorized
along with intimation should be dropped. officer of the bank seeks to ensure correctness
of the particulars furnished in the bank
statements.
28. 3. The Don Bosco Preamble (i) The use of negative expression- ‘to The expressions in the Bill have been used in
Charitable Society, prohibit’ has the potential to curb the accordance with the objects sought to be
1st Main, Vijayanagar democratic space of the dynamic achieved. The same has been prepared in
extension, Kondaji voluntary
 sector which works proactively consultation with Ministry of Law.
Road, Davanagere. for the betterment of the poor.
Karnataka
Preamble (iii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended The Preamble reflects the main objects sought
to be achieved by the Bill. The same may be
retained.
3(1)(f) (ii) The words ‘Political Nature’ should Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
be defined in the Act and not in the declaring an association to be an organization
rules of political nature not being political party.
These guidelines would be suitably incorporated
in the Rules after passage of the Bill in
Parliament.
29. 6. Dr. Varghese Philip, 3(1)(f) (i) The words ‘Political Nature’ should Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
Executive Director, be defined in the Act itself and not in declaring an association to be an organization
Emmanuel Hospital the Rules. of political nature not being political party.
Association, 808/92, These guidelines would be suitably incorporated
Deepali Building in the Rules after passage of the Bill in
Nehru Place, New Parliament.
Delhi-110 009.

143
Peamble (ii) The use of negative expression-‘to The expressions in the Bill have been used in
prohibit’ had the potential to curb accordance with the objects sought to be
democratic space of the dynamic achieved. The same has been prepared in
voluntary sector which works proactively consultation with Ministry of Law.
for the betterment of the poor.
Preamble (iii) Preamble to the Bill to be amended. The Preamble reflects the main objects sought
to be achieved by the Bill. The same may be
retained.
30 2. Shri Ragendra K. Sail, 3(1)(f) (i) The words ‘Political Nature’ should Detailed guidelines have been formulated for
President, “People’s be defined in the Act itself and not in declaring and association to be an organization
Union for Civil the Rules. of political nature not being political party.
Liberties, Chhattisgarh, These guidelines would be suitably incorporated
H-12, Anupam Nagar, in the Rules after passage of the Bill in
P.O. Shanker Nagar, Parliament.
Raipur.
12(3)(a) (ii) The word ‘inducement’ has not been It is not feasible to define each and every
defined anywhere in the Bill. word mentioned in the Bill. The terms not
defined in the Law will have the same meaning
as commonly inferred in the English language.
31. 15. Pradeep Ranjan Rath, 2(f) (i) To add the following words after sub The definition of this term has been taken
Company Secretary, clause(f) of clause 2 ‘and include from the Income Tax Act, 1961 since the
B.15/2, Kendriya Company as per the definition given in same is wider and more representative.
Vihar, Kharghar, Navi section 2(10) of the Companies Act,
Mumbai 1956’
3(1)(c) (ii) In clause 2(1)(c): By way of an There is no need for any clarification as same
explanation/clarification:- ‘It is clarified can be downloaded from MHA’s website
that the Government  servant or employee without any consideration.
of any corporation or any other body
controlled or owned by Government may
accept without any consideration
 copies
of “ANNUAL REPORT”

144
12 3 4 5 6
32. 11. Dr. D.S. Lohiya, General Most  of the changes are not encouraging The Bill seeks to consolidate the Law relating
Secretary, Manavlok volunatry sector . to regulation of receipt and utilization of foreign
Ambajogai, contribution and foreign hospitality by certain
‘Dhanpad’, Post Box individuals and associations. The same has been
No. 23, Ring Road, keeping in view the earlier recommendations
Ambajogai, Dist. of the Estimates Committee of the Lok Sabha,
Beed, (M.S.) recommendations made by the Group of
Ministers on reforming the National Security
System (2001), the concerns expressed in
Parliament by Hon’ble MPs from time to time
and recommendations of the Group of Ministers
on FCRA (2006). Moreover, view of various
stakeholders were also considered while
formulating the Bill.
33. 17. Dr. Ramesh General Regarding foreign investments No comments as the suggestions are not related
K.K., MBBS PGDFH to FCRA Bill.
(SRMC),
Thrissuvaperur
34. 18. T. Manoj Kumar, General The Regulatory aspects may include The Bill has been prepared keeping in view all
X/1258, Rajgarh having access to records of financial relevant aspects. Corporate bodies are also under
Colony, Gandhi aspects of such individual, organisation, the purview of the Bill.
Nagar, Delhi-31. political parties, corporate bodies must
come under ambit of this Bill.

145
ANNEXURE-IV
*GIST OF VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE/V ARIOUS ORGANISATIONS AND
POLITICAL PARTIES ON THE BILL AND COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS THEREON
Preamble of the Bill – 6
Name of the Members of the
Committee Organisations/ Gist of Comments/Suggestions Response/Comments of the Ministry of
Institutions/Individuals Home Affairs
12 3
Nationalist Congress Party The preamble of the Bill talks of “to Prohibit” The preamble reflects the objective of the Bill. The
whereas the existing FCRA, 1976 talks of “to primary purpose of the Bill is to ensure that foreign
regulate”. The use of the negative expression –“to contribution is utilised for bonafide activities and is
prohibit” has the potential to curb the democratic otherwise not misused, without compromising on
space of the dynamic voluntary sector and such national security concerns. The Bill has been drafted
prohibition is bound to hinder the working of the keeping in view the contemporary security scenario
voluntary sector which works for the betterment and concerns facing the country. The Bill, thereby,
of the poor and marginalised. not only seeks to consolidate the law to regulate
acceptance and utilization of foreign contribution
Bill also talks about prohibiting “activities detrimental by ass ociations but also prohibits such acceptance
to national interest”
 which is a subjective expression of foreign contribution for activities detrimental to
and no indicator mentioned  anywhere in the Bill the national interest.
of what  constitute activities detrimental to national
interest. Clause 9 of the Bill (relates to the power of Central
Government to prohibit receipt of foreign contribution/
Therefore, the words “and to acceptance and foreign hospitality etc. by certain persons or class
utilisation of contribution and foreign hospitality  for of persons or organizations), and provides in sub-
any activities detrimental to the national interest clause (e) that no such prohibition shall be made
and for matters connected therewith or incidental unless the Central Government is satisfied that
thereto” be deleted. acceptance of foreign contribution/hospitality by such
person, is likely to prejudicially affect:—
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
* The Ministry stated that recommendations of the Committee in respects of clause 12(3) (d) and (e), 18 and 38 may be considere d. Some other recommendations may be considered while
framing of the rules and guidelines.

146
12 3
(ii) the public interest; or
(iii) freedom or fairness of election to any
Legislature; or
(iv) friendly relations with any foreign State; or
(v) harmony between religious, racial, social,
linguistic or regional groups, castes or
communities.
Furthermore, Clause 12 of the Bill dealing with the
procedure for grant of certificate of registration in
sub-section (3) (a) and (f) expands the classification
of persons prevented from accepting foreign
contribution.
Catholic Bishops’ conference of Preamble to the Bill to be amended. The use of –do–
India negative expression-
‘to prohibit’ has the potential
to curb the democratic space of the dynamic
National Council of Churches voluntary sector, which works proactively for the
in India betterment of the poor. Thus, the term ‘prohibition’
be deleted.
National Council of YMCA
Shri Ilias Azmi, M.P. The term ‘national interest’ is very subjective/ The term ‘National interest’ is just a part of the
confusing. objectives stated in the preamble of the Bill and not
referred in the substantive clauses of the Bill. The
purposes prejudicial to the public and national interest
are defined in Clause 12(3)(f) of the Bill.
Shri V . Narayanasamy, M.P. The term ‘Activities detrimental to national interest’ –do–
is a vague term and subject to misuse. Government
should specify the activities, which constitute
activities detrimental to the national interest.

147
Clause 2(1)(d) of the Bill
Muslim League Kerala State The definition of “a candidate  for election” in The recommendations of the Committee in this
Committee Clause 2(1)(d) is not explicit as to the time from regard, if any, would be considered at the time of
which a person shall be considered as “duly drafting of rules.
nominated paper with Returning Officer” be
inserted after the words “duly nominataed”.
Clause 2(1)(i) of the Bill
Shri R.K. Dhawan, M.P. The word ‘purely Casual one’ in the clause 2(1) The foreign hospitality has been defined in Section
(i) defining the term ‘Foreign Hospitality’ should 2(1)(d) of the existing Act and the same definition
be made clear. has been retained in the Bill. Hospitality of casual
nature may apply to arrangements, which are not
regular or firmly established or pre-meditated and
could inter-alia include a casual lunch, dinner, local
transportation etc. during foreign visits.
Clause 2(1)(j) of the Bill–8
Dr. Bimal Jalan, M.P. Definition of ‘Foreign Source’ may be changed to The definition of ‘foreign source’ provided in the
exclude Indian companies where the foreign Bill is along the lines of the provision contained in
holding is in excess of 50% since such foreign Section 2(1)(e) of the existing FCR Act, 1976. The
holding is permitted under FDI or FII norms. said provision in the Bill would not affect the
normal operations of Indian companies with foreign
holding of more than 50% which would be governed
by various regulations pertaining to foreign
investment. The context of FCRA is different and
it is felt that retaining the existing provision would
not impact negatively on those who may want to
receive foreign contribution from such companies
for their legitimate activities.
Reserve Bank of India Definition of ‘foreign source’ may be changed to –do–
ICICI Bank exclude Indian companies where the foreign holding
HDFC Bank is in excess of 50 per cent.

148
12 3
Catholic Bishops’ Conference Definition of foreign source may be modified –do–
of India suitably as Indian companies with more than 50%
foreign holdings are treated as foreign source.  The
Bill has not taken into account the changing
scenario, which has emerged in the country since
1984.
Account Aid Inclusion of Indian companies with foreign –do–
shareholding of more than 50% in the definition
of ‘Foreign Source’ may be difficult to implement
since such foreign holding is permitted under FDI
or FII norms and the holding fluctuates for the
Indain companies listed in the stock exchange.
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P. Whether donations by PIO, OCI card holders Y es, because, persons in all these categories are
and Shri R.K. Dhawan, M.P. and persons of Indian origin who hold other foreign nationals and hold passports of other
country’s passports would be considered as foreign countries.
source?
Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen, M.P. Whether receipt of foreign contribution from The question appears to relate to an ordinary citizen
friends abroad is permitted? who does not fall into the prohibited category, as
defined in clause 3 (i) of the Bill nor persons
covered under clause 11. Receipt of foreign
contribution from a friend abroad, who is a foreign
source, by a person covered under clause 11 i.e.,
person having a definite cultural, economic,
educational, religious or social programme, would
require either registration with, or prior permission
from the Central Government.
Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen, Whether receipt of subscription amounts from Subscription is not prohibited, as it is a part of
M.P. abroad to newspaper is permitted? ordinary course of business as clarified in Explanation
3 below Clause 2(1) (h).

149
Shri Ratan Singh Ajnala, Is there may control on foreigners/NRI students Such payments as ‘fees’ charged by an educational
M.P. who pay in Indian currency while seeking i nstitution in India from foreign student(s) are
admission in medical or engineering colleges? excluded from the definition of foreign contribution
as clarified in Explanation 3 below Clause 2(1) (h).
Clause 3(1)(f) of the Bill–3
Nationalist Congress Party India is a democratic republic, so everyone has O ne of the purposes of the existing Act and the
the right to be part of the political process. Bill is to prohibit acceptance of foreign contribution
Clause 3(1)(f) where the organisation of political by political parties so as to prevent external influence
nature is prohibited from accepting foreign on the political process in the country. The present
contribution as specified by the Central Government Bill goes a step further to include organizations of
seems to  be inconsistent with the rights guaranteed a political nature in the prohibited category with a
by the Constitution of India. Therefore, the view towards attainment of the same objective.
proposal is that the Clauses 3(1) (f), 5(1) and 54
(2) (b) be deleted.
National Council of Churches Organisation of political nature may be kept in the –do–
in India prior permission category instead of putting them
in the prohibited category.
Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, Clause 3 of the Bill (prohibition to accept foreign The regulatory agencies and quasi-judicial bodies
M.P. contribution) may be made applicable to regulatory are governed by their own statutes and regulations
agencies and quasi-judicial bodies such as TRAI. which takes care of issues pertaining to national
interest. It is, therefore not considered necessary to
bring them within the ambit of Clause 3(1).
Clause 4 of the Bill–3
Muslim League Kerala State In clause 4, the following sub-clause be added: The suggested sub-clause should not be included
Committee “(g) by way of scholarship, stipend or any payment since scholarships, stipend etc. can be used as a
of like nature from any foreign source.” source of inducement.
Shri R.K. Dhawan, M.P. Is there a limit for receipt of foreign contribution Since the Bill does not prohibit acceptance of foreign
from relatives? contribution from relatives, there is no limit fixed in
this Bill in this regard.

150
12 3
Shri R.K. Dhawan, M.P. What is the meaning of the term ‘ordinary course An explanation has been provided under clause 2(1)
of business’ in sub-clause (f)? Whether franchise (h) that any amount received from any foreign
of a company is covered under it? It needs clarity. source by way of fee or towards costs in lieu of
good or services in the ordinary course of business,
trade or commerce shall not be treated as foreign
contribution. This would also include a franchise of
a foreign company which may be permissible under
the other relevant laws and/or regulations.
Clause 5 of the Bill–4
Indian National Congress The clause requires reformulation by incorporating Clause 5 (2) of the Bill deals with procedure to
within it a time bound post decisional hearing after notify an organisation of political nature and reads
declaring an organisation as an organisation of a as under:
political nature.
“Before making an order under sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government shall give the organisation in
respect of whom the order is proposed to be
made, a notice in writing informing it of the ground
or grounds, on which it is proposed to be specified
as an organisation of political nature under sub-
section:”
There is, therefore, a provision for giving notice
before declaring an association as an organisation
of political nature, Further, Clause 5(3) provides
the association with an opportunity to make a
representation against the said notice within a period
with a reasonable opportunity of being heard. In
view of this provision, there is no necessity for
keeping a provision for post decisional hearing. It
is also mentioned that a set of guidelines to define
an organisation of political nature will be included
in the Rules to be framed under the Act.

151
National Council of The procedure which has been laid down in the An organisation of political nature will be specified
Churches in India proposed Bill to declare an organization as being by an order, in writing, following the procedure
an organization of a political nature puts no onus prescribed in clause 5 of the Bill. Further, Rules to
on the Government after an inquiry to
 inform the be made to implement the provision of clause 5
organization whether it has been declared as an would specify the ground(s) on which an
organization of a political nature or not. organisation shall be specified as an organisation of
a political nature.
PRIA – Society The Government should specify as to what A set of guidelines to define an organisation of
constitutes an organisation of political nature. The political nature will be included in the Rules to be
term ‘Political nature’ is very subjective, the framed under the Act.
interpretation of which may be discouraging to the
voluntary sector.
Shri V . Narayanasamy, M.P. The term ‘political activities’ is a vague term and A set of guidelines to define an organisation of
subject to misuse. Government should specify the political nature will be included in the Rules to be
activities, which constitute political activities. framed under the Act. Further, clause 5(1) makes
a mention about the association of organisations
with the activities of any political parties and not to
political activities per se .
Clause 6 of the Bill – 5
Indian National Congress The term ‘any foreign hospitality’ may require a “Foreign hospitality” is appropriately defined in Clause
more focused and appropriate definition to avoid 2(1)(i) of the Bill. The definition is as follows:
possibility of uncertainty.
“foreign hospitality” means any offer, not being a
purely causal one, made in cash or kind by a
foreign source for providing a person with the
costs of travel to any foreign country or territory
or with free boarding, lodging, transport or medical
treatment.
This definition of foreign hospitality is adequate.

152
12 3
Muslim League Kerala State The clause needs to State explicitly  that all elements “Foreign hospitality” is appropriately defined in Clause
Committee of foreign hospitality ‘including  cost of transport’, 2(1)(i) of the Bill. The definition is as follows:
as defined in clause 2(1)(i) may be accepted by
persons mentioned in the said clause with the “foreign hospitality” means any offer, not being a
prior permission. purely causal one, made in cash or kind by a
foreign source for providing a person with the
costs of travel to any foreign country or territory
or with free boarding, lodging, transport or medical
treatment.
Also if prior permission
 for acceptance of foreign Prior permission for acceptance of foreign hospitality
hospitality is not granted within thirty days of the is granted depending on the exigencies of the travel
application, the required permission shall be requirement, date of departure and submission of
deemed to have been granted. complete requisite documents by the applicant.
Therefore prescribing a time limit may not be
necessary.
The words “for proceeding to or” be added before Existing provision is adequate and meets the
the words “while visiting any country or territory requirement.
outside India”.
Indigenous Nationalist Party Incorporation of a provision that it shall not be The restriction is in consonance with the objective
of Twipra (Tripura) necessary to obtain any permission for accepting of the Bill to regulate acceptance of foreign
foreign hospitality, if such hospitality is in connection hospitality for individuals working in important areas
with religious programme of an individual provided of national life in tune with the values of sovereign
an intimation is given to the Central Government democratic republic. The only exception provided
within a month of availing hospitality. This is in the Bill is for meeting emergent medical needs
justified in view of Right to
 Freedom of Religious should such an exigency arise on account of a
activity in Fundamental Rights. sudden illness contracted by the person, availing of
the foreign hospitality, outside the country. No
relaxation, on any other ground, including religious
freedom has been provided for, as such grounds
may be fraught with the possibility for misuse and
could open a Pandora’s box for similar relaxtion on
other grounds.

153
Clause 7 of the Bill – 1
National Congress Party Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to other This provision was incorporated in the existing Act
person. in the year 1984 and the same has been retained in
This means that an NGO headed
 by any small the Bill. The objective of this provision is to monitor
group or any right thinking individual will be the the utilization of foreign contribution received and
ultimate sufferer
 because they are the people who also to ensure that such foreign contribution is not
are working in the remotest parts of the country diverted to associations whose antecedents and
and they will not get the funds unless registered credentials have not been verified by the field
or obtained prior permission and will be caught in agencies. This would prevent diversion and mis-
the quagmire of red-tapism. utilisation of foreign contribution received. However,
if necessary, this aspect could be appropriately
addressed in the rules.
Clause 8 of the Bill – 8
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Provision under Clause 8(i)(a) prohibiting investment The basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
of India of FC in speculative business may
 be dropped. foreign contribution received for specific tasks is
According to Section 11(5) of the Income  Tax not utilized for activities other than the stated
Act, there are certain statutory investments under objectives of the organization. It is felt that the
which an NGO can make investment. Both the exposure of FC funds is speculative instruments
Acts should be synchronized in a manner that one may result in the loss of capital, which may
does not contradict the other. adversely impact the specific purpose for which
the foreign contribution was received.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Section 8(1)(b) of the Act is in a way restricting The basic purpose of the Act is to ensure that the
of India the utilization of foreign contribution. The restriction foreign contribution received for specific tasks is
of 50 per cent on administrative expense may not not utilized for activities other than the stated
National Council of Churches be practical and may have a negative effect on the objectives of the organization. Therefore, a limit of
in India utilization of funds.
 Further, administrative expenses 50% has been provided in the proposed Bill as per
are not defined. The statutory prohibition of 50 the recommendations of ‘GOM’ to prevent diversion
National Council of YMCA per cent has to be in the rules and not in the of foreign contribution from the core activities of
of India statue. Funds used for administrative purpose the association and also to encourage good
should be left for the donor and donee to decide governance in the voluntary sector. The limit is
and these expenses are not detrimental to the considered reasonable keeping in view the diverse
national interest and are outside the objects
 specified nature of the activities undertaken by the NGOs.
in the preamble of the Bill. As an illustration, associations engaged in educational
and research activities will have higher proportion
of administrative expenses.

154
12 3
The term ‘Administrative expenses’ could be defined
in the Rules.
Chairperson 50% should not be spent on administrative purpose. –do–
(Mrs. Sushma Swaraj, M.P.) We are going to recommend that it is to high.
Communist Party of India The cap of 50% on Administrative expenses is  very
(Marxist) high and should be reduced to 25%. Government –do–
should also have the power to relax in appropriate
cases.
Account Aid Implementation of 50% cap on administrative –do–
expenses is impracticable. If cap is essential, it
should be enforced by Income Tax Department.
Shri V . Narayanasamy, M.P. The cap
 of 50% for administrative expenses is  very –do–
high and it provides escape route for diversion of
funds. Government should explain the reason behind
such cap.
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P. Income Tax Act does not permit 50% expenses –do–
towards administative purposes.
Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen, The cap of 50% for administrative expenses  is not –do–
M.P. very high as 85% of the Government revenue
goes to establishment expenditure.

155
Clause 9 (a) of the Bill – 1
Muslim League Kerala State This clause prohibits certain persons or organisations This is an exceptional provision intended to be used
Committee from receiving foreign contribution. Such persons/ to safeguard paramount national interest as defined
organisations should be given reasonable opportunity in sub section (e). Clause 9(e) provides that no
to being heard. such prohibition or requirement shall be made if the
Central Government is satisfied that the acceptance
of foreign contribution by such person or class of
persons or the acceptance of foreign hospitality by
such person is not likely to affect prejudicially the
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) public interest; or ( iii) freedom or fairness of
election to any Legislature; or ( iv) friendly relations
with any foreign State; or ( v) harmony between
religious, racial, social, linguistic or regional groups,
castes or communities.
Clause 11 (3)(ii) of the Bill – 1
Muslim League Kerala State The clause restricts the area or areas in which The primary purpose of the Bill is to ensure that
Committee foreign contribution shall be accepted and utilized foreign contribution is utilised for bonafide activities
with the prior permission of Central Government. without compromising on national security concerns.
This is unjust, discriminatory and also This provision is considered necessary to ensure
unconstitutional as it violates the right to equality. that foreign contribution does not go into wrong
Provision in 11(3)(I) is also unjust, uncalled for , hands particularly in sensitive areas of the country
unconstitutional and objectionable. like North Eastern States, naxal affected areas,
coastal, border and tribal areas and other sensitive
areas.

156
12 3
Clause 12 of the Bill – 4
Indian National Congress A clause should be inserted in this clause which Verification of antecedents and activities of the
should either stipulate the outer limit  within which recipient association and the donor(s) is conducted
all applications for registration and  prior permission through designated field agencies. In some cases, a
be disposed of or insert a deemed permission detailed vertification of antecedents/activities of
provision, which would result in implied approval, recipient associations and donors is required,
if the application is not disposed of within a time- which is a time consuming process. However, a
frame. broad time-frame within which applications will
have to be considered/cleared may be prescribed in
the rules or guidelines to be framed for
implementation of this provision of the Bill.
Muslim League Kerala State Clause 12 does not prescribe any period within
Committee which the Government is to dispose of
 an
application for registration or prior permission. –do–
New provision in this clause may be added
prescribing a time period of ninety days for
disposing of an application for registration or prior
permission otherwise the applicant deemed to have
been granted registration or prior permission.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference There is no time limit for the Government within
of India which it shall grant registration
 or renew registration
as per the provisions under Clause 12 and 16  (3) –do–
respectively. The time limit of 90 days may be
provided to bring about transparency and
accountability.

157
PRIA Society Registration should be granted liberally and Registration is granted for a period of five years.
monitoring should be made more effective since After grant of registration, associations are required
National Fundation of certifying/fulfilling of conditions for grant  of to file only statements of receipt and utilization of
India registration/prior permission is a time consuming foreign contribution. It is therefore, necessary at
exercise. the very outset to establish bonafides  of an
association and its office bearers by way of
verification before grant of registration in view of
the security concerns. This would also facilitate
effective monitoring and regulation of associations
seeking registration.
Clause 12(3)(a)(ii), (iii), (v) and (vi) of the Bill – 11
Nationalist Congress Party Words like ‘inducement’, ‘communal tension and It is n ot feasible to define each and every word
disharmony’, ‘propagate sedition or advocate violent mentioned in the Bill. The terms not defined in the
methods’ have not been defined anywhere in the Bill will have the same meaning as commonly
Bill. They are subjective and have the potential to understood in the English language.
be used selectively.
It may, however, be mentioned that decisions are
Therefore, Clause 12(3)(a)(ii), (iii) and (v) be t aken after due verification of antecedents/activities
deleted. of an individual or organization, for which reasons
the scope for subjective interpretation may not exist.
Communist Party of India The Bill does not define the word ‘inducement’ or
(Marxist) ‘indirectly’ “not engaged or likely to engage
 to
propagate sedition etc.” leaving it to the subjective –do–
interpretation of the authorised official. These  words
should be appropriately defined.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference One of the conditions for grant of registration says
of India that an organisation has not indulged or involved –do–
in activities aimed at conversion through inducement
or force, either directly or indirectly, from one
religious faith to another. These expressions are
not defined and if these undefined expressions
become cause for rejecting and application for
registration, then it will have negative effect.

158
12 3
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Another condition for grant of registration is that
of India it has not created communal tension or disharmony –do–
in any district or any part of the country.  This is
again very broad and undefined expression which
may give wide discretion to the concerned
authorities.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Word ‘inducement’ should be defined otherwise it –do–
of India leads to misuse.
Communist Party of India The clause states that the authorised officer is The primary purpose of this Act is to ensure that
(Marxist) required to be satisfied that the organisation is “not foreign contribution is utilized for bonafide activities
likely to use foreign contribution for personal
 gains without compromising on national security concerns.
or divert it for undesirable purposes”. This should The said clause is one of the provisions made in
also not be left to the subjective assessment  of the Bill to ensure that foreign contribution is not
the concerned official and should be appropriately misused by an individual or organisation. The scope
defined. In certain cases, an affidavit can be for subjective assessment may not exist as decisions
sought. are taken after due inquiry and verification of
antecedents/activities of an individual or organisation,
reports about which are collected from different
official sources.
Communist Party of India The clause provides reasons
 for non-registration The word disharmony has a wide connotation and
(Marxist) of an organisation if it involves  in certain activities. would also include within its ambit caste tensions.
It mentions about communal  tension or  disharmony Furthermore, Clause 12(3)(f)(vi) provides for grant
as grounds for disallowing registration and  does of registration/prior permission after due inquiry,
not mention about any organisation promoting caste whereby the Central Government is satisfied that
hatred. This should be added here. acceptance of foreign contribution by the person
making an application for registration/prior
permission is not likely to prejudicially affect the
harmony between castes.

159
Catholic Bishop’s Conference In the Clauses 12(3)(a)(ii), the term ‘inducement’ Clause 12 explicitly provides the conditions for
of India may be replaced by ‘deceit or fraud’  and the term eligibility for the grant of registration and prior
‘indirectly’ may be deleted, as these terms are permission thereby putting in place a more
prone to subjective interpretation. transparent regime and thereby cutting down the
scope for subjective and arbitrary decisions. The
provisions contained in the sub clauses (ii), (iii),
and (v) of Clause 12 (3) are in keeping with the
security concerns of the country. The scope for
subjective decision may not exist as decisions are
taken after due inquiry and verification of
antecedents/activities of an individual or organisation,
reports about which are collected from different
official sources.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Conditions for registration like activities detrimental
of India to national interest, conversion through inducement –do–
or force indirectly, not
 to create communal tension
or disharmony,...has to undertake meaningful
activity,...any prosecution for any offence is
pending,...sovereignty and integrity are very
subjective and leaves wide discretion. These
conditions lead to vesting powers with authorities
and give scope for corruption.
Muslim League Kerala State Clauses 12(3)(ii), (iii), (v) leave wide scope for –do–
Committee arbitrary and unjust decisions.
Muslim League Kerala State Clause 12(3)(a)(vi) be deleted as the provision is The primary purpose of the Bill is to ensure that
Committee taken care of by Clause 12(3)(a)(iv). foreign contribution is utilised for bonafide activities
without compromising on national security concerns.
While clause 12 (3)(a) (iv) refers to registration
certificate being granted to a person not found
guilty of diversion or misutilisation of its funds,
clause 12 (3)(a)(vi) has a larger connotation wherein
a registration certificate may be granted to a person
who is not likely to use the foreign contribution for
personal gains or divert it for undesirable purposes
which could also impinge on national security
concerns.

160
12 3
Clause 12(3)(b) and (c) of the Bill – 5
Communist Party of India The clause states that the official is required  to The word “meaningful project” would generally refer
(Marxist) determine whether the organisation has ‘prepared to a road map of clearly defined set of objectives
a meaningful project’ for the targeted group intended and goals of the organization, which intends to
to receive foreign funds. These forward-looking receive foreign funds, for the benefit of a target
statements are subject to subjective interpretations group for which prior permission for acceptance
of the relevant  officers and should be appropriately of foreign contribution is being sought and is
defined. In certain cases, an affidavit can be proposed to be utilised. This would also ensure that
sought. the foreign contribution is not misused or diverted
for any other activities detrimental to the national
interest.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Clause 12(3) refers to meaningful activity. This The word “meaningful activity” refers to the
of India prevents a new person from undertaking a good activities undertaken by an association in pursuance
work and also prevents a person presently under- of a clearly defined set of objectives and goals in
taking a particular activity from expanding to its chosen field of activity, to benefit the people for
newer programmes. whom the foreign contribution is proposed to be
received and utilised. Furthermore, the term
‘meaningful activity’ can also be seen as an enabling
provision in terms of assessment of the purposes
for which foreign contribution is being sought.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Another condition for grant of registration is that
of India the person making an application for registration –do–
has undertaken meaningful activity. Meaningful
activity is a broad and subjective expression.
[Clause 12(b)]

161
National Congress Party This clause States that if there is any application
for grant of  certificate or giving prior permission,
the Central Government may do so after proper –do–
inquiry that it is satisfied that the person making
application for registration has undertaken
meaningful activity in its chosen field. “Meaningful
activity” has not been defined in the Bill. It is a
very broad expression and has the potential for
subjective interpretation.
PRIA Society ‘Meaningful activity’ is very subjective, the –do–
interpretaion of which may be discouraging to the
voluntary sector.
Clause 12(3)(d) and 12(3)(e) of the Bill – 4
Nationalist Congress Party As per the principle
 of natural justice, a person These provisions have been kept to ensure that
cannot be held guilty until proven. However, foreign contribution received is not misused or
according to this clause, even if there  is a used for any activities detrimental to national interest.
prosecution pending against the person, he is In the given circumstances, the receipt of foreign
prohibited from receiving foreign funds. This will contribution by a person against whom a
restrict a number of organisations from receiving prosecution for any offence is pending may,
FCRA registration since there can be false cases therefore, not be desirable. However, any
and accusations pending against social  activists recommendation that the Committee might make in
working in the field taking up right issues on be- this regard may be considered.
half of the marginalised communities.
Muslim League Kerala State The existing provision may be modified to the effect –do–
party that individual convicted for a major offence or is
facing charges framed by Court for any major
offence may be debarred and not for merely facing
prosecution for any offence pending against him.
The expression “major offence” may be defined in
Clause 2.

162
12 3
Catholic Bishop’s Conference One of the conditions for grant of registration.
of India ...pending prosecution...should be deleted. No such –do–
provision is in Peoples’ Representation Act.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Clause 12(3) says, “in case person being other –do–
Conference of India than an individual, any of its Directors or office
bearers has neither been convicted under any law
for the time being in force or any prosecution for
any offence is pending”. The provision regarding
pending prosecution should also be removed.
Clause 12 (3)(f)(vi) of the Bill – 1
Catholic Bishop’s Conference The expression “harmony between religious, social, It is not feasi ble to define each and every word
of India linguistic, regional, caste or communities” is very mentioned in the Bill. The term not defined in the
broad expression and lead to subjective decisions. Law will have the same meaning as commonly
understood in the English language.
The scope for subjective decision may not exist as
decisions are taken after due inquiry and verification
of antecedents/activities of an individual or
organisation, reports about which are collected from
different official sources.
Clause 12 (3)(g) of the Bill – 1
Muslim League Kerala State In Clause 12(3)(g), it needs to
 be clarified that it This clause refers to the person making an
Party shall not lead to incitement of an offence by the application for registration or prior permission.
applicant. The words “by the applicant” be inserted Therefore, no modification is necessary in this
after the word “offence”. clause.

163
Clause 12 (4) of the Bill – 1
Muslim League Kerala State Clause 12(4) be deleted as the applicant should Section 24 of the RTI Act, 2005 provides that
Party always have the right to know the reasons for nothing in the Act shall apply to intelligence and
refusal of his application. security organizations specified in the Second
Schedule of the Act. In view of this provision, any
information about activities/antecedents of an
association collected through intelligence/security
agencies for taking a decision for grant/refusal of
registration or prior permission cannot be disclosed.
Therefore, this clause is in conformity with the
RTI Act, 2005.
Clause 14(1) of the Bill – 1
Reserve Bank of India Cancellation of permission to receive foreign The suggestion will be duly considered at the time
contribution may be advised through website to of framing of the Rules.
avoid delay in receipt of communication in this
regard by the bank.
Chairperson, Shrimati Sushma Ground for de-registration/cancella tion should be As per clause 14(1), a certificate of registration
Swaraj, M.P. and Shri R.K. given to the applicant. can be cancelled by an order on the grounds
Dhawan, M.P. mentioned in the said clause. Although giving
grounds for cancellation has not been specifically
mentioned in this clause, it is implicit that grounds
mentioned in clause 14(1) would have to be
specified when a show cause notice or an order
for cancellation is issued by the Central Government.
Clause 14(2) further provides that no order of
cancellation of certificate under this section shall be
made unless the person concerned has been given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

164
12 3
Clause 15 (1) of the Bill – 1
National Council of YMCA Foreign contribution accessed in violation of any Only the foreign contribution and assets created
of India of the clauses only should vest in the prescribed out of the foreign contribution would be covered
authority and not all assets. Besides, all assets by under the clause 15(1).
the prescribed authority  are open to misuse and
must not be permitted.
Clause 16 of the Bill – 7
Indian National Congress This Clause should contain a provision wherein a Such a dispensation may be considered at the time
person seeking renewal of a registrat ion certificate of framing of rules.
and who has made an application for such renewal
within 6 months before
 the expiry  of the period
of the certificate is deemed to be renewed in the
absence of a decision of the Central Government
before the expiry of the period of the certificate.
Catholic Bishop’s There is no need for renewal of registration as Renewal of registration is necessary to weed out
Conference of India there are several monitoring provisions in the bill. defaulting/defunct organisations.
Catholic Bishop’s The provision of validity of registration certificate Renewal of registration is necessary to weed out
Conference of India for five years will lead to uncertainty  for an defaulting/defunct organisations.
organisation. It will have negative effect on
voluntary sector. The Bill has enough provisions to
ensure proper working such as suspension, seizure
and also regular submission of accounts, auditing
etc. This time limit should be removed.

165
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Renewal of registration after five years  is not Apart from monitoring mechanism, renewal of
of India required. This time limit should  be removed as regsitration is also necessary as it provides an
there are several monitoring provisions like opportunity for re-evaluating the bonafides of the
suspension, seizure, inspection and regular sub- associations and thereby for weeding out of
mission of accounts. defaulting/defunct associations.
Reserve Bank of India If we have an electronic system and a unique A number of factors are required to be considered
identification number, the five years restriction  for before registration of an association under FCRA is
renewal could be dispensed with because  all these renewed after five year. Further, apart from
things can be monitored on a regular basis. monitoring mechanism, renewal of registration is
also necessary as it provides an opportunity for re-
evaluating the bonafides of the associations and
thereby for weeding out of defaulting/defunct
associations.
Planning Commission Registration should be renewed after a period The validity of 5 years for registration is considered
longer than five years or if the first review can to be reasonable and adequate.
be done after five years, thereafter the renewal
period could be kept a little longer.
Account Aid Renewal of registration puts a lot of mental agony Renewal of registration after every five years is
on the NGOs and would hamper the on going considered to be reasonable and necessary to weed
projects. out defaulting/defunct organisations. Moreover, such
renewal will not in any way impede the activities of
a bonafide  association.
Clause 17(1) of the Bill – 5
Muslim League Kerala State Clause 17(1) restricts acceptance of foreign This provision is required for better monitoring of
Committee contribution in a single account through only one receipt and utilisation of foreign contribution.
of the branches of a bank. It is advisable to However, provision for use of multiple bank accounts
provide that the foreign contribution may be for utilisation of foreign contribution has been made
received through all such branches of a bank or in the Bill to facilitate operational expediency.
banks as may be specified in the application.

166
12 3
Dr. Bimal Jalan, M.P. Reporting  of foreign  remittances by the banks This clause is required to verify and cross check
should be deleted  as it will put additional burden the veracity of the accounts submitted by the
on the Banks. The Act should provide that any associations. Sufficient measures will be taken to
information, which is required, where  there is av oid additional burden on the reporting entities.
evidence of suspicious activities, will be supplied to
the Ministry and penal action may be  taken against
the banks not  furnishing the called for information.
RBI, SBI, ICICI Bank Ltd. There is already a system of reporting suspicious The threshold limit for reporting of foreign remittance
and HDFC Bank Ltd. transactions by the Bank branches directly to the by Banks is proposed to be kept at Rs.10 lakhs
Financial Intelligence Unit. Any cash transaction and may be finalised at the time of formulation of
above Rs.10 lakhs or small transactions aggre- rules under the Act. The Financial Intelligence Unit
gating more than Rs. 10 lakh in a month is also (FIU) shall be the nodal agency for collection of
reported. information pertaining to receipt of foreign
There should be a threshold limit beyond which contribution beyond a threshold limit and repreated
bank may report.
 A threshold limit of Rs.5 lakh transactions even if the amount is slightly less than,
or above may be fixed. or aggregates to a cumulative amount which may
be slightly less than the threshold limit. Sufficient
measures will be taken to avoid additional burden
on the reporting entities.
RBI The banks could report different types of
remittances but it
 is difficult to report about all –do–
types of foreign remittances.
RBI V oluminous data on foreign remittances will put an
extra burden on the financial institutions, which –do–
will increase cost on  the banks.  It will also divert
the focus on monitoring of suspicious transactions.

167
Clause 18 of the Bill – 2
Catholic Bishop’s Conference Furnishing a certificate from an officer of the bank This stipulation of certificate by authorised officer
of India or authorised person in foreign  exchange on details of the bank has been provided to ensure due
of foreign contribution received is not necessary verification and correctness of the particulars
in view of the provision in the Bill  for requirement furnished regarding receipt of foreign contribution
of annual information report from  banks on foreign by the recipient. However, any recommendation
contribution received. that the Committee might make in this regard may
be considered.
Communist Party of India All organizations receiving  foreign  contribution Clause 18 of the Bill provides for submission of
(Marxist) should submit yearly audited accounts to the accounts by the association in the prescribed manner
Government, which  should also  be published and within prescribed time.
through Website.
Clause 22 of the Bill – 1
Catholic Bishop’s When an organisation ceases to exist
 or its licence Such a dispensation may be amenable to misuses.
Conference of India is suspended, the funds after selling of its assets The proposed clause provides for a transparent and
should go to another organisation, doing a similar objective procedure for disposal of assets created
service. out of foreign contribution received.
Clause 23 of the Bill – 2
Nationalist Congress Party The clause provides for inspection of accounts and The provisions for inspection, search and seizure
records of an organisation by an authorised by an authorized Group A officer are already
gazetted officer, holding a Group A post. To arm provided in the existing Act [FC(R) Act, 1976]. A
a Group A officer with such sweeping power such Group ‘A’ officer in a responsible entity in the
as seizure of article or currency or security just Government. The provisions for inspection, search
on the ground of mere suspicion that those things and seizure are enabling provisions, which are
might have been received in contravention of the considered essential to enforce compliance to law
Act, may result in undue harassment of the and proper monitoring of receipt and utilization of
concerned person or bodies thereby hearalding the foreign contribution. Detailed procedure for such
new Inspection Raj. Therefore, they should first actions has also been laid down in the proposed
be asked to explain within specific time-frame and Bill.
then the officer can use his discretion to the effect Section 23 of the Bill provides for inspection of
if he feels dissatisfied. accounts or records maintained by any political
ssss

168
party or any person or any organization or any
association, if the Central Government has any
ground to suspect that any provision of the Act has
been or is being contravened. Adequate safeguards
have been provided in Clause 24 of the Bill whereby
the authorised person may be required to return
such accounts or records to the person from whom
these were seized if no proceeding is brought against
him, within six months from the date of such
seizure.
Muslime League Kerala State As per clause 23 the Central Government may The provision has been made in the Bill to enable
Committee authorise not only a Central Government gazetted the Central Government to deal with any exigency.
officer holding a Group A post but also any other Furthermore, the Central Government would only
officer or authority or organisation, for inspection after due consideration, invest this authority in any
of accounts or records. other responsible officer whom it considers fit to
inspect the records and accounts of the
organization(s) suspected of having contravened the
This inclusion of any other officer etc.; is not provisions of the Act.
desirable and also the gazetted officer should have
held the Group A post for not less
 than ten years.
Clause 24 of the Bill – 1
Dr. Bimal Jalan Search, seizure, all these included in Chapter V The provisions for inspection, search and seizure
should be completely abolished. are enabling provisions, which are considered
essential to enforce compliance to law and proper
monitoring of receipt and utilization of foreign
contribution. Detailed procedure for such actions
has been laid down in the proposed Bill.
12 3

169
Clause 31 of the Bill – 1
Catholic Bishop’s Conference The provision for appeal provided in Clause 31 This clause has been kept for taking recourse to
of India should not be limited to certain clauses only and judicial remedy in the exceptional circumstances
should be made applicable to all sections. when the assets of an association is confiscated.
Clause 38 of the Bill
Communist Party of India Clause 38 provides for prohibiting an association The FCR Bill provides for prohibition, suspension
(Marxist) from receiving foreign contribution for a period of and cancellation of certificate of registration in
3 years from the date of second conviction. It clauses 10, 13 and 14, respectively. Clause 35 and
should be amended.  Any organization which  is 37 of the Bill provides for conviction for
convicted of any offence under the Act should be contravention of the provisions of the Bill. Depending
prohibited from accepting foreign contribution for upon the gravity of the case, action can also be
a period of 5 years from the date  of first taken, u nder clauses 10, 13 and 14, against
conviction. associations convicted for first time. Clause 38, in
addition to conviction under Clauses 35 and 37
compulsorily prohibits second time offenders from
receiving foreign contribution to prevent repeated
violations by delinquent associations. The period of
prohibition of three years was considered to be
adequate; however, a view in this regard i.e. to
enhance the prohibition period to five years can be
taken.
Clause 50 of the Bill – 2
Catholic Bishop’s Conference The power of the Central Government to exempt The clause is to be used under exceptional
of India any particular organisation or individual from the circumstances to overcome difficulties due to
operation of all or any of the provisions of the unforeseen situations. Administrative guidelines shall
Act and as often as may be necessary, revoke
 or be suitably incorporated in the rules.
modify such order looks arbitrary and need to be
looked into. There is no criteria specified or
mentioned as to on what ground, the Central
Government can exempt a particular organisation
or individual from the operation of this clause.
Procedure for grant of exemption should be included
to bring transparency.

170
Catholic Bishop’s Conference No criteria specified for  exempting  organizations –do–
of India in Clause 50 leading to arbitrariness.
General observations on the Bill – 18
Indian National Congress Concerns of NGOs An effort has been made to balance national security
concerns and flow of foreign contribution for
There are concerns of NGOs, which may be charitable purposes by providing a more explicit
required to be addressed. We must balance and transparent regime.
national security concerns and the need to provide
a transparent regime for flow of funds for The Bill also seeks to put in place a system of
charitable purposes. efficient monitoring of receipt and utilization of
foreign contribution without compromising on
national security.
Communist Party of India There are possibilities of by-passing FCRA require- In order to strengthen the monitoring of receipt of
(Marxist) ments by channeling the funds
 through commercial foreign contribution, Clause 17(2) of the Bill
firms as consultant fees, exports etc. There is a madates every bank and authorized person dealing
need to plug the loopholes by appropriate amend- in foreign exchange to report –
ments. (a) the amount of foreign remittance;
(b)the source and manner in which the
foreign remittance was received; and
(c) other particulars as may be specified
With banks and authorized persons in foreign
exchanage acting as an independent channel of
information on foreign remittances, the possibility
of bypassing the FCRA requirements can be
effectively checked. The reporting requirements will
be further amplified in the rules.
12 3

171
Nationalist Congress Party It has often been seen that foreign contributions The FCR Bill seeks to strengthen the monitoring of
received for noble activities but surreptitiously and foreign contribution received. Clause 17 (2) of the
clandestinely they are delivered for subversive Bill mandates every bank and authorized person
activities. Here the question is who shall be dealing in foreign exchange to report –
monitoring the corpus of the foreign contribution.
Hence the need of the hour is that the provisions (a) the amount of foreign remittance;
of the Bill should be more specific and stringent (b) the source and manner in which the
to discourage such activities also. foreign remittance was received; and
(c) other particulars as may be specified
With banks and authorized persons in foreign
exchange acting as an independent channel of
information on foreign remittances, the possibility
of bypassing the FCRA requirements can be
effectively checked. The reporting requirements will
be furhter amplified in the rules.
Chairperson MHA’s website should contain maximum data about MHA’s website already contains information about
(Mrs. Sushma Swaraj, M.P.) associations which can be accessed by all. the registered associations, prohibited associations,
annual report on FCRA, etc. It also contains facility
for on-line submission of applications for registration/
prior permission, status enquiry and filing of FC-3
returns etc. Updation of the website is an ongoing
process wherein efforts are continuously to further
improve upon the contents.
Shri Ilias Azmi, M.P. There should be inquiry of the foreign donor and Under the existing Act, in cases of prior permission,
the purpose for which donation is given and the verification of the antecedents of the donor is carried
information about foreign donor details should be out where the amount of foreign contribution to be
available in the website of the Ministry. donated is above of Rs. 1 crore. Similar provisions
would be made in the rules to be framed under the
Bill. Furthermore, to ensure greater transparency,
efforts will be made to upload additional inputs, to
the extent feasible, to give a comprehensive profile
of donors.

172
12 3
Shri Ilias Azmi, M.P. There would not be even 5% of diversion of There is no question of allowing any diversion of
foreign contribution for activities detrimental  to foreign contribution for activities detrimental to
national interest. There are other avenues for national interest. In fact, all avenues for funding of
funding such activities. anti national activities are required to be monitored
and effectively controlled including FCRA route.
Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen, Whether receipt of foreign contributions by natural An association is permitted to receive foreign
M.P. religious organisations in India is permitted? contribution with registration/prior permission for
pursuing bonafide religious activities in consonance
with its stated aims and objectives.
Dr. Bimal Jalan, M.P. FCR Act should confine itself to two or three The provisions of the Foreign Contribution
principal things like prohibited class, e.g., political (Regulation) Bill, 2006 have been prepared keeping
parties, Member of Parliaments, educational in view the contemporary security concerns. In the
institutions, Institutions which Government do not changed security scenario, the Ministry of Home
want to be aided by the international agencies, Affairs is of the view that there is a need for more
Auditing of accounts, Prohibition of specific areas comprehensive coverage and focused attention for
which are not in the national interest. The Bill monitoring the receipt and utilization of foreign
should confine itself to accounts, registration  of contribution. Therefore, the thrust of the Bill is to
non-exempted entities and also prohibition of put in place a consolidated law with a view to:
specific areas, which, we believe, is not in the • facilitate receipt of foreign contribution
national interest. for bona fide purposes without compromising
on national security.
Bill should be looked at in the light of the • bring in transparency in decision-making
contemporary circumstances of liberalized economy process.
with flow of funds free of any investigation. • strengthen the monitoring of receipt and
utilization of foreign contribution to prevent
the diversion of foreign contribution towards
activities detrimental to national interest.

173
Dr. Bimal Jalan, M.P. There is a little possibility of FCRA  route being Keeping in view the contemporary security scenario,
used for terrorist funding as there are other all possible routes for inward transfer of foreign
channels of transferring funds meant for creating funds including the FCRA route are required to be
internal disturbances, terrorism etc. By making the closely monitored. The proposed Bill, inter-alia
provisions in the FCR Bill stringent may result in seeks to strengthen monitoring mechanism.
containing the legitimate activities of the NGOs
more than the containing their illegitimate activities.
It can also impose burden on NGOs dependent on
small grants received from abroad.
Dr. Bimal Jalan, M.P. State-aided agencies, Government-funded agencies, Under the existing Act also, a number of agencies
official agencies which are providing funds to any of the United Nations, and other international
State-recognised agency or anybody who is agencies and organisations have been notified by
receiving from official bilateral/multilateral donors, the Central Government to be not covered by the
recognised by the Ministry of Finance may be definition of ‘foreign source’, under section
exempted from the purview of FCRA. 2(1)(e)(ii) of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Act, 1976. A similar dispensation could be considered
under the proposed Bill.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference There is no need for a new legislation because The primary purpose of the Bill is to consolidate
of India there is already much monitoring being done through the law to re gulate the acceptance and utilisation of
the Income Tax, reporting to the Ministry of foreign contribution/foreign hospitality and to prohibit
National Council of Churches Home Affairs and so on. For national security the same for any activities detrimental to the national
in India concerns, bring amendments with stringent interest. The provisions of the Foreign Contribution
conditions in the existing Acts to protect national (Regulation) Bill, 2006 have been prepared keeping
National Council of YMCA interest and to curb terrorist activities. in view the contemporary security concerns.
of India
Catholic Bishop’s Conference The Bill should be an enabling one and not – do –
of India prohibitive to enable the voluntary sector to  do or
continue to do what they have been doing. The
intended purpose of the Bill to prevent misutilisation
of foreign contribution is already  being taken  care
by FEMA, PMLA and IT Act, etc. Bill should not
be mixed up with the objects of curbing use of
funds for terrorism.

174
12 3
Catholic Bishop’s Conference The provisions of the Bill  contradict the policy of National Policy on V oluntary Sector, while advocating
of India the Government of India laid down in the National a liberal policy of Government for the growth and
Policy on V oluntary Sector. There is need to work development of voluntary sector, also speaks of
National council of Churches in synchronization with the National Policy on tightening administrative and penal procedures to
in India V oluntary Sector issued by the Planning Commission. ensure that incentives provided to associations in
voluntary sector are used for bonafide purposes
National Council of YMCA pursuant to the main aims and objectives of such
of India associations. The FCR Bill seeks to achieve the
above objectives by putting in place an improved
Voluntary Action Network monitoring mechanism which would ensure that
India funds are not misutilsed.
Catholic Bishop’s Conference There is a requirement for a more effective The proposed Bill contains specific provisions in
of India monitoring mechanism in place instead of bringing Clauses 17 and 18 for strengthening monitoring
a new legislation. mechanism.
Reserve Bank of India Registration number allotted by the Ministry of This may be considered at the time of formulation
Home Affairs should be unique and relative bank’s of rules under the Act.
code be incorporated in the registration number
so that use of the same certificate for opening an
account in different branches
 of different banks
would not be possible.
Reserve Bank of India Monitoring of entire foreign remittances will slow The threshold limit for reporting of foreign remittance
down the foreign fund flow through legitimate by Banks is proposed to be kept at Rs. 10 lakh and
channels and encourage hawala channels. the threshold amount will be finalised at the time of
formulation of rules under the Act. Bonafide
associations are expected to use only legitimate
channels for receiving foreign contribution.
Planning Commission There should be a mechanism to maintain It is beyond the purview of the Bill.
dialogue between Government and NGOs like Joint
Consultative Machinery/Ombudsman.

175
ANNEXURE-V
LIST OF THE INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISA TIONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) BILL, 2006
Sl. No. Date Witnesses
12 3
1. 16.7.2007 Representatives of Banks
1. Dr. Bimal Jalan, MP, Rajya Sabha
2. Shri V . Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, RBI
3. Shri O.P. Bhatt, Chairman, SBI
4. Shri A.D. Chaudhary, CGM, Banking Operations, SBI
5. Shri Rajender Sehgal, Country Head, Financial Institutions and
Government Business Group, HDFC Bank Ltd.
6. Ms. Madhuri Puri Buch, Executive Director, ICICI Bank Ltd.
7. Shri Pramod Rao, Sr. General Manager, ICICI Bank Ltd.
2. 17.7.2007 Representatives of Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India
1. Arch. Bishop Stanislaus Fernandes, Secretary General
2. Dr. Babu Joseph, Spokesperson
3. Dr. Julian Francis, Advocate, Supreme Court of India
Representatives of National Council of Churches in India
1. Rev. Dr. Enos Das Pradhan, General Secretary CNI Synod
and Chairman, NCCI Commission on Polity and National
Governance
2. Mrs. Sharada Manohar Rao, Vice President, NCCI
3. H.G. Bishop Pathros Mar Osthathcos, Auxiliary Bishop of
Delhi, Malankara Jacobite Syrian Orthodix Church
4. Bishop S.S. Singh, Methodist Church in India, Delhi Regional
Conference
5. Rev. Fr. Jayan Thomas, Mar Thoma Church
6. Mr. Sanjay Patra, FCA, Executive Director, FMSF
7. Mr. Joselyn Martins, FCA, J.A. Martins and Co. Chartered
Accountants.
175

176
12 3
Representatives of National Council of YMCA of I ndia
1. Mr. W .I. Judson, Finance Secretary, National Council
2. Mr. J.P. Fernandes, General Secretary, YMCA, Nagpur
3. 3.10.2007 Representatives of Voluntary Action Network India
1. Shri Rama Reddy, President
2. Shri Paresh Tewary, CEO
3. Shri Jagadananda, Member
4. Shri Sharad Joshi, Treasurer
Representatives of Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India
1. Shri V . Murali, Vice Chairman, Corporate and Allied Laws
Committee
2. Dr. Alok Ray, Secretary, Corporate and Allied Laws Committee
3. Shri Atul Gupta
4. Shri Sunil Jain
5. Shri Deepender Agarwal
4. 6.11.2007 Representatives of Planning Commission
1. Shri S.N. Dash, Principal Advisor
2. Dr. Lalit Kumar, Deputy Advisor
5. 9.1.2008 (A) Representatives of the Planning Commission:
(i) Dr. Subas Chandra Pani, Secretary;
(ii) Shrimati Manjulika Gautam, Sr. Adviser (VAC)
(iii) Shri Lalit Kumar, Dy. Adviser (VAC).
(B) Chairpersons of the four expert groups set up to draft the
policy:
(i) Dr. Rajesh Tandon, President, PRIA-Society for Participatory
Research in Asia;
(ii) Shri Sanjay Agarwal; Account Aid;
(iii) Shri Ajay Mehta, ED, National Foundation of India;
(iv) Shri Paresh T ewari, CEO, V ANI.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.