PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED TWELFTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Fourth Report on Administration and
Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th July, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th July, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2018/Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)
212
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON  HOME  AFFAIRS
TWO  HUNDRED  TWELFTH  REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Fourth Report on Administration and
Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th July, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th July, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2018/Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)
C.S.(H.A.)-

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(vii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-51
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations  which  have   been   accepted   by   the
Government..................................................................................... 3-10
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire
to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply......................... 11-15
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations  in  respect  of  which   replies   of   the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee......................... 16-41
Chapter-IV Recommendation/Observation  in  respect  of  which  final  reply  of  the
Government have not been received.................................................... 42-51
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................... 52-58
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................... 60-68

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri P .  Chidambaram – Chairman
      RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri  Pratap Keshari Deb
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
9. Vacant
10. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
(i)
#  Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi nominated w.e.f. 2nd June, 2018 consequent upon the vacancy arose on the expiration of term
of Shri K. Rahman Khan from the membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2018.
@Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia, Member, Rajya nominated w.e.f. 9th July, 2018 in place of Shri Derek O’Brien.
%Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha resigned from the  Membership of DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f.
2nd June, 2018.
#
%
@

(ii)
23. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
24. Shri Dilip Patel
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
*Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 6th April, 2018 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of
Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda, MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Industry.
$ Vacant consequent upon resignation of Shri B. Sriramulu from Lok Sabha Seat ( i.e., Bellary Parliamentary Constituency of
Karnataka) w.e.f. 18th May, 2018.
*
$

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred Twelfth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained
in the Two Hundred Fourth Report on Administration and Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep.
2. The Two Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 18th July, 2017 and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on the 18th July, 2017.   After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to
the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations
of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said
report to the Committee on 30th October, 2017.
3. The Action Taken Notes, received from the Ministry of Home Affairs, was examined and it was
found that action was not taken on several recommendations contained in the Report, therefore, it was
decided to hear the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the UT Administration
of Lakshadweep on the Action Taken on recommendation given by the Committee. The Ministry of Home
Affairs furnished an updated status on the Action Taken Notes on 26th December, 2017.  The Committee,
in its meeting held on 27th December, 2017, heard the Home Secretary, representatives of UTL
Administration, the Ministry Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Shipping, Telecommunication Consultants India
Limited (TCIL), Airports Authority of India (AAI), Department of Telecommunication and Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. The Action Taken Report is based on Action Taken
Notes, updated status and the deliberations of the Committee’s meeting held on 27th December, 2017.
4. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha
in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th September, 2004.
5. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Twelfth Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 21st May, 2018.
6. The comments of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
N
EW D ELHI; P . CHIDAMBARAM
May 21, 2018 Chairman,
Vaisakha 31, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
A TR : Aerei da Trasporto Regionale (in French)/Regional Air Transport
(in English)
AAI : Airports Authority of India
A A Y : Antyodaya Anna Yojana
ANS : Air Navigation Services
AMC : Annual Maintenance Contract
BSNL : Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
BDS : Bachelor of Dental Surgery
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CAMC : Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract
CMFRI : Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute 
CHC : Community Health Centre
CHS : Central Health Services
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CDB : Coconut Development Board
COD : Cast on Delivery
CAPEX : Capital Expenditure
CIFT : Central Institute of Fisheries Technology
DGCA : Director General of Civil Aviation
DRSC : Department-related Standing Committee
DRDE : Defence Research and Development Establishment
DTS Distributed Temperature Sensing 
DPR : Detailed Project Report
DTTDC : Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation
EFC/PIB : Expenditure Finance Committee/Public Investment Board
EoI : Expression of Interest
FRRO : Foreigners Regional Registration Officer
FAD : Fish Aggregating Device
(iv)

(v)
FCI : Food Corporation of India
FCS : Food and Civil Supplies
GNCTD : Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
GH : Government Hospital
GDMOs : General Duty Medical Officers 
HPCL : Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
ICS&MS : Island Co-operative Supply and Marketing Societies
IFR : Instrument Flight Rules
IGH : Indira Gandhi Hospital
IOCL : Indian Oil Corporation Limited
LEDA : Lakshadweep Energy Development Agency
LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LDA : Lakshadweep Diving Academy
LTTD : Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
LTDC : Lakshadweep Tourism Development Corporation
LCMF : Lakshadweep Co-operative Marketing Federation
MNRE : Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MW : Mega Watt
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation
MT : Metric Tonne
MBBS : Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery
MIDH : Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
MTDC : Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation
MPEDA : Marine Products Export Development Authority
NCSCM : National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management
NITI : National Institution for Transforming India
NHM : National Health Mission

(vi)
NTPC : National Thermal Power Corporation
NOC : No Objection Certificate
NFSG : Non Functional Selection Grade
OFC : Optical Fibre Cable
ODF : Open Defecation Free
OIC : Oil Marketing Companies
OPEX : Operational Expenditure
OMSS : Open Market Sales Scheme
PADI : Professional Association of Diving Instructors
PHL : Pawan Hans Limited
PMU : Project Management Unit
PMUY : Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana
PDS : Public Distribution System
PPP : Public Private Partnership
RGSH : Rajiv Gandhi Specialty Hospital
RIP : Retail Issue Price
RCC : Reinforced Cement Concrete
RCS : Regional Connectivity Scheme
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
SECC : Socio Economic and Caste Census
SDO : Sub-divisional Officer
SCI : Shipping Corporation of India
SECI : Solar Energy Corporation of India
SPORTS : Society for Promotion of Nature Tourism and Sports
TCIL : Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd.
TCC : Tourist Carrying Capacity
TFR : Technical Feasibility Report
TRAI : Telecom Regulatory Authority of India

(vii)
TDS : Tax Deducted at Source
UTL : Union Territory of Lakshadweep
UTLA : Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration
UDAN : Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik
USO : Universal Services Obligation
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
VGF : Viability Gap Funding
VFR : Visual Flight Rules
WPC : Wireless Planning Co-ordination

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fourth Report on Administration and
Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep. The Two Hundred Fourth Report of the Committee
was presented to Rajya Sabha/laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Fourth Report have been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.1.7, 2.1.8, 2.3.7, 2.8.4, 2.13.3, 2.16.4, 2.16.5 and 2.17.4 (of  Two Hundred Fourth
Report)
Total Recommendations - 8
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.1.9, 2.2.4, 2.12.2 and 2.13.6 ( ibid)
Total Recommendations - 4
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos.  2.3.6, 2.4.3, 2.5.2, 2.6.5, 2.7.2, 2.10.7, 2.10.8, 2.10.9,
2.10.10, 2.14.3, 2.15.4, 2.16.8 and 2.17.9 ( ibid)
Total Recommendations - 13
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action taken steps
in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 2.1.13, 2.1.14, 2.2.5, 2.6.3, 2.9.5, 2.11.2, 2.16.11 and 2.17.8
(ibid)
Total Recommendations - 8
In respect of 8 recommendations in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished interim reply
1

2
or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should
furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized
in Chapters III and IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendation.
3. The details of the ATNs have been analysed in the succeeding chapters.

3
CHAPTER – I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
ECONOMIC ISSUES
1.1 Expansion of Tourism
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee takes note of the new initiatives taken by the UT Administration for promoting
tourism in Lakshadweep. The Committee, however, feels that the existing infrastructure is inadequate and
not conducive for the promotion of high-end luxury tourism, which requires significant investment, both
public and private, for the construction of new facilities and the upgradation of existing ones. Substantial
investment is also required to address the major weaknesses of Lakshadweep islands such as the low
carrying capacity of the islands, and transport and connectivity bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the National Centre for Sustainable
Coastal Management to complete its assessment of tourist carrying capacity of Lakshadweep Islands in
a time-bound manner and subsequently initiate measures to open up Lakshadweep tourism for private
investors in a regulated manner. (Para 2.1.7 of 204th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Final Report on the carrying capacity of Lakshadweep islands has been submitted by NCSCM,
Chennai. Taking into account the inadequate infrastructure for the promotion of high end tourism,
Lakshadweep Tourism Policy - 2016 has envisaged the promotion of high end resorts on the uninhabited
islands of Cheriyam, Thinnakara and Suheli Valiyakara by inviting private investment. Based on the
carrying capacity of each inhabited islands, resorts and tourist homes for the promotion of domestic
tourism will also be permitted. Detailed guidelines have been notified by the UTL Administration in May,
2017 for the development of eco-friendly tourist resorts on the inhabited islands.
Updated status
1.1.3 T ourist Carrying Capacity (TCC) for 10 inhabited islands has been submitted by the National
Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) . In order to promote private investment in tourism
infrastructure, a Tourism Policy, guidelines for setting up  Tourist Resorts and Tourist Homes have been
notified which are in line with the concept of Low V olume - High Value Tourism. Applications for the
setting up of tourist resorts and tourist homes are being invited.
1.1.4 During the course of the Committee’ s meeting held on 27th December, 2017 for the consideration
of Action Taken Notes, the representative of UT Administration, Lakshadweep apprised the Committee
3

4
that based on the TCC report, guidelines have been finalized as per the recommendations of DRSC on
Home Affairs.  The Home Secretary also apprised the Committee that based on these guidelines, applications
have now been invited from private players to develop these tourist resorts and tourist homes, and,
independently, the NITI Aayog has taken up four uninhabited islands and one inhabited island for holistic
development. Minicoy being the inhabited island and the others being Bangaram, Thinnakkara, Cherium
and Suheli.
1.2 Tourism Growth in Lakshadweep
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee also notes that the growth of tourism in Lakshadweep is highly desirable as it
would not only generate employment opportunities but also bring foreign exchange to Lakshadweep.
However, reckless and unsystematic growth may prove to be counter-productive by harming the fragile
eco-system of the islands. Hence, the Committee feels that the tourism plan of the UT Administration
must strike a balance between realization of tourism potential and ecological sustainability of the islands.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must strive to develop the
tourism in Lakshadweep on the development model adopted by Maldives and Mauritius, both of which
focus on high-end and low-volume luxury tourism, along with continuing the current cruise-based tourism
approach which would certainly help to regulate the number of visitors to the islands and to generate
substantial amount of revenue. (Para 2.1.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 The notified guidelines for high-end tourist resorts envisage resorts with a balance of luxury and
ecological sustainability of the islands. The MHA has approved Immigration Check Posts at Minicoy and
Agatti islands of UTL for clearing immigration, in respect of the tourists visiting by cruise liners, to these
islands. The approval of the Ministry of Finance (through Customs), for notifying Agatti island as a
Customs Port along the lines of Minicoy Custom Port, has been taken up.
Updated Status
1.2.3 NITI Aayog in consultation with M/s IPE Global Limited has proposed the holistic development
of 5 islands of Lakshadweep. The guidelines for high-end tourist resorts, so notified, strike a balance
between luxury and ecological sustainability of the islands.
1.2.4 MHA has approved Immigration Check Posts at Minicoy and Agatti islands of UTL for clearing
immigration in respect of the visiting tourists by cruise liners to these islands. Minicoy has been notified
as a Customs Port and infrastructure for the same will be ready within 3 months  i.e. , by March, 2018.
For immigration, the Supdt. of Police is FRRO (Foreigners Regional Registration Officer) and the
Lakshadweep Police has taken up the responsibility for immigration related matters and they been trained
for the same.
1.2.5 The UTL Administration is awaiting approval from the Ministry of Finance (through Commissioner

5
of Customs and Central Excise, Calicut) for notifying Agatti island as a Customs Port along the lines of
Minicoy Custom Port. A reminder letter for the same was sent on 06/12/2017 and on 16/12/2017 for
expediting it.
Further Recommendation
1.2.6 The Committee is disappointed that the Ministry of Finance has not notified Agatti island
as a Customs Port despite the lapse of more than 4 months. This may be conveyed to Ministry
of Finance and the decision expedited.
1.3 Fisheries
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee observes that Lakshadweep has a tremendous potential for fish export, especially
Masmeen, and consistent measures are required to harness this potential. The Committee, in this connection,
recommends that the Ministry must chalk out a detailed strategy, in consultation with the Marine
Products Export Development Authority, for developing the export potential of marine produce of
Lakshadweep which would definitely improve the economy of Lakshadweep. (Para 2.3.7 ibid)
Action Taken Replies
1.3.2 UTL Administration has begun the process for developing the export potential of Lakshadweep
marine products (value added products), especially Masmeen, in consultation with the Marine Products
Export Development Authority (MPEDA).  It is also exploring the possibility of establishing value addition
centres/units in islands, having the potential, with an idea to provide different value addition techniques
in consultation with interested large scale exporters in mainland.
Updated Status
1.3.3 One Fishermen Training Centre is functional and is providing various training programmes to
promote local entrepreneurs. UTL Administration is also providing various onboard Training programmes
pertaining to Pole and line, long lining, vertical lining etc. to keep the local fishermen abreast with latest
fishing technologies by using newly constructed departmental fishing vessel named “MFV Bluefin”.  It
is also used for FAD monitoring and maintenance and also used for rescue operations.  UTL Administration
is trying to establish value addition centres in collaboration with MPEDA/CIFT and few other private
marine products exporters of Kerala. UTL Administration requested MPEDA to provide a DPR on
implementation of various value addition programmes.
1.3.4 To provide better wholesale market channels for Lakshadweep fishermen, UTL Administration is
permitting large scale buyers and exporters with big sized boats from the mainland to procure raw fish
directly from the Lakshadweep fishermen. UTL Administration has already issued an NOC for allowing
10 large sized boats on lease, to purchase and transport fish from the island to the mainland.   This will
help the fishermen to overcome the limited marketing facility for raw fish in Lakshadweep and thereby
increase the total landings in the Lakshadweep group of islands.

6
1.3.5 The representative of UTL Administration mentioned that they will shortly allow the exporters to
take their office to the mainland.  In compliance with the Committee’s recommendation, for the processing
and other facility, the Administration had written to MPEDA to give a project proposal from a long-term
perspective. The UTL Administration was also looking at marine certification with the Marine Stewardship
Council. The level of subsidy that was being given at 50 per cent was quite substantial.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
1.4 Drinking Water and Sanitation
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee observes that the plan to install six desalination plants in the remaining islands
is facing delay since 2013 due to procedural issues as the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
is yet to provide the financial approval to the proposal. The entire issue has been caught in a web of
bureaucratic procedures which is totally unacceptable. The Committee understands that financial matters
like cost escalation must be addressed to avoid audit objections later on. However the procedural issues
should not become a pretext to delay the decision making process. The Committee therefore recommends
that in the interest of the health of the people of Lakshadweep the Ministry of Home Affairs must push
for an early decision on the grant of financial approval by the Standing Finance Committee, and in any
event before 15.08.2017. (Para 2.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 Standing Finance Committee (SFC) held its meeting on 28th June, 2017 and it approved the
proposal for establishment of 6 LTTD plants each with a capacity of 1.5 lakh liters per day, in the islands
of Amini, Androth, Kadmat, Chetlat, Kalpeni and Kiltan of Lakshadweep, at a cost of 
`187.87 crore,
excluding taxes, and the administrative charges will be borne by the UT Administration.
Updated Status
1.4.3 Project Management Unit (PMU) has been created under the Lakshadweep Public Works Department
for coordinating the smooth functioning to facilitate timely completion of the project. Technical and
Financial bids have been opened. Financial bids are under evaluation.
1.5 Education
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee takes note of the amount of expenditure required to establish digital labs, internet
connectivity, smart class rooms and e-library in various schools of Lakshadweep. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry must provide adequate funds to Lakshadweep Administration for the purpose. The
Committee also observes that promoting education is one of the focus areas under the Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy and therefore recommends that UT Administration may seek funds from the corporate
sector under their CSR initiatives. (Para 2.13.3 ibid)

7
Action Taken
1.5.2 In the Annual Budget of the UT of Lakshadweep, for the year 2017-18, there was an allotment
of `10 lakh for setting up of ‘smart class rooms’ in schools. Action has been taken to identify a suitable
type of ‘smart class room’ appropriate to the conditions in Lakshadweep. The model proposed is based
on the Kerala Education department model since a majority of the schools in Lakshadweep are following
Kerala’s syllabus. The teachers of the department have also been trained in the software/content. Based
upon the success of these ‘smart class rooms’, after the initial roll out, further scaling up would be done
by extending it to all 43 schools on the islands. There is internet connectivity in all schools. Digital labs
and e-libraries will be setup in a phased manner. Sufficient funds are available for the purpose.
Updated Status
1.5.3 It has been decided to setup smart class rooms in all classes of all schools on the 10 inhabited
islands. In the first phase, it is being setup in all Government Sr. Sec. Schools and S. B. School of
smallest island Bitra, making a total of 12 units. Negotiations are under way between Keltron Ltd. (A
Government of Kerala undertaking) through the Government of Kerala for the early establishment during
the current financial year itself. Digital lab and e-library are also being considered in a phased manner.
Since Lakshadweep Administration can make provisions for fund, the assistance through CSR is not
necessary for the time being.
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES
1.6 Civil Aviation
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee is disappointed to observe the delay in extension of runway at Agatti aerodrome
which has hampered the expansion of air connectivity options to Lakshadweep islands. The Committee
is not convinced by the intended utility of the proposed extension plan as it would only allow Q400 type
aircraft which does not offer much advantage over the existing ATR-72 aircraft in terms of enhancing
seating capacity or other parameters. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct
intensive inspections and prepare an extension plan with a long-term view which can allow Airbus A320/
Boeing 737 type standard aircraft to ply regularly so as to enable flight operations by private airlines
as well. In the short-term, the Committee recommends that the frequency of existing flights may be
increased and a flight should be made available twice a day, seven days a week, especially during the
peak tourist season, to meet the demand for higher passenger capacity. (Para 2.16.4 ibid)
1.6.2 The Committee also notes the revised extension plan and feels that the extension of runway towards
Kalpitti Island should be preferred as it does not disturb the existing structures and the Ministry may also
explore the possibility of constructing a bridge on sea to expand the runway by at least 750 metre to
a total length of 1900 metre so as to allow operations of standard aircraft. The Committee also
recommends that the extension plan may also take into consideration the possibility of international flight
operations to facilitate charter flights and export related activities. (Para 2.16.5 ibid)

8
Action Taken (w.r.t para 2.16.4. ibid)
1.6.3 Considering the practical difficulties in the extension of the runway towards the northern direction,
the Administration had proposed the airport expansion towards the southern side connecting Kalpitti
(which is an islet to attached to Agatti Island), which will enable larger aircrafts to ply. The UTL
Administration has only recently obtained sanction for the increased VGF towards the deployment of the
existing ATR-72 aircraft. It will take up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation the issue of operation of more
flights in the Kochi-Agatti sector on a daily basis, without VGF, to meet the higher passenger requirement
and to enable tourism development.
Action Taken (w.r.t para 2.16.5. ibid)
1.6.4 A proposal along with EFC/PIB note for providing funds (
` 1541.42 crore) for the extension of
Agatti Airport by Airport Authority of India was received from Ministry of Civil Aviation.
1.6.5 The existing runway orientation is 04-22, having a length of 1204 meters and width of 30 meters.
As per the DPR, the proposed extension on the runway end 04 is 286 meters x 30 meters with 60 meters
x 45 meters blast pad, while on the runway end 22, the extension is of 235 meters with 60 meters x
45 meters blast pad. The total length of the runway, after extension, shall be 1725 meters for the
operation of ATR-72/Q-400 type aircraft, without a load penalty.
1.6.6 However, the UTL Administration has also considered the extension of Agatti Airport exclusively
towards Kalpiti island (instead of the northward extension) and AAI was requested to examine the
proposal and identify the land requirement accordingly. Further action will be initiated after the receipt
of the response from AAI.
1.6.7 The proposal was examined in the MHA and the Ministry of Civil Aviation has been informed that
during current financial year there is no budget provision for the said scheme under Lakshadweep grant.
MoCA has been advised to first finalize EFC and other formalities in consultation with the concerned UT
Administration and relevant departments. As the scheme will attract the provision of New Services/New
Instrument of Services, therefore, the funds will be requested through Supplementary Grant once the
scheme is approved by the competent authority.
Updated status
1.6.8 Union Home Secretary held a meeting on 23.11.2017 with the officials of AAI and Administrator,
UTL Administration to discuss the status of the development of Agatti airport. Based on the discussions
during the meeting, the revised length of the runway has now been finalised at 1584 meters for ATR-
72 with full load (72 PAX). This reduces the runway at the Agatti side from 235 meters to 94 meters.
The UTL Administration has conveyed “in-principle” approval to the revised development plan and
requested AAI to send a team for joint demarcation on ground. AAI has been requested to expedite the
proposal.

9
1.6.9 Alliance Air has started a flight operations for every day of the week since 12th November, 2017.
1.6.10  Clarifying the issue raised by the Chairman, the representative of Airport Authority of India (AAI)
stated that the original proposal was to join the two islands (Kalpiti and Agatti) which was not agreed
to by the Ministry of Environment. Earlier it was planning for the runway for Q400 but it has been
reduced to ATR-72. Endorsing the view of AAI, the representative of UTL Administration added that the
intended facility was ATR-72 with full load, and for this sector, ATR-72 with full load was quite optimal
and also keeping in view the need for protecting the environment.
1.6.11 When the Chairman of the Committee apprehended that ATR-72 would not be a final solution to
the requirement of Lakshadweep and eventually a Boeing or any other Jet must land, the representative
of AAI stated that in that case, we will have to enter into the sea on either side also as for a bigger
aircraft, a further 150-300 meter expansion will have to be done.  It will be very costly because we will
be entering into the deeper sea.
1.6.12 Replying to the further query, as to how long ATR-72 solution would take care of requirements
and by when the proposed infrastructure would be completed, the representative of AAI mentioned that
the frequency of ATR-72 can be increased, even scheduled airlines operators were buying ATRs under
UDAN Scheme. As far as the completion of infrastructure project was concerned, it was informed that
it would take four years to complete the project because on three sides of the island, there is need to
enter into the sea and the construction would be on RCC platform supporting on stilt and, pre-fab and
pre-engineered structures, which could be constructed during low tide period of five to six months only.
1.7 Shipping
Recommendation
1.7.1 The Committee takes note of the ageing fleet of passenger and cargo ships/vessels of the UT of
Lakshadweep, especially the all-weather cargo ships. The Committee is aware that the acquisition and
induction of the ships requires a considerable time period and timely planning. The Committee is also
aware that the existing connectivity is not optimal and requires augmentation of the existing fleet with
new ships/vessels. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry must ensure that the
15 year perspective plan for shipping sector be approved and implemented in a timely manner so as to
improve sea connectivity to the Lakshadweep Islands. (Para 2.17.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has accorded an in-principle approval for the perspective plan of
shipping and aviation sector and has asked UTLA to take up the item of work as per the perspective
plan subject to the availability of the funds, the approval of subject matter of the Ministry concerned,
obtaining all the clearances including environmental clearance required from the competent authorities,
study of techno-economic feasibility of the project, and observance of codal formalities. Accordingly,

10
necessary proposals are being submitted by the UT Administration to the concerned Ministries for SFC
approval of the projects, as per the timeline, in the perspective plan.
Updated Status
1.7.3 Considering the timeline given in the Perspective Plan, necessary proposals have been submitted
to the Ministry of Shipping for approval of following projects by the Standing Finance Committee
(SFC):-
(i) One 500 Passenger all-weather ship
(ii) One 250 Passenger all-weather ship for tourists.
1.7.4 A letter has been received from the Ministry of Shipping seeking clarification on the estimated
price of ships projected by UTLA in the SFC on 30th November and the same is being worked out in
consultation with UTLA’ s technical consultant, Shipping Corporation of India.
1.7.5 The SFC proposals for the following projects are being prepared for submission to the Ministry
of Shipping for approval. The details of these proposals are as follows:-
(i) 2 × 150 Passenger all-weather vessels for inter-island transport.
(ii) 2 × 600MT Multipurpose Cargo vessels.
(iii) One 2000-LPG cylinder carrier vessel.
1.7.6 The Committee was informed by the representative of UTL Administration that as the prospective
plan was now approved, the Ministry of Shipping would be giving the financial approval for each of the
ships as per the scheduled time. The representative of the Ministry of Shipping, replying to the Chairman’s
query, added that the SFC proposal for acquisition of two ships was received in the month of November
and the Ministry was firming up the cost estimate, and SFC would give approval for two ships by
February, 2018.

11
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
ECONOMIC ISSUES
2.1 Water Sports and Underwater Tourism
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee is aware of the water sports and underwater tourism potential of Lakshadweep
islands and feels that innovative marketing and promotion strategies must be adopted to establish
Lakshadweep as a global water sports attraction. The Committee recommends that while keeping in view
the fragile ecology the Ministry must come up with a specific long-term plan to develop water sports
and underwater travel and tourism in Lakshadweep in a sustainable manner that would bring Lakshadweep
distinctly on the global tourism map. (Para 2.1.9 of 204th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.2 Since Lakshadweep islands have got premier dive spots, the UTL Administration is vigorously
promoting these destinations though innovative marketing strategies. Towards this, the Administration is
identifying a creative advertisement agency, through transparent bidding process, so that the destinations
can be marketed. Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI), South-east Asia has recognized
5 Dive centres in Lakshadweep  viz.  Kavaratti, Kadmat, Minicoy, Bangaram, and Kalpeni, out of which
Kavaratti Dive Centre has been identified as a 5-star dive centre of PADI. These Dive centres are
operated under the auspices of Lakshadweep Diving Academy, which is catering to the diving requirements
of high-end tourists.
Updated Status
2.1.3 LDA (Lakshadweep Diving Academy) has been set up for promotion of underwater diving, the
same has been affiliated to PADI. PADI South-East Asia has recognised 5 Dive centres in Lakshadweep
viz. Kavaratti, Kadmat, Minicoy, Bangaram and Kalpeni, out of which Kavaratti Dive Centre has been
identified as a 5 star Dive Centre of PADI. Apart from organising professional courses for the Indian
Air Force and other government departments, the LDA has trained more than 1200 people at various
levels.
2.1.4 Lakshadweep Administration has finalized a creative advertisement agency for promotion of Brand
Lakshadweep as a tourism destination with specific focus on promotion of water sports. Tender for
appointment of creative advertisement agency was floated on 14.08.2017 (with corrigendum) and the
final result was declared on 10.11.2017. Supply order has been issued to the advertisement agency.
11

12
Diving activities are being carried out strictly in compliance with observations/recommendations of
NCSCM Ecological Carrying Capacity report.
2.2 Agriculture
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee is constrained to note that the Coconut Development Board (CDB) is implementing
only two schemes out of 10 schemes of CDB in Lakshadweep. The Committee feels that the implementation
of some of the other schemes of CDB like Technology Demonstration, Market Promotion and Statistics,
Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme and Scheme of Information and Information Technology among others,
can be particularly useful for the coconut farmers in Lakshadweep. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation with the CDB, must explore the possibility
of implementing the remaining schemes of CDB to improve the quality, production, value-addition and
marketing of the coconuts in Lakshadweep. (Para 2.2.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 Ministry of Agriculture has issued instruction to the Coconut Development Board (CDB) to make
all efforts to explore possibilities of implementing different schemes of CDB in the UT of Lakshadweep
from the current financial year onwards. The Coconut Development Board is adopting pro-active approach
in implementing various schemes of the Board for development of coconut in UT of Lakshadweep and
allocation of 
`2.72 crore approximately has been made for current financial year for implementation of
various schemes for UT of Lakshadweep. The Board is in touch with the officers of the UT for exploring
possibilities of implementing its various schemes during the current financial year.
Updated Status
2.2.3 Coconut Development Board (CDB) was implementing two schemes in the UTL, before the
recommendation of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its
204th Report on Administration and Development of UT Lakshadweep, namely ‘Laying out of
demonstration plots in coconut garden and Or ganic manure unit’ . During the current year, CDB has
extended five new schemes for implementing in the UTL vide letter dated 23.10.2017.The UTL
Administration has also written to CDB seeking implementation of two other CDB schemes as recommended
by the Parliamentary Committee  i.e. Technology Demonstration and Market Promotion and Statistics.
Action Taken -1
2.2.4 The allocation for the schemes presently under implementation is as follows:-
(i) Enhanced Allocation of Existing Scheme ‘Laying out of demonstration plots in coconut
garden’ to cover new area of 800 ha. in addition to existing area of 110 ha. - 
`159.25 lakh
(Allocation 2017-18)
(ii) Organic manure unit. – ` 0.40 lakh (Allocation 2017-18)

13
Action Taken-2
2.2.5 The New schemes extended to Lakshadweep are as follows:-
(i) Information and Information Technology- Skill Development. - ` 5.00 lakh (Allocation
2017-18)
(ii) Rejuvenation and replanting (225 ha.) - ` 100.69 lakh (Allocation 2017-18)
(iii) Production and Distribution of quality planting material –establishment of Regional coconut
nurseries. - ` 3.20 lakh (Allocation 2017-18)
(iv) Coconut palm insurance scheme (29500 palms). - ` 2.00 lakh (Allocation 2017-18)
(v) Kera Suraksha Insurance Scheme. - ` 0.17 lakh (Allocation 2017-18)
2.2.6 Total Allocation for the financial year 2017-18 for the new schemes that were extended to
Lakshadweep was ` 270.71 lakh.
Action Taken - 3
2.2.7 The Horticulture Commissioner, Government of India, the Chairman, CDB, the Chief Coconut
Development Officer and other senior officers of CDB visited Lakshadweep during the period from 27th
to 29th Nov.2017 to explore the possibility of implementing additional CDB schemes in UT of Lakshadweep
consequent to the recommendations of 204th report in connection with Department related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs. The team had detailed discussion with Secretary (Agriculture),
Director and other senior officers and stake holders. The next team of CDB shall visit other islands
during January, 2018 to facilitate CDB schemes among the farmers.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
2.3 Medical equipment and skilled manpower
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee is unhappy to note that despite the availability of medical equipment, its operability
and maintenance were limiting its application and utility. The Committee feels that leasing of equipment
and maintenance contracts can resolve this issue to a certain extent. The Committee therefore recommends
that efforts must be made to lease medical equipment along with a maintenance contract. While leasing
the Administration should also make it a condition that a certain number of permanent Lakshadweep
residents should be trained for operating/handling the equipment by the lessor or the supplier of the
equipment before concluding the lease/purchase. (Para 2.12.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract (CAMC) has been entered into for all the medical

14
equipment which has been purchased recently and this will go a long way to solve the issue of timely
maintenance of the equipment. The UTL Administration is also planning to enter into AMC for the existing
older equipment. Resultantly, the firms will train and deploy qualified willing local hands so that the
equipment as per the contract can be maintained. Already one firm has trained and deployed a local
engineer for AMC obligations.
Updated Status
2.3.3 The UTL Administration has already entered into Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract
(CAMC) for the following medical equipment which has been purchased recently: two Ultrasound HD-
15, three Ultrasound CX-30, nine Fixed X-Ray machines.
2.3.4 The department is proposing to enter into CAMC for the following equipment after repairing the
defects: nine Ultrasound HD7 and nine Digital X-Ray machines. Department has already proposed to
procure nine Servo Stabilizer (5 KV A) and two online UPS (2 KVA) vide F.No.38/5/2015 –DHS. This
will go a long way to solve the issue of timely maintenance of the equipment.  The department is also
entering into CAMC for the existing older equipment. Resultantly, the firms will train and deploy qualified
willing local hands. Already, one firm has trained and deployed a local engineer for AMC obligations.
2.3.5 As regards, the issue regarding maintenance of medical equipment, the representative of UTL
Administration apprised the Committee that once the equipment become old, there was nobody to provide
repairing services but for the new equipment, a Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract (CAMC)
was being entered into, in a timely manner i.e the equipment should have an inbuilt tendered provision
that it should be repaired after five years.
2.4 Education
Recommendation
2.4.1 The Committee is aware that most of the Lakshadweep students pursue their higher education in
Kerala. The Committee feels that if UTL Administration can construct and maintain hostels in selected
higher education destinations, especially in Thiruvananthapuram, Cochin and Kozhikode cities of Kerala,
this can help to eliminate the boarding and lodging costs of the students. The Committee therefore
recommends that the Ministry must identify such locations where a majority of Lakshadweep students
regularly pursue their higher education and explore the possibility of establishing hostels at these
locations. (Para 2.13.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 Majority of Lakshadweep students are undergoing higher education after +2 level in the nearby
State to Lakshadweep i.e., Kerala. Kochi and Kozhikode are the districts of Kerala where maximum
concentration of Lakshadweep students pursuing higher education exists. Comparatively fewer students
pursue higher studies at Trivandrum. Transit accommodation has already been constructed by Lakshadweep

15
Administration at Kochi and Kozhikode, which can be utilized to meet the urgent requirement of
Lakshadweep students at mainland. Most of the students prefer institutions with hostel facilities for their
higher education at mainland. Professional Colleges in which seats are reserved for Lakshadweep students
usually have attached hostel facilities, which are being availed by Lakshadweep students.
Updated status
2.4.3 T ransit accommodation, already constructed by the UT Lakshadweep Administration at Kochi and
Kozhikode, can be utilized to meet the urgent requirement of Lakshadweep students at mainland. Most
of the students prefer institutions with hostel facilities for their higher education at mainland. All the
Professional Colleges, where Lakshadweep students are admitted, have attached hostels and the students
prefer to stay there.

16
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
ECONOMIC ISSUES
3.1 Fisheries
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee takes note of the huge potential of fish production in Lakshadweep but is not
satisfied with the existing quantum of production, which is just 12% of the estimated sustainable fish
production potential. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take necessary steps
for the development of the fisheries sector in Lakshadweep like the procurement of multi-day sophisticated
fishing vessels, development of off-shore cold storage facilities and establishment of fish processing
centres. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that a scientific approach for development of
fisheries sector in Lakshadweep may be adopted at all stages of fish production from fish catching and
its subsequent handling to its storage, processing and packaging. The Committee also recommends that
better fishing equipment and training should be provided to the fishermen and better deep freezing plants,
canning facilities and fish processing units be established on a priority basis.
(Para 2.3.6 of 204th Report)
Action Taken
3.1.2 Last year fish production reached 29% of the estimated potential of the Marine Sustainable Yield
(MSY) of the Lakshadweep by encouraging acquiring/constructing a larger type of multi-day fishing
vessels and deploying sufficient numbers of Fish Aggregating Devices. In the current year also, the fish
production of the Lakshadweep is expected to be more than 30% of the MSY .
3.1.3 At Present, one canning factory and six ice plants have been setup in the Islands for processing
and storing the fish caught.  Further, financial assistance is regularly provided to the fishermen for
constructing larger type of multi-day fishing boats, and construction and renovation of Lakshadweep-
type boats. Moreover, 50% financial assistance is also provided to procure deep freezers, ice boxes and
construction of hygienic fish processing units.  It is also pertinent to mention that a Fisherman Training
Centre is functioning to promote the local entrepreneurs in the field of fishing, and it is also proposed
to impart onboard training to the fishermen about different fishing methods and latest fishing technologies
by using department’s multi-day fishing vessel named Bluefin.
16

17
Updated Status
3.1.4 As per the available resource assessment made by CMFRI, the potential of Lakshadweep waters
for production of fish is estimated to be 100,000 Million Tonne (MT). The fish landing details for the
last three years is as follows:-
Table No. 3.1
2013 : 15612  MT
2014 : 15204  MT
2015 : 16209  MT
2016 : 25649  MT
3.1.5 This indicates fish landing is on an increasing trend and it has almost doubled during 2016-17. The
available potential assessment is made by CMFRI, considering Andaman as the base for calculation. This
may or may not be correct. Therefore, the Fisheries Department, Lakshadweep has requested CMFRI
for the correct resource assessment management frame work for Lakshadweep waters for sustainable
fishery in Lakshadweep. Accordingly, CMFRI Expert Team, including Director, CMFRI, visited
Lakshadweep and launched the Project ‘Resource assessment and Management Framework for Sustainable
Marine Fisheries of Lakshadweep’ on 30th November, 2017, which is expected to be completed within
three years.  On getting the correct resource assessment, the UT Administration can make proper policy
and plan programmes.
3.1.6 As part of augmenting fish landing, the UTL Administration deployed FAD (Fish Aggregating
Device) in most of the islands in consultation with the fishermen community.  Additional seven FADs
have been prepared and are ready for deployment in different islands shortly. UTL Administration is
providing financial assistance to the fishermen for construction/ renovation/repair of large multiday
fishing vessels (45-55 feet), small type vessel (25–45 feet). Details of assistance given during 2016-17
are as follows:
(i) Larger multi-day fishing boats - 2 Nos. (
` 28,82,245/-).
(ii) Smaller Lakshadweep type fishing boats - 43 Nos.  ( ` 1,34,60,644/-)
(iii) Financial Assistance for hygienic fish processing unit - 343 Nos. ( ` 38,85,348/-)
(iv) Financial Assistance for fish box/ice box/deep freezer - 47 Nos. ( ` 6,18,535/-)
3.1.7 UTL Administration has established one Canning Factory and six Ice Plants in different islands and
targeted to establish Ice plants in all the inhabited islands in a phased manner.
3.1.8 The representative of UTL Administration apprised the Committee that MPEDA has opened an
office in Lakshadweep and an Assistant Director level officer has been posted there and through him UTL

18
Administration had contacted all the exporters involved in the field of Tuna exports.  He pointed out that
although fish landing was sufficient there but market access was a big problem. So in the current season
UTL Administration had allowed the boats from the mainland which are owned by the Lakshadweep
people to start taking the fish, however, UTL Administration would shortly allow the exporters to take
the raw fish to the main land.
3.1.9 Responding to the Chairman’s query, the UTL Administration informed the Committee that financial
assistance to the fishermen for construction, renovation and repair of large multiday fishing vessels for
the year 2016-17 has actually been disbursed and for the year 2017-18 the amount has been sanctioned.
Further Recommendation
3.1.10  The Committee disapproves of the restrictions on market access that have hampered the
realization of export potential of fish produced in Lakshadweep. Restrictions on market access
amounts to a non-tariff barrier to the product and is against the principle of open and free trade.
The Committee observes that despite a sufficient amount of fish landing in Lakshadweep,
market access has remained a bottleneck. The Committee is of the view that allowing the
exporters to take raw fish to the main land can provide an impetus to the quantum of fish
production. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT Lakshadweep Administration
should immediately remove all the bottlenecks including restrictions on market access, to promote
the production of fish as well as its export.
GOVERNANCE ISSUES
3.2 Availability of Subsidized Rice
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee is disappointed and dissatisfied with the reply of the UT Administration and
wonders as to why it was trying to fulfill the additional requirement of subsidized rice through Open
Market Sales Scheme (OMSS) where the selling rate of rice would definitely be higher than what is
offered under subsidized rice quota mandated by the National Food Security Act. It is unfortunate that
the minimum requirements of a population of barely 71,000 people of their staple food (rice) cannot be
met by the Government of India, thanks to its maze of rules and regulations. The Committee strongly
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this matter with the Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and request it to make a special exemption for UT of Lakshadweep
and provide them an additional 100 metric tonnes of rice per month at the subsidized rate. The
Committee also recommends that, in the interim, the Ministry of Home Affairs must arrange for the
procurement of additional rice required from the open market and provide it at a subsidized rate to the
Lakshadweep people and this arrangement should continue until a permanent arrangement for the
provision of subsidized rice is made. The Committee further recommends that the interim arrangement
should be in place w.e.f. 1.8.2017. (Para 2.4.3)

19
Action Taken
3.2.2 UTL Administration had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution, Government of India with the request that they may be exempted from participating
in the e-auction and the additional requirement of 1200 MT of rice per annum may be allocated to this
Administration at minimum fixed reserved price for OMSS category. The Ministry vide letter dated
11.09.2017, has requested Chairman and Managing Director, FCI to offer a higher quality of food grains
in the OMSS, for six months or so in consultation with UT Administration and resolve the issue as per
the extant OMSS policy 2017-18. The reply from the FCI in this regard is awaited.
Updated Status
3.2.3 UTL Administration had requested the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
to consider and increase the allocation quota of Grade-A rice to UT of Lakshadweep by an additional
1200 MT per annum. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution vide their D.O
letter No. 2/Lakshadweep/2015-B.P-III/855, dated 10.03.2017, informed that it is not possible to increase
the quota of allocation under the National food Security Act and has advised that the additional procurement
may be made through OMSS.
(i) Accordingly, the Administration had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution vide F.No.13/6/2015-CS (part)/316, dated 22.04.2017,
with a request that this Administration may be exempted from participating in the e-auction
and the additional requirement of 1200 MT of rice per annum may be allocated to this
Administration at the minimum fixed reserved price for OMSS category.
(ii) The Ministry vide letter F.No. 1-1/2017PY .IV , dated 11.09.2017, has requested the Chairman
and Managing Director, FCI to offer higher quality of food grains in the OMSS, say
requirement for six months or so in consultation with UT Administration and resolve the
issue as per extant OMSS policy 2017-18.
(iii) For online registration for e-auction with FCI, the mandatory requirements such as V AT/
Tin, Department PAN, CST No. etc., were not available as the FCS Department is a non-
revenue generating department. Therefore, the Administrator, UT of Lakshadweep vide F.
No. 13/6/2015-CS (part)/826 dated 07.11.2017  has designated Lakshadweep Cooperative
Marketing Federation (LCMF) as the agency of Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration
for the purpose of procurement of additional rice from FCI, for the PDS Beneficiaries
covered under ‘tide over’  category.
(iv) Now the Lakshadweep Cooperative Marketing Federation (LCMF) has completed the
formalities and documentation, for e-auction from FCI, on e-auction portal
www.valuejunction.in/fci on 09.1 1.2017 and has received the login ID and Password on
23rd November 2017 .  The process of procurement through e-auction by LCMF is at its
final stages.

20
3.2.4 Hon’ble Union Home Minister has written to the Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution, on 10.11.2017, to consider an allotment of 1200 MT additional rice at a subsidized rate to
UT of Lakshadweep. The response is awaited.
3.2.5 During the course of the Committee’ s meeting held on 27th December, 2017, the Chairman
expressed the concern of the Committee that the Government of India could not order the FCI to deliver
1200 MT of rice to Lakshadweep. The representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution submitted that under the National Food Security Act, the quota for every State and
Union Territory was fixed and there was a need to amend the said Act to give rice beyond that fixed
quota. Responding to the query on the delay in getting the rice, the representative of the Ministry
explained that some delay happened because of the cyclone but the lifting of additional allocation of rice
will commence from the month of January.
3.2.6 The Chairman of the Committee wanted to know as to why 1200 MT of rice should come under
open market sales scheme or quota scheme and wondered as to why the whole issue was getting bogged
down in rules and regulations causing procedural delay and why there was no one in the FCI who can
take the decision.  He pointed out that thousand tonnes of food grains are wasted in FCI because they
are stored for long and the Ministry says that 1200 MT of rice cannot be given to Lakshadweep.
Responding to that the Home Secretary submitted before the Committee that under the present system,
there are guidelines and norms that have to be followed and a special dispensation for Lakshadweep
would require a separate order at some level and would have some financial implications. Eventually, it
will have to be funded from MHA’ s budget. He, however, assured the Committee that the MHA would
try to find some solution to this issue.
Further Recommendation
3.2.7 The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary to the Committee
that the Ministry will try to find a solution to the problem of shortage of rice in Lakshadweep.
The solution is obvious. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution should
direct the Food Corporation of India (FCI) to supply 1200 MT of rice (of good quality) to UT
Administration of Lakshadweep at the minimum fixed reserve price for Open Market Sales
Scheme (OMSS) category. Such a decision can be taken by the Minister of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution under his powers. The Committee hopes that a solution will be
found as per the spirit of the Committee’s original recommendation on this issue and will not
be thwarted by meaningless rules. Rules are made to facilitate solutions and not thwart solutions.
The Committee desires to be apprised once the issue is resolved.
3.3 Availability of Subsidized Sugar
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee takes note of the reply of the UT Administration of Lakshadweep with regards to

21
the change in the policy direction of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution.
In this regard, the Committee was informed that the said Ministry would reimburse sugar subsidy to UT
as per the existing fixed quota of 115 Metric Tonne (MT) per month (and an additional annual festival
quota of 22 MT) and any change in policy would occur from FY 2017-18 onwards. However , an
apprehension was expressed that the distribution of PDS sugar may be reduced in the upcoming policy
change. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT Administration must push its case for
reimbursement of sugar subsidy as per the existing quota, even beyond FY 2017-18, by granting it a
special exemption in the policy change which is at present under examination.  The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must stress the importance of providing subsidized sugar
to the entire population of Lakshadweep and the additional amount of 
` 1-1.5 crore is a small amount
that can be easily borne by the Government of India. (Para 2.5.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 The matter was taken up with Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, who
have intimated that the Government of India has decided to continue the system of sugar distribution
through PDS with restricted coverage of AAY Families w.e.f. 1.6.2017 to give access to consumption
of sugar, as a source of energy in diet, for the poorest of the poor section of the society i.e. AAY families.
The Central Government will continue to reimburse a fixed subsidy of 
`18.50 per kg @ 1kg per month
per AAY family to participating States/UTs. The States/UTs are also allowed either to absorb the additional
cost on account of handling, transportation and dealer’ s commission or pass it on to the consumer by
adding it to the Retail Issue Price (RIP) of 
`13.50 per kg under the Public Distribution System (PDS).
3.3.3 Regarding the special exemption for extending erstwhile sugar subsidy to all beneficiaries of Ration
card holders, the matter is under examination of the UTL Administration and thereafter will be taken up
with the subject matter Ministry (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution).
Updated Status
3.3.4 As per the new sugar policy, the Ministry vide letter DO No.2(1)/2017-SP dated 12.05.2017
informed that the Government of India had reviewed the sugar subsidy scheme and decided that it is
imperative to give access to consumption of sugar for the poorest of the poor sections of the society
i.e, AAY families at the scale of 1kg/Ration card.  Accordingly, the same has been implemented in this
UTL w.e.f. May, 2017.
3.3.5 Regarding the special exemption for extending erstwhile sugar subsidy to all beneficiaries of Ration
card holders, the policy matter requires approval from Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution.  The financial requirements for meeting the subsidy for PDs sugar at the scale 1 kg/ month
to each beneficiary is worked out as 
`2.16 cores per annum. The matter was examined, and the Govt.
of Delhi and the Govt. of Dadra and Nagar Haveli have been requested vide UT Administration letter
F.No.13/3/2014-CS V ol-II (Part)/770 and F. No. 13/3/2014-CS V ol-II (Part)/769 dated 13/10/2017
respectively to apprise the UTL Administration about the system of sugar distribution adopted in their

22
States post new sugar policy. DNH Administration has informed that they are not providing sugar in PDS.
However, response from GNCTD is awaited.
3.3.6 Further vide UT Administration’s letter No.13/3/2014-CS (V ol-II) (Part)/850 dated 17.11.2017, the
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution has also been requested that in the light of
recommendation of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs the allocation of PDS Sugar for
the people of Lakshadweep may be restored as per old policy in relaxation to the general policy.  The
reply from the Ministry in this regard was awaited.
3.3.7 The UTL Administration submitted before the Committee that in compliance with the Committee’s
recommendation, the issue of subsidized sugar was taken up with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution and the financial implication for providing subsidized sugar was to the tune
of 
` 2.16 crore. The representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
submitted before the Committee that after a lot of deliberation, a new sugar subsidy scheme was started
w.e.f 1st June, 2017. Under this new scheme only the beneficiaries under Antyodaya Anna Yojana are
covered and they get one kg sugar per ration card. Presently, such families number around 2.5 crore
only as compared to the 40 crore beneficiaries before this scheme. It needs to be examined whether
coverage for Lakshadweep can be increased or not under this scheme.
3.3.8 A Member of the Committee raised the issue whether the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution would be able to give the sugar at the open market rate for which Administration can
provide a subsidy.  The Chairman also pointed out that UTL Administration must have savings somewhere
and the Administrator may re-allocate or re-appropriate the amount of money to the tune of 
` 2.62 crore
out of that savings.  The UTL Administration stated that re-allocation was not possible under the subsidy
head. However, the representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
clarified that if UTL Administration were willing to bear the subsidy, the Ministry had no problem in
releasing the sugar stock, however, only thing was that the Central Government could not bear the
subsidy burden.
3.3.9 Clarifying on the issue, the Home Secretary submitted before the Committee that various executive
functionaries at different levels have some limited powers of re-appropriation and that too after following
due processes. So the Administrator would have to examine whether there is a saving this year, under
some head, and he should be given time to see whether it will be possible for him to re-appropriate and
spend money on this head.
3.3.10 The Chairman pointed out that Lakshadweep is an extremely sensitive island and the farthest
boundary of India having serious security issues concerning those islands and nothing grows in
Lakshadweep except coconut, therefore, the Committee had recommended providing sugar at the subsidized
rates. Responding to that the Home Secretary submitted that the MHA itself deals with a number of
territories in the country, which are sensitive from the security viewpoint, and if there would be similar
demands from all such territories then the Ministry would end up spending their entire Budget on
subsidizing various commodities.

23
Further Recommendation
3.3.11  The Committee is dismayed that a simple issue involving a subsidy of ````` 2.62 crore per
year has defied solution for nearly a year and no one seem to have the authority to take a final
and binding decision. The Committee observes that Government of India, after its review of the
sugar subsidy scheme, had decided to give access to sugar for the poorest of the poor section of
the society i.e. AAY families at the scale of 1 kg per ration card holder and the same provision
has been implemented in the UT of Lakshadweep w.e.f. May, 2017. The Committee, notes the
submission of the representatives of the UTL Administration, the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution that a special dispensation for
Lakshadweep would require a special order and would entail financial implications. However, the
Committee is of the considered view that Lakshadweep, being farthest away and due to its
sensitive nature, must be treated as a special case, especially considering the fact that nothing
grows there except coconuts. The Committee, considering the submission of the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution that the Ministry would be able to give sugar at
the open market rate, hopes that the Lakshadweep Administration would be able to find savings
of 
````` 2.62 crore, the amount required for a sugar subsidy for the financial year 2017-18, out of
the allocation made to UTL under various schemes/budgetary grants for the current financial
year. The Committee feels that with the approval of the financial advisor and in consensus with
the Home Secretary, the requisite quantity of sugar can be procured and distributed. The Committee
recommends that from the next year, the Ministry of Home Affairs may seek an additional
budgetary grant to meet the expenditure, to be incurred on the sugar subsidy, under a separate
head from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee desires that this matter may be specifically
brought to the notice of the Home Minister.
3.4 LPG Coverage
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the UT Lakshadweep Administration pursuant to
the suggestion given by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in
its meeting held on 16th January, 2017 for identifying the beneficiaries under Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala
Yojana. The Committee observes that the beneficiaries in the two islands have already been identified.
The Committee however is not satisfied with the number of households that were found to be eligible
under this Scheme i.e. only seven in Minicoy and six in Kavaratti, which in the Committee’ s view are
very few and by this the Administration would not be able to achieve 100% LPG coverage. The
Committee therefore strongly recommends that instead of identifying the eligible households under the
Scheme, the Administration must try to identify households that do not have LPG connections or cannot
afford LPG but are not necessarily below poverty line and make efforts to grant all such households free
LPG connections under this Scheme. The Committee understands that a special exemption may be
required for doing so and recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may request the Hon’ble Prime

24
Minister to direct the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to grant such exemption under Pradhan
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana for Lakshadweep. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that a special
drive must be conducted in all inhabited islands to identify such households and grant them free LPG
connection under the said Scheme before the end of September 2017. (Para 2.6.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.2 The LPG distribution at Amini and Kadmath islands is to be commenced shortly. The persons
eligible under this scheme (Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana) in two islands namely Kavaratti and Minicoy
have been identified, and the details have been submitted to the Ministry of Petroleum and the state level
coordinator, HPCL, on 18.03.2017. The Asst. Manager, IOCL, Kozhikode, Area Office has informed vide
e-mail dated 6.07.02017 that the list of beneficiaries has been updated in the Indsoft (official software
of Indian Gas) and applications have been scrutinized.
3.4.3 Further, the Chief Area Manager, Kozhikode Area Office, IOCL has informed vide letter
No.KAO:LPG:LCMF dated 14.09.2017, that 127 households in Kadmath and 348 households in Amini fall
under Socio Economic and Caste Census (SECC) 2011 list, and hence are eligible for PMUY connections
and Connections will be awarded immediately upon launching of the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana for
the Kerala and Lakshadweep. UTL Administration has informed that the recommendation by the Parliamentary
committee for special exemption for  identifying households, which do not have LPG connection or
cannot afford LPG but are not necessarily ‘Below Poverty Line’, to grant free LPG connection under
this scheme will be taken up with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.
Updated Status
3.4.4 The Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana is a centrally sponsored scheme for release of free connection
to BPL Women by Oil Marketing Company. Under this scheme the identification of BPL person/household
is done, on the basis of SECC-2011 database, by the Oil Marketing Companies (OIC). The Hon’ble Union
Home Minister has written to Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas vide do dated 10.11.2017 to
consider coverage of all households in UT of Lakshadweep for free LPG connection under PMUY
scheme.
3.4.5 The representative of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas apprised the Committee about
the provision of Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana, its guidelines and eligibility criteria, and stated that
nobody is empowered to make an exception only for Lakshadweep. However, he submitted that the
Minisrty was conscious of the fact that certain places like Lakshadweep, North-East and Jammu and
Kashmir need a special dispensation and they were examining how it could be done.
3.4.6 Responding to the Chairman’s query on the number of households not having LPG connection but
wanting connection under the Ujjwala Yojana, the representative of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas stated that there were 12000 household in Lakshadweep in all 10 islands combined and there were
5000 consumers, and remaining 7000 households do not have LPG connection. Once the LPG infrastructure
was available, most of them get covered and many of them would be eligible under Ujjwala Yojana as

25
there would be small number of households falling under non-SECC category and being without
LPG.
Further Recommendation
3.4.7 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that
once the LPG infrastructure is in place in Lakshadweep, a very small number of households
would fall under the non-Socio Economic and Caste Census (SECC) category and would be
without an LPG connection. However, the Committee is worried that the construction of LPG
infrastructure may take some time and until then many families would be living without the
facility of an LPG connection. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UTL Administration,
in tandem with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, must arrive at a consensus on the
modus operandi of ensuring free LPG connection for all households, not having an LPG connection
at present and not covered under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. The Committee also
recommends that a special dispensation, under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana, may be
explored till the time the LPG infrastructure is in place and every household in Lakshadweep
is able to avail of an LPG connection.
3.5 Large Number of Vacant Posts in Administration
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee is not convinced by the evasive reply of the UT Administration with regards to the
filling up of vacant posts under the jurisdiction of the UT administration. The Committee therefore
strongly recommends that the Ministry must ensure that the recruitment of the posts within the powers
of the Administrator are completed within the next six months and the Committee should be apprised
about the status of the same by 30.11.2017. The Committee also recommends that the administration
should also pursue the other recruitment agencies for initiating the recruitment for the vacant posts which
are not within the powers of the Administrator at the earliest . (Para 2.7.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.2 The UTLA is making every effort to fill the vacancies as expeditiously as possible. However,
recruitments are prone to various issues arising as a result of non-finalization of recruitment rules,
amendments in the rules, litigation, absence of suitable qualified candidates etc. The filling up of the posts
is monitored continuously and a review is carried out on the first Wednesday of every month.
Updated Status
3.5.3 During the course of interaction, the UTL Administration informed the Committee that at the time
when the Committee visited Lakshadweep, about 1079 posts were lying vacant. With the efforts of the
Administration, 365 vacant posts have been filled up between 25th April to 12th December, 2017 and
recruitment notification had been issued for filling up of 428 seats. However, 257 new vacancies arose

26
between 25th April and 12th December, 2017, resulting into vacancies of 971 posts, as on 27th December,
2017.  As regards the notification for 428 vacant posts, where the recruitment process was going on,
the physical tests had been conducted in relation to the appointment for 200 posts, in the police and the
Indian Reserve Battalion.  Responding to the Chairman’s query, the UTL Administration informed that the
notified posts would be filled up by 31st March, 2018.
3.5.4 The Chairman wanted to know by when the remaining vacant posts, 286 as on 25th April, 2017
and 257 new vacancies that arose between 25th April and 12th December, 2017, would be filled up. The
UTL Administration stated that it was not in a position to give any time frame for the intended action.
The Committee was informed that there were issues involved in the remaining posts  viz.  outdated
Recruitment Rules, posts to be filled by UPSC and litigation. However, 40% of the vacant posts as on
that date could be filled up. On the Chairman’s suggestion to fill up the vacant posts under litigation
through temporary appointments, the UTL Administration apprehended that temporary appointments
would again lead to further litigation.
Further Recommendation
3.5.5 The Committee notes that there are 971 vacant posts, as on 27th December, 2017. This
includes the 257 new vacancies that arose between 25thApril and 12thDecember, 2017. The
Committee is unable to understand the reason for such a large number of posts falling vacant
during such a short period of time. The Committee recommends that the UT Administration may
apprise the Committee about the reasons for these vacancies and prepare an action plan to fill
them up. The Committee also recommends that the remaining vacant posts should be filled up
by the UTL Administration expeditiously and an interim solution may be explored for filling up
the vacant posts that are under litigation. The Committee is not convinced that temporary
appointments would be considered illegal or will lead to further litigation and once again
recommends that temporary appointments should be made, pending regular appointments, so
that the sanctioned posts do not remain vacant.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
3.6 Public Health and Medical Facilities
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee is anguished by the lackadaisical approach of the Government towards the medical
requirements of the people of Lakshadweep where several posts of specialist doctors have been lying
vacant for the past 13 years and no fruitful effort has gone into resolving the issue. The Committee takes
serious note of the fact that the doctors are either unwilling to come to Lakshadweep or soon resign from
their posts to go back to the mainland. The Committee finds that this is a gross failure on the part of
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which could not fill up the vacancies despite having the
powers to invoke rules pertaining to compulsory posting. (Para 2.10.7)

27
3.6.2 The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make all out
efforts to resolve the issue by either relaxing the rules and empowering the Administrator of UTL to make
ad-hoc appointments or by pursuing the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to invoke the compulsory
posting rule and depute sufficient number of specialist doctors to Lakshadweep at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that, meanwhile, the MHA must allocate adequate funds to the UT of
Lakshadweep for the purpose of outsourcing services of specialist doctors. The Committee also recommends
that the Government should try to provide special allowances and incentives to candidates who are
willing to work in Lakshadweep. (Para 2.10.8)
Action Taken
3.6.3 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which has intimated
that the issue is under examination. However, the Lakshadweep administration has notified 09 posts of
specialists to be hired on contract basis under NHM vide employment Notice dated 25.08.2017 and walk-
in-interview held on 23.09.2017 at Kochi and 30.09.2017 at Kavaratti and it is expected that some
specialists may become available consequent to the interview.
Updated Status
3.6.4 The Union Home Minister vide D.O. letter dated 10.11.2017 has requested the Minister of Health
and Family Welfare to consider posting of the specialist doctors in the UT of Lakshadweep. The Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, in its reply, clarified the position on the health sector issues as follows:-
(i) There are ten sanctioned posts of Non-Teaching Specialists sub-cadre of CHS, for
Lakshadweep Islands, out of which seven posts are vacant. Efforts are being made to fill
up these vacant posts on regular basis. As per procedure, based on the number of vacancies,
the Ministry sends specialty-wise requisitions to UPSC. The requisition of vacancies may
also include Lakshadweep and A&N Islands, and other places wherever they are available
at that time. The Commission recommends candidates accordingly. Offers are issued to the
candidates subject to fulfilling certain terms and conditions which also include liability to
serve in any part of India or outside. Based on the panels recommended by UPSC from
2011 onwards, the Ministry issued offer of appointment to 12 candidates in various specialties
giving initial posting at Lakshadweep Islands. However, only four candidates joined at
Lakshadweep Administration. Out of these, 02 officers were later transferred out of
Lakshadweep Islands. Thus, the results are not encouraging due to unwillingness of doctors
to join the posts outside Delhi. From the recent panel received from UPSC, one out of eight
candidates will join the post of Specialist Grade – III (Surgery) at Lakshadweep Islands on
regular basis as he belongs to the Islands and has requested for it.
(ii) Pending the filling up of posts on regular basis in the Lakshadweep Islands, the Ministry
is presently deputing 06 Specialists as well as GDMOs with PG qualifications (02 in the
specialty of Anesthesia and 01 in the specialty of Obst. and Gynae, Pediatrics, Surgery and

28
Pathology) to Lakshadweep Admn. for a period  of 90 days on rotation basis to cope up
with the acute shortage of specialists and to ensure constant patient care.
(iii) Separately, a proposal, to enter into a PPP agreement for outsourcing the services of 20
Specialists to provide specialist services to IGH Kavaratti, GH Minicoy, CHS Androth and
CHC Amini, was received from the Union Territory of Lakshadweep. The Ministry has
conveyed its support to the proposal. The UT has floated an e-tender in two bid system
for engaging 5 Specialists each for outsourcing of specialty services at IGH, Kavaratti, GH
Minicoy, CHC Androth and Amini, for a period of two years, vide tender notice dated 23rd
October, 2017. The pre-bid meeting was convened at Kochi on 20th November, 2017 and
the tender will be opened on 22nd December, 2017. Further action is to be taken by the
Lakshadweep Admn. and the Ministry of Home Affairs.
(iv) In order to attract doctors to join the service on regular/rotational basis at Lakshadweep and
A&N Islands, the Ministry is working on a proposal to incentivize the doctors posted at
these Islands, by granting them additional pay/allowances @ 20% of Basic Pay besides the
allowances such as Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance, Islands Special
(Duty Allowance), Hard Area Allowance, etc. already admissible to Central Government
employees posted in Lakshadweep and A&N Islands. A meeting is scheduled to be held at
a senior level on 11th January, 2018 with the Administrative Heads of Union Territory of
Lakshadweep, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Delhi to explore the possibilities to post
doctors at these Islands.
(v) Already, the Lakshadweep Administration has been authorized to initiate action to fill up these
posts on contractual basis. Further to this, the Ministry is also contemplating to fill any vacant
posts in Lakshadweep Islands on contract on yearly basis with higher remuneration through
special recruitment drives. The current rates of remuneration are as i.e. 
` 1,10,000/-
(for 1st year) and ` 1,20,000/- (for 2nd year) for contractual doctors in Lakshadweep
and A & N Islands, while the rates of remuneration for mainland are  ` 95,000/- and
` 1,05,000/- respectively.
3.6.5 Now, the UT Administration has floated an e-tender in two bid systems to outsource Specialty
Services at Kavaratti, Minicoy, Androth and Amini. The pre-bid meeting was held at Ernakulam on
20.11.2017 and corrigendum issued based on the discussion. The tender will be opened on 22.12.2017
for technical evaluation.
3.6.6 Therefore, in order to ensure minimum specialty services in disciplines like Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Paediatrics, Anaesthesia, General Surgery and Medicine to carry out surgeries and other
procedures, the UTL administration proposes to outsource these specialists for IGH Kavaratti, GH
Minicoy and CHC Androth and Amini on the same lines as that existing in RGSH Agatti which will mean

29
that we will be outsourcing services of 20 Specialist doctors for these hospitals [proposal has been
approved by the Ministry vide order No.A.12034/22/2016/CHS.IV dated.27th Feb. 2016]
Further Recommendation
3.6.7 The Committee notes the various solutions being explored by the Ministry to address the
issue of unwillingness of doctors to serve in the UT of Lakshadweep. The Committee is of the
view that hiring an outsourcing agency to provide the doctors is an interim solution and in the
long run a mechanism to ensure that the Government doctors are posted permanently in
Lakshadweep on either regular or rotational basis, has to be put in place. The Committee feels
that linking the promotional avenues of doctors to compliance with the posting in the UT of
Lakshadweep can be a viable solution.  However, the Committee also finds merit in the solution
of contractual posting of the doctors by providing better pay and perks. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must continually make efforts to find a lasting
solution to this persistent problem and ensure adequate availability of doctors to provide regular
medical services to the residents of the UT of Lakshadweep.
Recommendation
3.6.8 The Committee also recommends that the MHA must pursue the medical recruitment agencies and
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to incorporate a clause in the Recruitment Rules for mandatory
posting to Lakshadweep without any exception and any reluctance on the part of doctors may be a
sufficient ground for their dismissal from service. (Para 2.10.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.9 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which has intimated
that the matter is under examination.
Updated status
3.6.10  As of now, the Government does not enjoy the power to invoke mandatory posting of doctors
to the Lakshadweep Islands and the A&N Islands. There are no such provisions available in the Central
Health Service Recruitment Rules, 2014. To invoke such a power of mandatory posting, there will be
the requirement of suitable amendment in CHS Recruitment Rules. It is also apprehended that if such
a provision,  i.e.  ‘reluctance on the part of doctors may be a sufficient ground for their dismissal from
service’ as recommended by the Committee, is incorporated in the Recruitment Rules, the doctors may
not join the posts even in mainland posts and there could be the risk of further reduction in the joining
rate. Only very recently the retirement age of the doctors was enhanced to 65 to cope up with the
problem of low joining and attrition rate in CHS. As on date, the total number of CHS posts is 4390 out
of which 1257 posts are lying vacant which is about 28.63% of the total number of posts. These vacant
posts are mostly outside Delhi and the reason is reluctance of candidates to join such places. As there

30
are number of opportunities for doctors in private sector, inclusion of such a harsh condition in the Rules
will further erode the present day strength of CHS.
3.6.11 To cope up with the shortage of specialist doctors in Lakshadweep islands, the Ministry is
exploring the possibilities to link the promotional prospect of doctors, at NFSG level of Non-Teaching
and Public Health Specialists and GDMOs having PG qualification, with mandatory posting to Lakshadweep
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Promotion to NFSG level will entirely depend upon the specialist
doctors and GDMOs with PG qualification undertaking to serve in the Lakshadweep and A&N Islands
for a period of at least one year either in one spell or in two spells of six months each. If this possibility
is found feasible for implementation, suitable amendments in CHS Recruitment Rules, 2014 will be
undertaken. There may not be any requirement to take punitive actions i.e. dismissal from service
because of unwillingness of doctors serving in the Islands as recommended by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee of Ministry of Home Affairs.
Further Recommendation
3.6.12  The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry that 1257 out of 4390 posts i.e.
about 28.63% of the of the total number of posts in Central Health Services (CHS) are lying
vacant and the incorporation of punitive measures will further erode the present strength of
CHS. The Committee also observes that there are no provisions available in the Central Health
Service Recruitment Rules to ensure mandatory posting of doctors to the UT of Lakshadweep.
The Committee agrees that linking the promotional prospects of doctors to mandatory posting
to Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar islands can encourage the doctors to serve in these
remote islands and recommends that such a provision may be incorporated at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may be requested
to explore the possibility of amendment in the CHS Recruitment Rules for incorporating a
provision for compulsory posting in the Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar islands.
Recommendation
3.6.13  The Committee is also anguished to note that the medical quota seats of Lakshadweep, which
is already suffering from inadequacy of doctors, has been reduced from 13 to 5 from 2015-16 onwards.
The Committee feels that this indicates the Government’ s insensitive approach towards Lakshadweep and
seems unjustified. Moreover, the Ministry was unable to provide any satisfactory response on this measure.
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this issue with
the Ministry concerned and pursue it for a rollback of this measure and a restoration of the previous
quota of medical seats for Lakshadweep. (Para 2.10.10)
Action Taken
3.6.14  The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which has
intimated that the matter is under examination.

31
Updated status
3.6.15 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is maintaining a Central Pool of MBBS/BDS seats by
seeking voluntary contribution from the States having medical/dental colleges and certain other medical
institutions. The seats collected in the Central Pool from the State Governments/Institutions are in turn
allocated to the States/UTs, which are not having medical/dental colleges of their own and to certain other
Ministries/Departments such as the Ministries of External Affairs, Defence, Home Affairs, and HRD, and
the Cabinet Secretariat. The allocation of Central Pool MBBS/BDS seats is made to beneficiary States/
UTs (including UT of Lakshadweep) keeping in view various factors  i.e. (i) Population of the beneficiary
State/UT; (ii) availability of seats in Central Pool; and (iii) national average of availability of seats in the
country.
3.6.16  During the current academic year 2017-18, the UT of Lakshadweep has been allocated 2 MBBS
and 2 BDS seats. The basis for allocation of seats is as under:-
(i) Total population of UT of Lakshadweep is 0.64 lakh (as per Census 2011),
(ii) National average of available MBBS seats,
(iii) 5.55 MBBS seats per lakh population.
3.6.17  MBBS seats required for UT of Lakshadweep to achieve the ratio of 2.5 MBBS per lakh: 1.6.
MBBS seats (Due to availability of limited number of MBBS seats in Central Pool, the method of 2.5
MBBS seats per lakh has been applied for all beneficiary States/UTs). Accordingly 2 MBBS seats were
allocated to the UT of Lakshadweep for 2017-18. The Central Pool seats have been reduced for the
States/UTs of Tripura, Manipur, Mizoram, Sikkim. The allocation of Central Pool seats has increased in
case of Meghalaya, Nagaland, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. Efforts are also being made
on regular basis for seeking increased contribution of seats from donor agencies to meet the increased
demand of medical seats by the beneficiary States/UTs.
3.6.18  On the issue of reduction of medical seats, the representative of UTL Administration stated that
the UTL Administrator had written to Hon’ble Minister concerned to increase the quota, who in turn,
assured that they were looking into the matter. The representative of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare maintained that these medical seats were provided from the central pool of seats which are
voluntarily donated by the States from the surplus seats which are maintained by the Ministry. As per
the calculation, based on population criteria of Lakshadweep it comes out only 1.6 seats, therefore,
allotted two seats.  However, the Ministry was making all out efforts to increase the central pool seats
so that more seats could be redistributed.
3.6.19  When the Chairman of the Committee asked the Home Secretary to find out the solution, the
Home Secretary responded that there was perhaps a need to re-visit the formula adopted by the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare. Obviously, they have a limitation in the total number of seats which are
available in the Central Pool. However, there is a need to consider whether this allocation needs to be

32
strictly on population basis or can there be a special dispensation for special category States/UTs like
Lakshadweep.
Further Recommendation
3.6.20  The Committee feels that if there are more doctors, who come from Lakshadweep, then
they are more likely to make a choice for being posted in Lakshadweep. They are also more
likely to inspire other students from Lakshadweep to study medicine. Mo reover, the Committee
disapproves the allocation of the MBBS/BDS seats only on the basis of population. The arithmetical
calculation leading to 1.6 seats for Lakshadweep is absurd and is a failure to apply rational
standards. There is nothing to prevent the Ministry concerned to fix an absolute minimum
number like 5 seats. The Committee feels that the remoteness of the region and the vulnerability
of the population to epidemics, diseases and disasters should also be given good weightage while
deciding the allocation of medical seats. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation
and urges the Ministry of Home Affairs to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to revisit the formula, by creating a special dispensation for special category
States/UTs and restore the previous quota of medical seats for the UT of Lakshadweep.
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES
3.7 Telecommunications and Data Connectivity
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee is concerned about poor state of telecom and data connectivity in the Lakshadweep
Islands and feels that the benefits of digital revolution are yet to penetrate significantly in this
geographically isolated Union Territory of India. The Committee agrees with the UT Administration that
the quantum of capital expenditure required is beyond its financial capacity, however, the Committee
observes that delayed implementation of the project would only lead to higher capital expenditure in
future. Moreover, provision of a secure and robust means of communication in Lakshadweep is all the
more necessary in view of the strategic importance of the islands and, in the Committee’ s view, the
submarine optical fiber connectivity is the only long term solution to resolve the connectivity problem
of the islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the
Department of Telecommunication for an early implementation of the submarine optical fiber project and
the funds from Universal Service Obligation Fund may be sanctioned to cover the capital as well as
operational expenditure of the project. (Para 2.14.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that the Telecom Commission had recommended for the
cost benefit analysis and a feasibility study for laying submarine OFC in Lakshadweep. In accordance
with the T elecom Commission’s decision, cost benefit analysis and feasibility study were carried out by
TCIL for laying submarine in Lakshadweep along with validation of the estimated cost before proceeding

33
ahead. On the basis of cost benefit analysis carried out by TCIL, the work of preparation of DPR, based
on ‘Desktop Study’, has been awarded to TCIL. On submission of DPR by TCIL, approval of the
Competent Authority would be sought for the project including the scope and quantum of funding,
implementation strategy and the funding modalities.
Updated Status
A. Laying of optical fiber cable:
3.7.3 The Ministry informed the Committee that the matter regarding laying of optical fiber cable, from
mainland to islands, for improvement in telecom facility, in the UT of Lakshadweep, has been taken up
with the Department of Telecommunication, who intimated the status of the project as follows:-
(i) As per TRAI recommendations, dated 22.07.2014, a secure and reliable connectivity would
be established through a submarine cable keeping in view strategic importance of
Lakshadweep.
(ii) Future bandwidth requirement of 7.56 Gbps forecasted by TRAI for backhaul shall be met
through this project.
(iii) On 07.11.14, Telecom Commission recommended a cost benefit analysis and feasibility
study for laying submarine OFC in Lakshadweep may be undertaken along with validation
of the estimated cost before proceeding ahead.
(iv) CAPEX of about 
` 468 crore to be funded by USO Fund
(v) OPEX proposed to be funded by MHA
(vi) On the basis of cost benefit analysis carried out by TCIL, ‘In-principle’ approval accorded
on 16.11.16 for preparation of DPR by TCIL.
(vii) Based on cost estimates submitted by TCIL as an outcome of tendering process followed
by TCIL, work order has been issued to TCIL on 27.1 1.17 for preparation of DPR based
on DTS for Submarine OFC connectivity between Mainland India (Kochi) and six Islands
of Lakshadweep Islands viz. Kavaratti, Agatti, Androth, Kalpeni, Amini and Minicoy.
(viii) W ork order accepted by TCIL on 13.12.2017.
(ix) DPR based on DTS is targeted to be submitted by TCIL by March 2018
(x) Telecom Commission approval targeted to be sought by June 2018
(xi) Based on the request dated 30.11.2017 received from Shri Mohammed Faizal, Hon’ble MP,
Lakshadweep Islands, OFC for all inhabited Islands is under examination.
(xii) Project targeted to be implemented by 31.12.2019

34
B. Augmentation of Satellite bandwidth from 102 Mbps to 318 Mbps:
(i) CAPEX: ` 46.53 crore being funded by USO Fund.
(ii) OPEX/transponder charges to be funded by Lakshadweep UT Administration/ MHA
(iii) Bandwidth augmented by BSNL from 102 Mbps to 282 Mbps
(iv) Bandwidth augmented from 102 Mbps to 282 Mbps is solely between Kavaratti and Mainland
(Ernakulam/ Delhi)
(v) For augmentation of bandwidth of 54 Mbps between Kavaratti and other Islands of
Lakshadweep Islands, antenna installation is under progress while the transponder frequency
allocation is awaited for the links and up-down converters and Low Noise Amplifiers are
yet to be received
(vi) Issue of import clearance raised by BSNL being resolved in consultation with WPC
(vii) Request dated 30.11.2017 from Shri Mohammed Faizal, Hon’ble MP, Lakshadweep Islands
for further augmentation of satellite bandwidth to 1 Gbps is under examination.
(viii) Balance bandwidth under the project is targeted to be augmented by 31.03.2018
C. Augmentation of 2G Mobile Coverage with Edge Technology:
(i) In-principle approval accorded by Telecom Commission on 07.11.2014 on the basis of
TRAI recommendations dated 22.07.2014 for installation of 10 towers to improve quality
of service
(ii) T elecom Commission approval on 14.12.2016 for funding of 
` 10.1 crore towards
CAPEX Work awarded to  BSNL on nomination basis
(iii) CAPEX of ` 10.1 crore to be funded by USOF
(iv) W ork of setting up Towers/ BTSs under progress by BSNL
(v) 2 Towers likely to be commissioned by 31.12.2017
(vi) 1 T ower likely to be commissioned by 15.01.2018
(vii) Remaining 7 towers likely to be commissioned by 31.01.2018
(viii) Project targeted to be implemented by 31.03.2018
3.7.4 The representative of Department of Telecommunication informed the Committee during its meeting
held on 27th December, 2017 that after submission of DPR by TCIL in March, 2018, the approval of
telecommunication would be sought by April-May, 2018 because the proposal cost was approximately

35
to the tune of ` 500 crores. Thereafter, the selection of the executive agency would be done by March,
2019.  After that, it would take around 12 to 28 months for the commissioning of the project so that
the project would be completed by June, 2020. Meanwhile, the project of satellite bandwidth augmentation
from 102 Mbps to 318 Mbps would have already been taken.
3.7.5 Responding to the Chairman’s query, as to whether the long term solution would be the fiber, the
representative of the Department of Telecommunication stated in the affirmative and added that the long
term requirement of the bandwidth would be around 7.65 Gbps and such a bandwidth could not be
covered by satellite. On the query of a Member of the Committee that TCIL was covering only six islands
presently and what would be the fate of remaining islands, the representative of the Department of
Telecommunication stated that TCIL had agreed to prepare DPR for all the inhabitant islands, and based
on their recommendations, finally the DoT would take the call.
Further Recommendation
3.7.6 The Committee notes that TRAI had recommended laying down submarine optical fiber
cables to provide secure and reliable connectivity to the Lakshadweep islands back in 2014.
However, till date, the Detailed Project Report is yet to be submitted by TCIL for the approval
of the Telecom Commission. The Committee is of the opinion that the project will not be
completed by the scheduled date of 31st December, 2019. The Committee recommends that the
Government should prioritize and expedite this project to ensure its timely completion. The
Committee also recommends that the Government should implement this project in a
comprehensive manner to connect all inhabited islands, including the farthest island of Minicoy,
with the optical fiber cable to resolve the connectivity woes of the Lakshadweep islands once and
for all.
3.7.7 The Committee also observes that an in-principle approval was granted by the Telecom
Commission, in November 2014, to the proposal of augmenting the 2G mobile coverage through
incorporation of Edge technology. However, it took more than two years before an approval was
granted for providing funds worth 
`````10.1 crore to BSNL for beginning the work. The Committee
is aware that by 2014 3G technology, which was launched back in 2008, had become ubiquitous
and even 4G had been launched. The Committee is perplexed as to why the option to upgrade
the 2G network directly to 3G technology was not explored. The Committee is also unable to
understand the reasons for a two year delay in the grant of financial approval after the grant
of an in-principle approval. Moreover , till the end of 2017, the government has not been able to
implement the project relating to the Edge Technology. The Government must understand that
it needs to change its procedures in view of the fast changing technology as by the time a project
is approved and implemented, the technology moves ahead by one or two generations, as has
happened in the case of Lakshadweep. The Committee disapproves of this bureaucratic approach
that has left the Lakshadweep islands bereft of the benefits of technological advancements in the
telecommunications sector and recommends that the project of implementing the Edge Technology

36
should be completed at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the proposal to
enhance the satellite bandwidth to 1 Gbps may be considered favorably as the project of laying
submarine optical fiber is unlikely to be completed anytime soon.
3.8 Renewable Sources of Energy
Recommendation
3.8.1 The Committee is well aware of the acute problem of limited sources of energy and power-
generation in Lakshadweep. The existing power generation through diesel is both costly and polluting,
and is therefore unsustainable in the long run. The Committee notes that steps are being taken for
installation of rooftop solar power panels on both public and private buildings. However generation
through such panels may not be sufficient to reduce the dependency on diesel power. The Committee also
notes the proposal for floating solar panels on lagoons and feels that the UT Administration can make
use of the abundant lagoon area available in the Lakshadweep islands for installation of floating solar
power panels. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy for conducting an early technical feasibility study and financial evaluation
of the proposal to install floating solar power panels and the UT Administration may be directed to
identify all islands where there is a possibility to implement this proposal. (Para 2.15.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.2 Proposals have been received by UTL Administration from some firms with respect to floating
Solar Power Panel. A  detailed  discussion was held on 17.08.2017 in the Chamber of Hon’ble Administrator
with M/s NTPC  officers, Noida, for implementation of  floating solar power plant  by deploying Solar
PV panels in the lagoon area of the all inhabited islands. However, detailed project proposal has not been
received. The UTL Administration is exploring the feasibility of floating an EOI for floating solar and then
based upon the response proceed further.
Updated Status
3.8.3 Roof top Solar Power plant:   Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has allocated a target for
this UT for implementation of Solar Rooftop power plants. A target of 10 MW capacity of Solar Rooftop
power plant was allocated to Lakshadweep and the target fixed is to complete by the year 2022 vide
D.O. No.03/13/2015-16/GCRT dated. 30th June 2015. In this regard LEDA (Lakshadweep Energy
Development Agency), the implementing agency for Renewable Energy Projects in Lakshadweep, has
made an initial assessment of availability of roof area on Government Offices/Institutions and residential
building suitable for roof top power plants throughout the islands.  LEDA has prepared tender document
and it is being floated.
3.8.4 Floating Solar Power plant: Expression of interest has been invited from interested vendors to set
up floating solar plants in the lagoons of all 10 inhabited islands of Lakshadweep vide Notice F.No.74/
7/2016-LEDA Dated. 23/10/2017. The matter was also discussed in a meeting at MNRE on 21/11/2017.

37
It is decided that SECI will float the tender for the said project on behalf of Lakshadweep Administration
based on the expression of interest received from various firms. Ministry will also explore the possibility
of providing subsidy to the project by incorporating the same in the existing schemes of MNRE.  Based
on the request from certain firms, the last date of submitting EoI has been extended up to 07/12/2017.
31 firms have submitted their EoI and they are being scrutinized to prepare tender document.
3.8.5 The representative of UTL Administration stated that in accordance with the recommendation of
the Committee, the UTL Administration had taken action on two fronts i.e. solar power plant and floating
solar in the lagoons of ten inhabited islands.  Responding to the Chairman’s query, the representative of
UTL Administration added that they would float the tender for roof top solar in a few days while for
floating-solar, however, it was not certain about the duration of time that would take for preparing the
tender by Solar Energy Corporation of India.
Further Recommendation
3.8.6 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the UT Lakshadweep Administration to
bring the benefits of solar power to Lakshadweep. The Committee, however, feels that the
projects for the installation of roof top and floating solar power panels can be expedited to ensure
early implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
must expedite the pace of these two projects and implement them ahead of the scheduled time.
3.9 Civil Aviation
Recommendation
3.9.1 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure on the slow progress on the project for
providing night landing facility in Lakshadweep. The Committee feels that establishing Instrument Flight
Rules (IFR) based night landing at all helipads would require significant amount of time and costs. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must explore the option of allowing Visual Flight
Rules (VFR) based night landing, at least in times of emergency evacuations and medical exigencies.
The Committee therefore requests the Ministry of Home Affairs to pursue the matter with the Ministry
of Civil Aviation to amend the rules for night landing operations and allow VFR for remote locations
like Lakshadweep where land availability is an issue and compliance with IFR requirements is prohibitively
costly and not feasible. (Para 2.16.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.9.2 The Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) has conveyed that the detailed Technical Feasibility Report (TFR)
in respect of night landing proposal for the islands of Kavaratti, Agatti, Minicoy, Andrott and Amini are
being prepared separately and shall be submitted along with  the estimated cost of provision of lighting
system and nav-aids.
3.9.3 The UTL has also communicated in principle approval of the competent authority to PHL for

38
phase-wise development of night landing facilities with Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti being taken up in
phase-1.
3.9.4 The UTL has further requested the PHL to take necessary action to submit detailed TFR in respect
of the above three islands along with estimated cost of provision of lighting system and nav-aids, at the
earliest vide letter dated 12.09.2017.
Updated Status
3.9.5 The PHL has conveyed that the detailed Technical Feasibility Report (TFR) in respect of night
landing proposal for the islands of Kavaratti, Agatti, Minicoy, Andrott and Amini are being prepared
separately and shall be submitted along with the estimated cost of provision of lighting system and nav-
aids.
3.9.6 The UTL Administration has also communicated in principle approval of the competent authority
to PHL for phase wise development of night landing facilities with Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti being
taken up in phase-1. The UTL Administration has received Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Phase-1
on 29th November 2017 and the same is under scrutiny and further action will be initiated after evaluation
of DPR.
3.9.7 The Committee was informed by the representative of UTL Administration that on the direction
of DRSC on Home Affairs, Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) submitted the proposal for developing facilities
of night landing in three islands, namely Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti at the cost of 
` 8.25 crore, which
would be approved by UTL  Administration in few days.  Responding to the Chairman’s query, the
representative of UTL Administration added that the work would be executed by PHL in next 4 to 6
months in the first phase. However, survey was done for other three islands also but there were
shortcomings that need to be analyzed before developing night landing facilities.
Further Recommendation
3.9.8 The Committee takes note of the efforts to develop night landing facilities, on various
islands of Lakshadweep, pursuant to the previous recommendations of this Committee. However,
the Committee observes that the Ministry has failed to provide any explanation for not allowing
Visual Flight Rules (VFR) based night landing, at least in times of emergency evacuations and
medical exigencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must furnish a
detailed reply on the issue of VFR based night landing and allow it until most of the islands have
the required infrastructure to ensure Instrument Flight Rules based night landing.
3.10 Shipping
Recommendation
3.10.1  The Committee is anguished to note that while formulating the specific technical requirements at
the tendering stage, opinion of technical experts was not sought and a proper technical evaluation was

39
not done prior to the floating of tender. The Committee observes that the UT Administration took more
than five years to finalize the appropriate vessel as per the requirements and feasibility which should
have been done in 2013 itself. The Committee strongly objects to this waste of time and effort and feels
that in such matters Government cannot function on a trial and error basis. The Committee recommends
that accountability for the failure of successive tenders may be set which led to a loss of crucial time
and cost escalation and caused delay in resolving the demand-supply gap of fuel in Lakshadweep.
(Para 2.17.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.2  As per the perspective plan 2000-2015, the UTLA has acquired 4 all-weather passenger ships, 8
fair-weather High speed crafts, 2 Bollard Tugs and 2x800 MT multipurpose cargo Barges through the
Technical consultancy of SCI, Mumbai. In addition, Ministry of Shipping had accorded approval for
acquisition of one 1000 MT Oil Barge at a total cost of 
` 37.95 crores (including project cost of ` 22
crore, running and maintenance cost for five years of ` 15.70 crore and consultancy charges of ` 25
lakh) vide letter dated 8.2.2013. However, the acquisition of 1000 MT oil tanker was not completed  on
time, mainly due to poor participation in the initial tender, which had led to re-tendering and thereafter
the issue of designer not meeting tender criteria.
3.10.3  Now, car go capacity has been revised to about 700/750 MT capacity of the Oil Tanker instead
of the already approved 1000MT. Ministry of Shipping has conveyed its approval vide letter dated
8.5.2017, and thereafter SCI was requested to finalize and float tender for acquisition of the proposed
Oil Tanker. SCI floated tender on 17.7.2017 and tenders received were opened on 28.8.2017. Eight
bidders have participated in the tender proceedings and the same are being evaluated by SCI. Though
the present tender has been floated with revised dimension and capacity, it has not led to any cost
escalation in the project.
Updated status
3.10.4  As per the perspective plan 2000-2015, the UTLA has acquired 4 all-weather passenger ships, 8
fair weather High speed crafts, 2 Bollard Tugs and 2 x 800 MT multipurpose cargo Barges.
3.10.5 These were through the technical consultancy of SCI, Mumbai. However, the acquisition of 1000
MT oil tanker (subsequently revised as 700 MT capacity) was not completed on time due to various
reasons but as such UTLA may not be held responsible for the delay as seen from below:-
(i) SCI  vide  letter dated 25.7.2013 informed that 8 shipyards participated and submitted their
technical offer and only one shipyard is qualifying as per the tender criteria.
(ii) After examination, the proposal was considered for re-tender and communicated to SCI
vide letter dated 1.8.2013
(iii) SCI vide mail dated 15.1.2014 informed that after technical evaluation, out of 12 shipyards
participated, 11 shipyards were meeting all the criteria for eligibility in technical tendering.

40
(iv) To examine the tender process and evaluation methodology followed by SCI in evaluating
commercial bids, a Committee was constituted vide order dated 22.7.2014.  The Committee
in its meeting held on 19.8.2014 observed that M/s SCI has not followed the procedure
for evaluation of the tender which had resulted in disqualification of certain participating
shipyards at the stage of evaluation of Commercial Offer due to deviation in technical
specification.
(v) The recommendation of the committee was communicated to SCI vide letter dated 17.9.2014
and requested to cancel the tender proceedings and invite fresh tender incorporating all the
observations.
(vi) Approval was conveyed as proposed by SCI vide letter dated 13.5.2015 to ensure wider
participation and maximum response from the capable shipyards to achieve fair and competitive
price.
(vii) SCI vide mail dated 29.7.2015 informed that 8 shipyards participated and out of 8 shipyards
only 6 can be considered qualified subject to their meeting tender criteria.
(viii) However, it was observed that 6 shipyards were relying on a designer which was not
meeting the tender qualification criteria and they were asked to propose another designer.
Fourshipyards gave a revised proposal with designer Alsen China, which, later it was
observed, was outsourcing to Cyber marine which was the initial designer. Additionally, in
the tender conditions there was no provision for outsourcing.
(ix) Meanwhile, two 800 MT Multipurpose Cargo Vessels (M.V . Sagar Samraj and M.V. Sagar
Yuvraj) were delivered by the M/s Modest Shipyard having an overall length of 72 meters.
Since the Masters of these vessels expressed apprehension over entry inside lagoon and
berthing in western side jetties at Minicoy and Kavaratti during monsoon, it was felt
necessary to revisit on the dimensions of subject Oil Tanker, specifically the length.
(x) SCI opined that a fresh tender may be required to be floated with revised tender specifications
for the acquisition of Oil Tanker and SCI requested for advice whether they should initiate
the process of floating fresh tender for the acquisition.
(xi) The in-principle approval of the Ministry of Shipping for acquisition of 700/750MT Oil
Tanker instead of originally approved capacity was received vide letter No. SS-15011/1/
2015-SY . II dated 8.5.2017.
(xii) SCI floated tender on 17.7.2017 and tenders received were opened on 28.8.2017.  Eight
bidders have participated in the tender proceedings and same are being evaluated by SCI.
3.10.6  The delay in acquisition of Oil Tanker was mainly because of poor participation in the initial
tender which had led to re-tendering and thereafter issue of designer not meeting tender criteria.

41
Further Recommendation
3.10.7  The Committee laments the delay in the procurement of a 1000 MT capacity oil tanker,
which could have been procured by now had the procurement process not failed on several
accounts. Now that the Ministry of Shipping has granted its in-principle approval for the acquisition
of a 700/750 MT Oil Tanker, the procurement process must begin and be completed at the
earliest.

42
CHAPTER - IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
ECONOMIC ISSUES
4.1 Tourism Growth in Lakshadweep
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee observes that most of the State Tourism Departments are having their own
corporations such as Maharashtra-MTDC, Delhi-DTTDC etc. which are engaged in the promotion and
development of the tourism sector and carrying out commercial activities that cannot be undertaken by
their Tourism Departments. The Committee therefore feels that it is necessary to have a Government
controlled corporation in Lakshadweep, along similar lines, which would be solely focused on the
development and management of tourism. (Para 2.1.13 of 204th Report)
4.1.2 The Committee appreciates the measures being taken for converting the Society for Promotion of
Nature Tourism and Sports into a Government owned Lakshadweep Tourism Development Corporation
(LTDC). The Committee feels that the said measure is all the more necessary in order to expand the
tourism sector in Lakshadweep. At the same time, the Committee also recommends that the Ministry
should make adequate financial provisions for LTDC once it gets incorporated and provide it with
necessary infrastructure and facilities. (Para 2.1.14  ibid )
Action Taken
4.1.3 To address the issue of large scale investments, Lakshadweep Tourism Policy 2016 envisages for
converting SPORTS into a fully owned Tourism Development Corporation. Towards this, proposal was
submitted to Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry has conveyed in principle approval for the formation
of a tourism development corporation for the purpose. The matter regarding establishment of Lakshadweep
Tourism Development Corporation as a fully owned government company is under examination in the
MHA.
4.1.4 During the course of the Committee’  meeting held on 27th December, 2017, the Home Secretary
informed the Committee that the creation of Tourism Development Corporation was in the process of
being approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs and was infact in the last stage of approval.
Further Recommendation
4.1.5 The Committee may be apprised once the creation of Lakshadweep Tourism Development
Corporation is approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
42

43
4.2 Agriculture
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee feels that the UT Administration must take note of the old age and unplanned
natural growth of the coconut trees and recommends that the Administration must conduct age and
quality assessment of the coconut trees in Lakshadweep. It should also undertake measures for scientific
plantation of new and better quality coconut trees. (Para 2.2.5 of 204th Report)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The Coconut Development Board has expressed their willingness to implement the additional
scheme namely “Replanting and Rejuvenation of coconut garden under MIDH” in Lakshadweep as
recommended by Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on Administration and development
of UT of Lakshadweep. Further, the Coconut Development Board has informed that UT Administration
has to conduct a roving survey for assessing the no. of palms existing per hectare, senile/unproductive
palms to be removed, number of existing palms available for rejuvenation etc. as a prerequisite for
implementing the project/scheme.  Accordingly, Department has projected sufficient provision in the BE
2018-19 for conducting roving survey throughout Lakshadweep for assessing the above parameters.
Department is in touch with the District Agriculture Officer to initiate preliminary arrangements  for
conducting roving survey after obtaining prior approval of the competent authority.
Updated Status
4.2.3 Directions have been issued to field units vide letter dated 25.10.2017 along with detailed proforma
for conducting sample survey to assess the quantum of senile, diseased and unproductive trees. The
survey is expected to be completed within two months. Resurvey now has to be conducted in order to
assess the quantum of destruction of coconut palms and other trees due to the effect of the recent Ockhi
cyclone.
4.2.4 The representative of UT Administration of Lakshadweep further added that CDB in its report had
pointed out that coconut trees were of quite old age, therefore, these trees are removed or felled and
new saplings were given and thousands of rupees were given to particular person so that new trees could
come up.  The UTL Administration had undertaken the survey but due to recent cyclone Ockhi 32750
trees got damaged.  The UTL Administration had to undertake re-survey and to encourage more and more
people to replant the trees.
Further Recommendation
4.2.5 The Committee would like to be informed about the final outcome of the survey and the
resurvey and the new plantations done thereafter.

44
GOVERNANCE ISSUES
4.3 LPG Coverage
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee observes that apart from Kavaratti and Minicoy, LPG godown construction and
operation is still pending in all the other inhabited islands. The lack of godowns on these islands has
affected the supply chain of distribution of LPG cylinders to the people, which in turn, must have caused
great hardship to the people of Lakshadweep. The Committee therefore recommends that the construction
of new godowns in all the inhabited islands must be completed at the earliest and adequate stock of
cylinders should be maintained in the existing ones to meet the demand of LPG cylinders. Where godowns
have already been constructed but not used for one reason or another, the UTL Administration must use
its powers under various laws and take over the godowns as an emergency measure (pending resolution
of any dispute) and put the godowns to use immediately. (Para 2.6.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 At present the required infrastructure under the prescribed norms for LPG distribution systems
in Lakshadweep is available only in two Islands namely Kavaratti and Minicoy. The LPG distribution at
Amini and Kadmath islands are to be commenced soon/shortly since the godowns have also been
constructed in these islands. The construction in the other islands is also being taken up in a phase-wise
manner.
Updated Status
4.3.3 The LPG distribution in the UTL is done by the Lakshadweep Cooperative Marketing Federation
(LCMF), sole agency through the primary Island Co-operative Societies (ICS&MS) in the Islands.  The
LPG godowns are managed, controlled and operated by concerned Island Co-operative Societies (ICS&MS).
Up to September 2017, the required infrastructure under the prescribed norms for LPG distribution
systems in Lakshadweep was available only in two Islands namely Kavaratti and Minicoy. Since October
2017, the LPG distribution at Amini and Kadmath islands has also been  commenced.
4.3.4 The  status of construction of LPG godowns at other islands is given below:
(i) Androth - Construction completed. The procedural formalities for obtaining explosive license
and other approvals are under process by the concerned Societies and the LCMF.
(ii) Kalpeni – Construction completed. The Godown was inspected by team of Indian Oil
Corporation (IOC) on 7-10-2017. The IOC has certain reservations about the safety aspect.
The matter is being taken up with the IOC.
(iii) Kiltan -  
Construction is nearing completion.

45
(iv) Agatti – The concerned Island Cooperative Society has identified the land for construction
of LPG godown.  Further arrangement between the land owner and the concerned Society
is under process.
(v) Chetlat - The concerned Island Cooperative Society has identified the land for construction
of LPG godown.  Further arrangement between the land owner and the concerned Society
is under process.
(vi) Bitra – It is the smallest island with land area of only 0.10 sq km with approximately 98
houses. The concerned SDO has been directed to identify the suitable land for construction
of LPG godown in accordance with the PESO norms.
4.3.5 Responding the Chairman’s query, about the number of islands having LPG godowns and the
mode of distribution for the remaining inhabited islands not having godowns, the representative of UTL
Administration submitted that four islands had licensed godowns and three islands had un-licensed
godowns which meant that the godowns were just constructed and for the remaining three islands, if
the UTL Administration gets land the godowns would be constructed thereon. Otherwise, LPG would
be distributed off islands, which would require permission from the Petroleum and Explosive Safety
Organisation (PESO).
4.3.6 Clarifying further to the Chairman’s query that in case the UTL Administration were not able to
acquire land and construct godowns, there should be no objection to get LPG supplied from another
island, the representative of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas submitted that the Ministry had no
objection except the fact that LPG alone is to be transported in the barge. The UTL Administration
submitted before the Committee that they are also looking at option of solar cooking.
Further Recommendation
4.3.7 The Committee observes that four islands in the UT of Lakshadweep currently have the
infrastructure, i.e godowns, for the supply of LPG, while for three islands the construction of
godowns has been completed and for the remaining three islands, land is being sought for the
construction of godowns. The Committee also notes the submission of the Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas that in case the land is not made available for the remaining three islands, the
UTL Administration would supply LPG to those islands from other islands, through a barge. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the UTL Administration must obtain the necessary
permission for distribution of LPG from the newly constructed godowns in three islands and must
expedite the construction of godowns in the remaining islands. The Committee also recommends
that continued supply of LPG must be ensured by the UTL Administration to all households
without fail, in all the ten islands, especially those islands where godowns are still to be constructed.
The Committee further recommends that UTL Administration may look into and explore the
option of solar cooking, however, LPG has to be supplied to all the households till alternate
options are available.

46
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
4.4 Biodegradable Toilets
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee is astonished by the loss of precious time due to the non-fulfillment of the contract
for the installation of 12000 bio-toilets by the selected vendor. The Committee observes that the vendor
had stopped installation of bio-toilets three years ago and since then the UT Administration is locked
in a battle with the vendor. The Committee feels that the Administration could have adopted a decisive
approach and made parallel efforts to identify other vendors during these three years. The Committee
recommends that the UT Administration must urgently initiate renewed efforts to identify a new vendor
for installation of bio-toilets and the prior experience of such large-scale installation should be made
a mandatory criterion for selection of the vendor. The Committee also notes that installation of
Bio-toilets is the only feasible solution to the problem of sewage disposal in Lakshadweep and
recommends that sufficient number of bio-toilets may be installed at the earliest. The Committee desires
to be apprised about the revised time line for completion of the project and the progress made in this
regard. (Para 2.9.5 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 The UTL Administration has initiated steps to evaluate the performance of the installed bio-toilets
at Kavaratti, Bitra and Androth islands by a Committee constituted for this purpose. The report of the
committee is being examined for decision on future course of action.  The UTL Administration has
analyzed the feedback collected from the beneficiaries. Moreover, the UTL Administration has initiated
steps for Black Listing of M/s MRC, Kapurthala to prohibit it from being awarded or associated with
any contractual work under UTL Administration.
Updated Status
4.4.3 According to the latest household survey conducted, only 123 households do not have toilets,
remaining households have conventional toilets with septic tank. The UT Administration is pursuing the
issue of toilet construction wholeheartedly to ensure sanitation so as to declare UT of Lakshadweep as
ODF (Open Defecation Free) by 31st December, 2017.
4.4.4 The UTL administration worked on evaluation of the performance of the installed bio-toilets, for
which Department of Science and technology, UTLA collected feedback from the bio-toilets households
and conducted effluent analysis tests. Details of the feedback collected from the households in the above
islands are as:-

47
Table No. 4.1
Sl.No. Name of the Islands No. of BT No. of household No. of
installed surveyed complaints
1. Kavaratti 876 356 69
2. Bitra 82 31 1
3. Androth 660 270 12
4.4.5 The Department has analyzed the 50 effluent samples at Kavaratti and 5 samples at Bitra. According
to the effluent analysis report, the parameters such as COD (54.54%), TDS (14.15%) and Fecal
Coliform (25.45%) have not fulfilled the prescribed limit suggested by the DRDE. In addition to the
above issues of effluent analysis report the Department is also facing the following problems in the
installed bio-toilets:-
(i) Installed bio-toilets in the islands are only SF-Model (Single Family) - for 4-6 persons only.
(ii) Issues of foul smell and soaking problem.
(iii) Nuts and bolts used in the bio-digester and soak pit have corroded.
(iv) New models of bio-digester required for low lying areas in islands.
4.4.6 The Department had sent letters to the Director, DRDE on 17th November, 2017 and a detailed
letter about the aforementioned issues on 4th December, 2017.  DRDE Director has agreed to send a
team of Scientists to Lakshadweep to check the issues of bio-toilets and give necessary recommendations.
In preliminary talks, DRDE has accepted that there might be requirement of changing the technical
specifications or remodeling of the bio-toilets due to presence of brackish water and unique geography
and climate of Lakshadweep, to make it more suitable to Lakshadweep conditions.
4.4.7 Thereafter, DRDE, Gwalior sent a reply on 14.12.2017 and mentioned that the ‘DRDE Bio-digester
based Bio-toilet’ is far superior to septic-tank/any other cost-effective on-site sanitation technology.
Therefore, it is suitable for Lakshadweep condition also as an effective alternative to septic tank. There
may be issues of overloading beyond the recommended capacity ( i.e. more than 10 persons using the
toilet recommended for 5 persons) which may lead to soaking problem and foul smell. These issues can
be resolved through capacity enhancement of existing bio-digester. Therefore, design of bio-digester
suitable for enhanced number of users can be suggested by DRDE, if desired. For this, the realistic
numbers of users need to be communicated to DRDE.
4.4.8 Accordingly, Department of Science and Technology, UTLA sent a letter to DRDE on 15.12.2017,
with details of the household size as per the Census 2011 and requested to design the bio-digester with
technical specifications and desired value of effluent quality, suitable for enhanced number of bio-toilet
users.

48
4.4.9 DRDE, has replied to the letter dated 15.12.2017 through mail and they have assured to provide
detailed specifications for enhanced capacity bio-digester in the first fortnight of January, 2018.  Thereafter,
the UT Administration will reissue a tender for the remaining number of bio-toilets.
Further Recommendation
4.4.10  The Committee is of the considered view that underground water is a precious commodity
in Lakshadweep. Keeping this in mind, the Committee had mooted the suggestion of biodegradable
toilets. The Committee is now surprised to come across the view of the representative of UTL
Administration that STP was a long term solution and biodegradable toilets were only an interim
solution.  The Committee observes that the DRDE is now designing the bio-digester with technical
specification and desired value of effluent quality, suitable for an enhanced number of bio-toilet
users. The Committee recommends that once the UTL Administration receives the details from
DRDE, the Administration should plan for installation of biodegradable toilets in the UT of
Lakshadweep for maintaining an ecological balance and preserving the underground water.
4.5 Universal Health Insurance
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee accepts the assertion of the UT Administration that a thorough evaluation of the
health insurance program is necessary in order to universalize the benefits of the program. However, the
Committee observes that out of a total population of around 65000, almost 45000 (existing 15000
beneficiaries and 30000 Government servants) were already covered under one or the other health
insurance scheme and only around 20000 people were left out from the ambit of the insurance coverage.
The Committee therefore strongly recommends that an evaluation of the health insurance programme
should be carried out within the next six months and an early decision should be taken within a year
to achieve Universal Health Insurance in Lakshadweep. (Para 2.11.2 ibid)
Action Taken
4.5.2 The Lakshadweep Administration has signed an MoU with New India Assurance Company Ltd.
on 26th April 2016 for the implementation of Health Insurance Package for the residents of Lakshadweep.
The Insurance Package was launched on 1st November 2016, i.e. on “Lakshadweep Day”. The UTL
Administration is already exploring the possibility of operationalising universal Health Insurance so as to
cover the entire population under the scheme except for those who are otherwise eligible, by merging
the existing reimbursement scheme with the proposed expansion proposal.
Updated Status
4.5.3 Health insurance scheme has been evaluated and UTL Administration is in the process of floating
tender for Universal Health Insurance to cover entire population.
4.5.4 The representative of UTL Administration mentioned about the coverage of entire population under

49
the Universal Health Insurance that one year of current insurance scheme was completed, but there were
issues regarding the definition of family. However, the lacunae were taken care of and they were working
for floating the tender for covering the entire population under the Universal Health Insurance.
Further Recommendation
4.5.5 The Committee would like to be apprised when the entire population will be covered under
the Universal Health Insurance Scheme.
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES
4.6 Civil Aviation
Recommendation
4.6.1 The Committee is of the considered view that air connectivity needs to be strengthened urgently
by exploring alternative means like seaplanes. The Committee, taking note of the progress on the project
of operationalising seaplanes, however, feels that the efforts need to be intensified to achieve an early
operationalisation of seaplanes. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs must grant a ‘No Objection Certificate’ immediately for starting the seaplane services at the
earliest and the UT Administration may be directed to complete all the other formalities in a timely
manner . (Para 2.16.11 ibid)
Action Taken
4.6.2 The ULTA is planning to introduce seaplane service in Lakshadweep on a non-subsidized and non-
liability on the Administration. The interested operator has to obtain all mandatory clearance and approval
of their own. The Administration is in the process of floating the EoI for the seaplane operation in
Lakshadweep based on this model.
Updated Status
4.6.3 The UTLA was planning to introduce seaplane service in Lakshadweep on a non-subsidized and
non-liability model on the Administration. The Administration was in the process of floating the EoI for
the seaplane operation in Lakshadweep based on this model.
4.6.4 A meeting in this regard was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil Aviation. In the
meeting, it was decided that to promote water-drones in country and to explore the possibility of
incorporation of water-bodies in Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN, a Coordination Committee
inter-alia be constituted under the Chairpersonship of Joint Secretary in-charge of RCS, Ministry of Civil
Aviation comprising members from Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Environment and Forest, DGCA,
BCAS, AAI (ANS), and concerned State Governments/UT Administrations. An officer has been nominated
from UTLA. Investigation by the Committee will be carried out between 15th and 19th January, 2018
in Lakshadweep. UTLA will also float its own EOI for seaplanes and the operators will need to take
licenses from relevant authorities for operations.

50
4.6.5 The representative of UTL Administration informed the Committee that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation was taking up the issue of seaplanes under UDAN-RCC scheme and Committee constituted for
the purpose was visiting Lakshadweep between 15th and 19th January, 2017 for seaplanes development.
Further Recommendation
4.6.6 The Committee would like to be informed about the final decision taken by the Ministry
of Civil Aviation on the issues of water drones and seaplanes, and other operational aspects
related thereto.
4.7 Shipping
Recommendation
4.7.1 The Committee is constrained to note that a lack of proper planning and prior assessment has
delayed the acquisition of the long pending oil barge. The Committee feels that the failure of the UT
Administration to assess the limitations of the jetties at Kavaratti and Minicoy beforehand was also
responsible for this inordinate delay along with Shipping Corporation of India’s failure to follow a
standard evaluation procedure during the tendering process. The Committee observes that the capacity
of the existing oil barges is woefully inadequate from a near-future perspective and, therefore, timely
acquisition of a higher capacity barge is an absolute necessity. The Committee therefore recommends that,
now that a suitable vessel has been identified and specifications finalized, the Ministry of Home Affairs
must grant early approval for acquisition of a 700/750 MT capacity oil barge. The Committee also
recommends that the UT Administration of Lakshadweep, pursuant to grant of approval, must proceed
with the tendering process in a planned and timely manner taking into account the opinion of the
technical experts and leave no room for any further delay . (Para 2.17.8 ibid)
Action Taken
4.7.2 T ender has been floated for acquisition of 700 MT Oil Tanker by UTL Technical Consultant, SCI,
Mumbai.  Eight shipyards have reportedly participated in the tender proceedings, which was opened on
28.8.2017.  The Technical Tender is under evaluation by the SCI.
Updated Status
4.7.3 T ender has been floated for acquisition of 700 MT Oil Tanker by UTL Technical Consultant,
Shipping Corporation of India, Mumbai. Eight shipyards have reportedly participated in the tender
proceedings, which was opened on 28.8.2017.
4.7.4 Commercial offers were opened by SCI on 14.12.17 and are under evaluation based on price, fuel
consumption and delivery period etc. The evaluation is expected to be completed early next week
followed by submission of the evaluated report to the Internal Audit Department of SCI. L1 will be
decided after and announced after approval from audit department. Further action as follows:-

51
(i) Final discussions with L1 shipyard to finalize Shipbuilding Contract and Technical
Specification before signing.
(ii) Signing of contract, likely by mid-January, 2018.
4.7.5 Further UTLA has also floated an EOI for leasing of oil tanker to tide over the interim requirement
and the interested parties have been called for discussion on 3/01/218. Responding to the Chairman’s
query, the representative of UTL Administration assured the Committee that commercial bid for the oil
barge would be finalized by SCI in January, 2018.
Further Recommendation
4.7.6 The Committee would like to be apprised whether the commercial bid for the oil barge has
been finalized by the Shipping Corporation of India.

52
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS–AT A GLANCE
ECONOMIC ISSUES
Tourism Growth in Lakshadweep
The Committee is disappointed that the Ministry of Finance has not notified Agatti island
as a Customs Port despite the lapse of more than 4 months. This may be conveyed to Ministry
of Finance and the decision expedited. (Para 1.2.6)
Fisheries
The Committee disapproves of the restrictions on market access that have hampered the
realization of export potential of fish produced in Lakshadweep. Restrictions on market access
amounts to a non-tariff barrier to the product and is against the principle of open and free trade.
The Committee observes that despite a sufficient amount of fish landing in Lakshadweep,
market access has remained a bottleneck. The Committee is of the view that allowing the
exporters to take raw fish to the main land can provide an impetus to the quantum of fish
production. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT Lakshadweep Administration
should immediately remove all the bottlenecks including restrictions on market access, to promote
the production of fish as well as its export. (Para 3.1.10)
GOVERNANCE ISSUES
Availability of Subsidized Rice
The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary to the Committee
that the Ministry will try to find a solution to the problem of shortage of rice in Lakshadweep.
The solution is obvious. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution should
direct the Food Corporation of India (FCI) to supply 1200 MT of rice (of good quality) to UT
Administration of Lakshadweep at the minimum fixed reserve price for Open Market Sales
Scheme (OMSS) category. Such a decision can be taken by the Minister of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution under his powers. The Committee hopes that a solution will be
found as per the spirit of the Committee’s original recommendation on this issue and will not
be thwarted by meaningless rules. Rules are made to facilitate solutions and not thwart solutions.
The Committee desires to be apprised once the issue is resolved. (Para 3.2.7)
Availability of Subsidized Sugar
The Committee is dismayed that a simple issue involving a subsidy of 
````` 2.62 crore per year
has defied solution for nearly a year and no one seem to have the authority to take a final and
binding decision. The Committee observes that Government of India, after its review of the
sugar subsidy scheme, had decided to give access to sugar for the poorest of the poor section of
the society i.e. AAY families at the scale of 1 kg per ration card holder and the same provision
52

53
has been implemented in the UT of Lakshadweep w.e.f. May, 2017. The Committee, notes the
submission of the representatives of the UTL Administration, the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution that a special dispensation for
Lakshadweep would require a special order and would entail financial implications. However, the
Committee is of the considered view that Lakshadweep, being farthest away and due to its
sensitive nature, must be treated as a special case, especially considering the fact that nothing
grows there except coconuts. The Committee, considering the submission of the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution that the Ministry would be able to give sugar at
the open market rate, hopes that the Lakshadweep Administration would be able to find savings
of 
`````2.62 crore, the amount required for a sugar subsidy for the financial year 2017-18, out of
the allocation made to UTL under various schemes/budgetary grants for the current financial
year. The Committee feels that with the approval of the financial advisor and in consensus with
the Home Secretary, the requisite quantity of sugar can be procured and distributed. The Committee
recommends that from the next year, the Ministry of Home Affairs may seek an additional
budgetary grant to meet the expenditure, to be incurred on the sugar subsidy, under a separate
head from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee desires that this matter may be specifically
brought to the notice of the Home Minister. (Para 3.3.11)
LPG Coverage
The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that
once the LPG infrastructure is in place in Lakshadweep, a very small number of households
would fall under the non-Socio Economic and Caste Census (SECC) category and would be
without an LPG connection. However, the Committee is worried that the construction of LPG
infrastructure may take some time and until then many families would be living without the
facility of an LPG connection. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UTL Administration,
in tandem with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, must arrive at a consensus on the
modus operandi of ensuring free LPG connection for all households, not having an LPG connection
at present and not covered under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. The Committee also
recommends that a special dispensation, under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana, may be
explored till the time the LPG infrastructure is in place and every household in Lakshadweep
is able to avail of an LPG connection. (Para 3.4.7)
Large Number of Vacant Posts in Administration
The Committee notes that there are 971 vacant posts, as on 27th December, 2017. This
includes the 257 new vacancies that arose between 25th April and 12th December, 2017. The
Committee is unable to understand the reason for such a large number of posts falling vacant
during such a short period of time. The Committee recommends that the UT Administration may
apprise the Committee about the reasons for these vacancies and prepare an action plan to fill
them up. The Committee also recommends that the remaining vacant posts should be filled up

54
by the UTL Administration expeditiously and an interim solution may be explored for filling up
the vacant posts that are under litigation. The Committee is not convinced that temporary
appointments would be considered illegal or will lead to further litigation and once again
recommends that temporary appointments should be made, pending regular appointments, so
that the sanctioned posts do not remain vacant. (Para 3.5.5)
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
Public Health and Medical Facilities
The Committee notes the various solutions being explored by the Ministry to address the
issue of unwillingness of doctors to serve in the UT of Lakshadweep. The Committee is of the
view that hiring an outsourcing agency to provide the doctors is an interim solution and in the
long run a mechanism to ensure that the government doctors are posted permanently in
Lakshadweep on either regular or rotational basis, has to be put in place. The Committee feels
that linking the promotional avenues of doctors to compliance with the posting in the UT of
Lakshadweep can be a viable solution.  However, the Committee also finds merit in the solution
of contractual posting of the doctors by providing better pay and perks. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must continually make efforts to find a lasting
solution to this persistent problem and ensure adequate availability of doctors to provide regular
medical services to the residents of the UT of Lakshadweep. (Para 3.6.7)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry that 1257 out of 4390 posts i.e.
about 28.63% of the of the total number of posts in Central Health Services (CHS) are lying
vacant and the incorporation of punitive measures will further erode the present strength of
CHS. The Committee also observes that there are no provisions available in the Central Health
Service Recruitment Rules to ensure mandatory posting of doctors to the UT of Lakshadweep.
The Committee agrees that linking the promotional prospects of doctors to mandatory posting
to Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar islands can encourage the doctors to serve in these
remote islands and recommends that such a provision may be incorporated at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may be requested
to explore the possibility of amendment in the CHS Recruitment Rules for incorporating a
provision for compulsory posting in the Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar islands.
(Para 3.6.12)
The Committee feels that if there are more doctors, who come from Lakshadweep, then
they are more likely to make a choice for being posted in Lakshadweep. They are also more
likely to inspire other students from Lakshadweep to study medicine. Mo reover, the Committee
disapproves the allocation of the MBBS/BDS seats only on the basis of population. The arithmetical

55
calculation leading to 1.6 seats for Lakshadweep is absurd and is a failure to apply rational
standards. There is nothing to prevent the Ministry concerned to fix an absolute minimum
number like 5 seats. The Committee feels that the remoteness of the region and the vulnerability
of the population to epidemics, diseases and disasters should also be given good weightage while
deciding the allocation of medical seats. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation
and urges the Ministry of Home Affairs to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to revisit the formula, by creating a special dispensation for special category
States/UTs and restore the previous quota of medical seats for the UT of Lakshadweep.
(Para 3.6.20)
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES
Telecommunications and Data Connectivity
The Committee notes that TRAI had recommended laying down submarine optical fiber
cables to provide secure and reliable connectivity to the Lakshadweep islands back in 2014.
However, till date, the Detailed Project Report is yet to be submitted by TCIL for the approval
of the Telecom Commission. The Committee is of the opinion that the project will not be
completed by the scheduled date of 31st December, 2019. The Committee recommends that the
Government should prioritize and expedite this project to ensure its timely completion. The
Committee also recommends that the Government should implement this project in a
comprehensive manner to connect all inhabited islands, including the farthest island of Minicoy,
with the optical fiber cable to resolve the connectivity woes of the Lakshadweep islands once and
for all. (Para 3.7.6)
The Committee also observes that an in-principle approval was granted by the Telecom
Commission, in November 2014, to the proposal of augmenting the 2G mobile coverage through
incorporation of Edge technology. However, it took more than two years before an approval was
granted for providing funds worth 
`````10.1 crore to BSNL for beginning the work. The Committee
is aware that by 2014 3G technology, which was launched back in 2008, had become ubiquitous
and even 4G had been launched. The Committee is perplexed as to why the option to upgrade
the 2G network directly to 3G technology was not explored. The Committee is also unable to
understand the reasons for a two year delay in the grant of financial approval after the grant
of an in-principle approval. Moreover , till the end of 2017, the government has not been able to
implement the project relating to the Edge Technology. The Government must understand that
it needs to change its procedures in view of the fast changing technology as by the time a project
is approved and implemented, the technology moves ahead by one or two generations, as has
happened in the case of Lakshadweep. The Committee disapproves of this bureaucratic approach

56
that has left the Lakshadweep islands bereft of the benefits of technological advancements in the
telecommunications sector and recommends that the project of implementing the Edge Technology
should be completed at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the proposal to
enhance the satellite bandwidth to 1 Gbps may be considered favorably as the project of laying
submarine optical fiber is unlikely to be completed anytime soon. (Para 3.7.7)
Renewable Sources of Energy
The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the UT Lakshadweep Administration to
bring the benefits of solar power to Lakshadweep. The Committee, however, feels that the
projects for the installation of roof top and floating solar power panels can be expedited to ensure
early implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
must expedite the pace of these two projects and implement them ahead of the scheduled time.
(Para 3.8.6)
Civil Aviation
The Committee takes note of the efforts to develop night landing facilities, on various
islands of Lakshadweep, pursuant to the previous recommendations of this Committee. However,
the Committee observes that the Ministry has failed to provide any explanation for not allowing
Visual Flight Rules (VFR) based night landing, at least in times of emergency evacuations and
medical exigencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must furnish a
detailed reply on the issue of VFR based night landing and allow it until most of the islands have
the required infrastructure to ensure Instrument Flight Rules based night landing.
(Para 3.9.8)
Shipping
The Committee laments the delay in the procurement of a 1000 MT capacity oil tanker,
which could have been procured by now had the procurement process not failed on several
accounts. Now that the Ministry of Shipping has granted its in-principle approval for the acquisition
of a 700/750MT Oil Tanker, the procurement process must begin and be completed at the earliest.
(Para 3.10.7)
ECONOMIC ISSUES
Tourism Growth in Lakshadweep
The Committee may be apprised once the creation of Lakshadweep Tourism Development
Corporation is approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs. (Para 4.1.5)

57
Agriculture
The Committee would like to be informed about the final outcome of the survey and the
resurvey and the new plantations done thereafter. (Para 4.2.5)
GOVERNANCE  ISSUES
LPG Coverage
The Committee observes that four islands in the UT of Lakshadweep currently have the
infrastructure, i.e godowns, for the supply of LPG, while for three islands the construction of
godowns has been completed and for the remaining three islands, land is being sought for the
construction of godowns. The Committee also notes the submission of the Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas that in case the land is not made available for the remaining three islands, the
UTL Administration would supply LPG to those islands from other islands, through a barge. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the UTL Administration must obtain the necessary
permission for distribution of LPG from the newly constructed godowns in three islands and must
expedite the construction of godowns in the remaining islands. The Committee also recommends
that continued supply of LPG must be ensured by the UTL Administration to all households
without fail, in all the ten islands, especially those islands where godowns are still to be constructed.
The Committee further recommends that UTL Administration may look into and explore the
option of solar cooking, however, LPG has to be supplied to all the households till alternate
options are available. (Para 4.3.7)
HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT  ISSUES
Biodegradable Toilets
The Committee is of the considered view that underground water is a precious commodity
in Lakshadweep. Keeping this in mind, the Committee had mooted the suggestion of biodegradable
toilets. The Committee is now surprised to come across the view of the representative of UTL
Administration that STP was a long term solution and biodegradable toilets were only an interim
solution.  The Committee observes that the DRDE is now designing the bio-digester with technical
specification and desired value of effluent quality, suitable for an enhanced number of bio-toilet
users. The Committee recommends that once the UTL Administration receives the details from
DRDE, the Administration should plan for installation of biodegradable toilets in the UT of
Lakshadweep for maintaining an ecological balance and preserving the underground water.
(Para 4.4.10)
Universal Health Insurance
The Committee would like to be apprised when the entire population will be covered under
the Universal Health Insurance Scheme. (Para 4.5.5)

58
INFRASTRUCTURAL  ISSUES
Civil Aviation
The Committee would like to be informed about the final decision taken by the Ministry
of Civil Aviation on the issues of water drones and seaplanes, and other operational aspects
related thereto. (Para 4.6.6)
Shipping
The Committee would like to be apprised whether the commercial bid for the oil barge has
been finalized by the Shipping Corporation of India. (Para 4.7.6)

59
MINUTES

V
FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 27th December, 2017 in Committee Room “A”,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS   PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
3. Shri Derek O’Brien
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
6. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shrimati Kirron Kher
9. Shri Kaushal Kishore
10. Shri P. Nagarajan
11. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
12. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
13. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal  Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
61

62
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1.        Shri Rajiv Gauba, Home Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary (UT)
3. Dr. N.K. Sinha, Economic Adviser
Representatives of UT of Lakshadweep
l.        Shri Farooq Khan, Administrator
2. Shri Vivek Pandey, Advisor to Administrator/Secretary
3. Shri Asar Pai Singh, Resident Commissioner
4.       Dr. Tariq Thomas, Collector
Representative of Ministry of Agriculture and  Farmers’ Welfare
1. Dr. B.N.S. Murthy, Horticulture Commissioner and Chairman,
Coconut Development Board
2. Dr. P. Paul Pandian, Fisheries Development Commissioner,
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
3. Shri K. B. Surwade, Director (Fisheries)
Representative of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Shri Asutosh Jindal, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Health and Family welfare
Ms. Gayatri Mishra, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Rabindra Agarwal, Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.V. Madabhavi, Chief Engineer
Representatives of Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL)
Shri Rajesh Kapoor, Director
Representative of Airport Authority of India
1.        Shri S. Raheja, Member
2. Shri H.S. Suresh, Executive Director (Engineering)
3. Shri S. Bisvas, Executive Director (Architect)

63
Representative of Department of Telecommunications
Shri Kamal Bhagat, Deputy Director General
Representative of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
Shri P. K. Tiwari, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri S.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Venkatramana R. Hegde, Director
Representative of Pawan Hans Ltd.
Shri Sanjeev Razdon, General Manager (Maintenance, repair and overhaul)
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Chairman then recalling that
the Committee had given its 204th report on the subject ‘Administration  and Development of Union Territory
of Lakshadweep’  and the Ministry of Home Affairs had furnished the Action Taken Notes on the report on
30th October, 2017. The Chairman informed the Members that he had gone through the Action Taken Notes
(ATNs) and found that the action taken with respect to many of the recommendations  was   not   satisfactory.
The   Chairman   then   informed   the Committee about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of
the Ministry of Home Affairs and the UT Administration of Lakshadweep on the ATNs.
2.1 The Chairman also apprised the Members that the Ministry had furnished a revised  Action   Taken
Note   and  the   same   was  placed   before  them   for  their consideration.
(After the arrival of witnesses)
3.0 The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the UT Administration
of Lakshadweep to the sitting. The Chairman then informed them that the Committee, on the basis of the
original A TN furnished by the Ministry, had found that no satisfactory action was taken on several
recommendations given in its report The Chairman then requested the Home Secretary to apprise the Members
of the Committee about the latest status of the Action Taken Notes.
3.1 The Home Secretary requested the representatives of the UT Administration of Lakshadweep to make
a presentation on the subject and inform the Committee about the current status of implementation of
various recommendations.
3.2 The Collector, Lakshadweep, thereafter made the presentation which inter alia covered the following
issues:
(1) The Committee was informed that the National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management
had submitted its report on tourist carrying capacity of the Lakshadweep islands and the UT
Administration was in the process of development of tourism infrastructure in the UT of
Lakshadweep based on the guidelines for high end, low volume tourist resorts. The Minicoy
and Agatti islands had been notified as Immigration Check Posts. The Committee was also

64
apprised that the NITI Aayog had taken up four uninhabited islands for their holistic
development.
(2) On the issue of provision of subsidized rice, the UT Administration informed that it was facing
issues regarding sourcing of the rice. The representative of Food Corporation   of  India
expressed   their   inability   to   grant   special   exemption   to Lakshadweep Islands under the
existing provisions. The UT Administration also informed that formalities for procurement of
additional quantum of rice have been completed through Lakshadweep Cooperative Marketing
Federation from FCI in e-auction under Open Market Sales Scheme (OMSS).
(3) On the issue of supply of subsidized sugar, the Committee was informed that only 4000 AAY
beneficiaries are eligible after the changed policy as mandated by the National Food Security
Act and the remaining population was not being provided subsidized sugar. The Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution assured to provide the required amount of
sugar if the subsidy amount is borne by the UT  Administration  which  amounts  to   around
` 2.62   crore  per  annum.   The Committee enquired as to whether the Administration can
provide that amount from budgetary grants given to it. The Administrator replied that he may
not be empowered to do so and would require approval of the Ministry of Home Affairs for
this purpose.  The  Committee,  however,  requested  the  Administrator,   UT  (L)  to  explore
the possibility of re-appropriation from the savings for current fmancial year and make budgetary
provisions for next financial year to provide subsidized sugar to the entire population.
(4) The UT Administration also informed that operations of LPG godown had commenced in 2
additional islands bringing the total  number of islands having operational godowns to 4 while
construction of godowns was under way in 3 more islands. The UT Administration assured
that the rest of the 3 inhabited islands will be supplied LPG cylinders by transportation through
barges.
(5) On the matter of granting special exemption to Lakshadweep under the Ujjwala Scheme  and
providing  free  LPG  connections  to   all   the  beneflciaries,   the  UT Administration informed
that the matter was being examined by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The
representative of the M/o of PNG informed that at present there was no provision to grant
such special exemption, however, the Ministry was exploring the possibility for the same.
(6) On the issue of vacant posts and pending recruitments of 1079 posts, the UT Administration
informed   that   365   posts   had   been   filled   from   25.04.2017   to 12.12.2017. 428 posts
have been already notified and the recruitment process is underway. The   Committee   suggested
that   for   remaining   286   posts,   the   UT  Administration may consider adhoc /temporary/
contractual appointments as an interim solution.
(7) On the issue of bio-degradable toilets, the Committee was informed that such toilets required
proper maintenance and have to be installed in a scientific manner.  The Committee suggested

65
Sewage Treatment Plants as a lõng term solution and provision of bio-degradable Toilets as an
immediate priority.
(8) On the issue of restoration of the previous quota of 13 medical seats in the Central Pool for
Lakshadweep residents which had been cut to 5 seats and then to just 2 seats, the representatives
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed that the decision was taken as per the
existing formula based on population. The Committee expressed its displeasure and the Home
Secretary stated that he would take up the matter with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
to revisit the formula. The Committee was also informed that as an interim measure to ensure
availability of specialist doctors, the UT Administration had initiated measures to outsource the
specialty services at Kavaratti, Minicoy, Androth and Amini to an external agency and a tender
had been floated for the purpose.
(9) On the issue of Telecommunications and data connectivity, the Committee was informed by
representative of M/o Telecommunication that TCIL has been given approval for preparation
of DPR for OFC and the DPR will be completed within 12-18 months for all the 10 islands. As
a short term measure, the Ministry will enhance the bandwidth from 102 Mbps to 318 Mbps.
(10) To implement renewable energy projects in Lakshadweep, UT Administration informed that it
was in the process of floating tender for roof top solar plants while it had also received
Expression of Interest from 31 firms for floating solar power plants.
(11) To   improve   air  connectivity,   the   Committee   was   informed  that  Airport Authority of
India had granted its approval for expansion of the runway that would allow operation of full
load ATR-72 type aircrafts but it would take 4 years to complete the expansion project. The UT
Administration also informed that as a short term measure, increasing the frequency of the
ATR-72 is being considered. The Committee pointed out that there were several shortcomings
in the existing helipads which should be addressed.
(12) W ith regard to the shipping projects, the Committee was informed that the 15-year Perspective
Plan had been approved by the MHA and proposals had been submitted to the Ministry of
Shipping for procuring 2 all-weather ships for approval by the Standing Finance Committee
(SFC).
(The Witnesses then withdrew)
4.0 ** * *
4.1 ** * *
4.2 ** * *
5.0         A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
6.0         The Committee then adjourned at 5.16 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matter.

66
XIII
THIRTEENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 21st May, 2018 in Room  No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram – Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
10.     Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
11. Shri Kaushal Kishore
12. Shri P. Nagarajan
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
14. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar , Director
3. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
1.        Shri B.R. Sharma, Special Secretary (BM)
2. Shri Rabindra Panwar, Special Secretary/FA
66

67
3. Shri Mukesh Mittal, Joint Secretary (IS. II)
4. Dr. R.K. Mitra, Advisor (P.II)
5. Shri A.V . Dharma Reddy, Joint Secretary (BM-I) 6.
6. Ms. S. Chaudhuri, Director
7. Shri Harish Chander, Director/Consultant
Representatives of National Security Guard (NSG)
1.       Shri S. Lakhtakia, Director-General
2. Dr. Sanjeev Mishra, Financial Advisor
3. Shri P.S. Phalnikar, Inspector-General
4.       Shri Abhishek Trivedi, Inspector-General
Representatives of Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
1. Shri R.K. Pachnanda, Director-General
2. Shri R.K. Mishra, Additional Director-General
3. Ms. Nishtha Upadhyay, Internal Financial Advisor
4. Shri D.S. Chawdhary, Inspector-General
5. Shri Anand Swaroop, Inspector-General
6. Shri S. S. Harta, Deputy Inspector-General
7. Shri Ajaypal Singh, Deputy Inspector-General
2.0     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them about the
agenda of the meeting,  i.e.,
(i) ** * *
(ii) to consider and adopt draft 212th and 213th Reports of the Committee.
2.1 ** * *
3.0 ** * *
4.0 ** * *
5.0 ** * *
5.1 ** * *
5.2 ** * *
5.3 ** * *
*** Relate to other matter.

68
5.4 ** * *
6.0 ** * *
6.1 ** * *
6.2 ** * *
6.3 ** * *
6.4 ** * *
7.0 Thereafter, the Committee took up Agenda No. 2 i.e., ‘to consider and adopt draft 212th and 213th
Reports of the Committee’.
7.1 The Committee first took up the draft 212th Report for consideration and adopted the same without
any change.
7.2 ** * *
7.3 The Committee then adjourned the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament.
8.0 A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matter.