-
\ 
\ 
) 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE INDIA!'\ ;\lAJORITY (AMEl' DMENT ) DILL, 1997 
{PRESEN TED TO THE RAJY/\ SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID I:"' "l HE LOK SAB HA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW UELHI 
SEPTEMBER , 199&/BHADRAPADA. 1920 (SAKA) 

-
\ 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE INDIA~ !\lAJORITY (AMENDMENT ) DILL , 1997 
(PHESENTEO TO THE RAJY 1\ SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID 1:--1 THE LOK SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW UELHI 
SEPTEMBER . 1998/BIIADRAPADA. 1920 (SAKA) 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
C.S.(H.A.}---81 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE INDIAN MAJORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABiiA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER·, 1998) 
913 RS F-1.,\ 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
SEPTEMBER, 1998/BHADRAPADA , 192Q (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
( 1. COMPOStttor< o~ Til~ Co.:.,urree 
2. REPOR1 
3. Rt:LEVAr< r Mtr<lrrl!s O> TH~ MEETINGs Ol' CoMMll TEE 
4. THe INOtAr< MI\J ORnv (AMtND MEN1') Btu, 1997 
PAvES 
(i)-(iii) 
1-2 
3-8 
9-12 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1997-98) 
I. Shn Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Smh 
4 Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jag:~nnath Mishra 
7 Shri Pranab MukherJee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Dev,h;~nker Dave 
• 10. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
11. Shn N Ra)endran 
12. Shn Ja laludin Ans~n 
11 13. Shri Raj Babbar 
14. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABRA 
15. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
16 . .Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17. Shri Jogatvir Singh Orona 
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
19. Shri Satya Pal Ja1n 
20. Shri Ra)abhau Thakre 
2!. Shri Vijay Gocl 
22. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swami 
23. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
24. Shri llrij Mohan Rum 
25. Kumari Mamata DancrJCC 
26. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
27. Shri M O.H Faroo4 
28. Prof. M. Kamson 
29. Shn ldri~ Ah 
30. Shn Gopal T;mc.fcl 
31. Shn Khelo,.ar Srngh 
, 32. Shri R ajcsh Prlot 
33. Prof. P .J. Kuricn 
34. Shri Ta~hmuddin 
35. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
36. Shri Sudhir Giri 
37. Shri N.S. V Chitthan 
38. Shr: N. Denni, 
39. 'lhri Kunwar Sarvn' J Singh 
40. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
41. Shri Kanshi Ram 
42. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
43. Shri Torno Ribn 
44. Shri Lal Dihari Tiwari 
913 RS "-l·A 
• 
(1) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMI'ITEE (1998-99) 
Shri Pranab Mukher;ee _ Chairma11 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shro Hansraj BhardwaJ 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4 Shri II. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shn Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri l'rafull Goradia 
8. Shn S. Ramachandran Pilla• 
9 Shn K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
ll Shri Janeshwar Mbra 
12. Shn Drupad Borgoham 
13. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvic Do> 
14. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
15. Shn S. Viduthala• Virumbi 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. Shn Lal Bihari Tiwaro 
19. Shn Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dau 
22. Shn Anant Kumar Hegde 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchid~na n d Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrimati Meiw Kumar 
27. Shn Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shn Mufti Mohammed Sayccd 
29. Shn C . K. Jaffer Sh;mef 
3(). Shri Nedurum~lli J:1nardhanu Reddy 
31. Shn lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shn Motilal Vora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
34. Shn Sudhir Giri 
35. Shn Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivasan 
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
39. Shri Lalu Prnsad 
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
41. Shri C'hada Sure~h Reddy 
42. Shrl Ranu.:sh C'handrapp:• Jigaji nagi 
43. Shri Ramshcth Thakur 
44. Shn A.F. Golam Osmani 
45. Shn S.K. nwbwmullna ry 
• 
(ii) 
Vll RS f-Z· D 

• 
( 
(iii) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi. Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
• 

• 
' 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs. having been authorisct.l by 11, 
present this Forty Sixth Report of the Committee. The Report pertains to the Indian 
MaJOnty (Amendment) Bill, 1997• The Bill seeks to amend the indian MaJority Act. 1875. 
~o ~s to prescribe 18 years a~ the age for attaining majonty on a uniform basis throughout 
the country 
2 Pursuant to the provi~ions of the Rules relating tn the Departmem ·rcla ted 
Parltamentary Standmg Committees, the Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha. refcrrctJ•• the 
Bill, as antroduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 13th August. 1997, ~nd pending therein, to the 
earhcr Committee (lm-98) for examination artd report. 
3. The Committee (1997·98) constdered the Bill 10 its meetmg held on 29th September, 
1997. and heard the Secret~ I) and other Officers of the Mtnistry of Law, Ju,:ice and 
Company AHatn> (Legislative Department) on the pr<wisie>ns contained in th<" Doll. The 
present Commltlee further considered the Bill Clausc-by-C!Ju,c tn its meeting hdJ on IJth 
August, 1998 
4. The Committee while constdering the Bill took nut.: of the following document' 
furnoshed by the Minbtry:-
(i) Background note on the Bill; and 
(ti) Replies to the written Questionnaire on the Bill prepared by the Secretariat. 
5. The Committee considered and adopted this Report in it. meeting hclc.J on the 9th 
Scptcrnbu , 1998. 
6. Section 3 of the lndi;on M<l)ority Act 1875 as of now prescnbes 21 years as the age fm 
m~:untng mojorily 1n respe~t of minors under guardians U]'pointt•d or declared by a Court of 
Justtcc ond J$ years for others. The Indian Majomy (/'F.~ndment) Bill, 199?, ~eeh to put 
the age uf majOrity for all minors at 18 years on a uniform ba~ts. As stated in the St:nen\cnl 
of Object~ and Reasons appended to the Bill. the atlwr:t'ment '" Section 3 of thc Indian 
majorityAct Hl75 as proposed in the Bill has been brough• :tbout after the Governm.·nt ha~ 
seen some merit in the representations received agaor." the picsctip(lon of different a~:c~ for 
:maintng the age of majority in respect of monor' The Boll Jl'io seck' to remove the world 
' Indian' from the principal Act and omit cerraon arch:11: .md redundant expre\stOil\ U\Cd 
theretn tO make the provisions in the Act somplc anu •·•ctd 
7 In the course of the exmnmation of the Bttl the Cotllflltt.ee \\as dpprised that on ~iew 
of the subJeCt matter of the propo:;ed legislatton falling under Entry 5 of the Concurrent Lt~t 
in the Sevt:nth Schedule to the Constitution of India, as per convention. the vie~ of the 
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations in the matter were invited wnh " 
clear stipulation that in case no comments/views were received from them by the 30th June, 
1997, it shall be presumed that they have no commems to offer in the matter. In response to 
that only the Governments of Andhra Pradesh. K3matcl;a Kerala, Maharashtra, RaJa~than, 
West Bengal and the Union Territory administrations of L-<.~kshadweep, Pondicherry, Daman 
& Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Ndtion3! Capiul T~rntory of Delhi responded with 
their concurrence to the proposal to bring the ag ... of rnajomy tor 3!1 minors at 18 ye;us. The 
Government of Jammu & Kashmir had stated :ha: !t would cx~mine and consider the 
amendmenr-, if any, made in the Centnol Law and th;1t it hld ns own law titled , ''The 
MaJority Act, Sanwat I 877" on the subject. No comments/views had been received frorn the 
other State l.overlltnt:nts and Union Terr itory adtmnistratinns . 
--- -- ------ --- - ------- ---
'Pu t>Jishc~ on the Calcite or llldtU, Extr•ordin•ry Part·ll, Scctoou 2 • .latcd the 13th August, 1997 
" Rooi)·a ~;obho Portinoncntnry ' ilullctin Part-11 , dated the 19Lh Augu.,, 1997 . 
• 

2 
7.1 The Commiuec pre.umes that in order to make the proposed changes to the existing 
law, .recc1pt of comments of all the State Govcmmcnts/UT Administrations arc not 
necessary. 
8. The Commiue.: sought clanfications from the Legl>l~tive Department particularly on 
two aspects . Firstly, the Commiucc wanted to know the reasons on account of which 
different ages for attaining the age of majority for nunor.. were prescribed earlier and 
secondly why the world 'Indian' was sought to he removed from the lndtan majority Act. 
1875 when there were st ill a number of Acts beginning with the world 'Indian' 1n force in the 
oountry. The Comn1iuee was told that the Statcmem of Objects and Reasons of the Bill 
does not ~pecifically deal with the reason' <•s rcgurds different _.ges for atta tning the age of 
majority as specif ied in Section 3 of the lnd1:!n Majonty Act, 1875. The Patna High Court, 
m the case of Gopeshwar Pra~ad vs. State of Bihar, (AIR 1951 Patna 570) while upholding 
the constitutionality of Section 3. had gone into the reasons for the aforesaid classification 
and found that the age of persons who are in-charge of the Coun of Wards was deliberately 
extended to 21 years, so that the estates might be properly 3dministered and the 
Government revenue adequately protected. 
9. Regarding the removal of the word 'Indian', the explanation given by the Secretary 
of the Dcpartnu;nt wa$ that many such laws were enacted during the Oritish Rule when the 
Briti~hers were admini.~tcring several colonies and they used tO prefix the world 'lndtan' with 
every Act to identify the country 10 which it applied. The Secretary submitted that the 
Department would do ~way with the word 'lndi:m' from all such act~ no sooner it got on 
opportunity 10 do so through similar amendment. In this context, the previous Commincc 
suggested that with regard 10 the deletion of the word 'Indian' from the central Jaws, the 
Legislative Department should bring forward an omnibus Dill which would have the effect of 
deleting the word 'Indian' wherever 11 occurs in the Central Laws . In response thereto, the 
then Secretary of the Department stated that he would examine the suggest10n. The 
Commillec reiterates the sugges110n of the predecessor Commiuee in that regard and direct> 
the Ligislative Departmem to take neto;ssary action in the maHer. 
10. The Comminee noted that the P;Hna H1gh Court had found justifiable reasons for 
prescribing the age of 2l ye;~rs a1. the age of majonty for minors in-charge of the Court of 
Wards and according!)' sought to know what JUSllfication the Legislative" Dept~rtment sa" Ill 
reducing 11 to l8 years. 1l1e clari f1cation given by the Department wa; that the social 
conuuion' ;~s obtnimng in the countr} are n.>" (;u more diffe~ent th:m tho'e preva1hng m 
1!!75 when the leg1slat1(ln wa~ enacted and at a tune when the youth ol 18 years have been 
given the nght to franchise to decide the political destiny of the count1y, there seems to be 
no justifi.:ation to keep the person> under guardians as minors till tht!y attam the age of :! I 
year,. 
ll. The Comm11h.:e is mclincd to ;~ccept the view that on account of advanced 
l<'lecommunicatiOn nLiwork and resultant means or communication a sea change has been 
bwught about 1n the sncial environment of the ,·ountry and the youth of the country is f:1r 
more enlightened than every before Consequ.:ntly, the maturity level among them has 
sub>tant1,tlly gone up as borne out by their bemg vested with the right to vote and thus 
participate in the political proce$~ of the country. The Committee, therefore, sees no reason 
\\hV the distTinunation m terms of d1ffere111 ages of majority for minors as contained m the 
Jnd1an !\1ajllrity Act, 1875 should not be clone away with. The Commiuee accordingly agre~s 
wuh the amendments us proposed in the Indian · ~~;ority (Amendment) Bill, 1997. 
12 ( lauscs 2 10 4 w.:re adopted by the Commou~e wi1hout any change. 
13. Clause I, the Enactmg Formula und the T itle ,, • . •dopted. 
14. 'I he Committee recommend> that the Bill a~ mtro<l••·· and referred 10 11, be 
pa"ed, 
NEw D~oLHI; 
Srptembc•r 9, 19911 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE 
Chairmu!l, 
Commiuee 011 Nome Ajfairv. 

] 
RELl::.Y.I\NT M!l\UTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTE E 
•m 
THIRD MEETING 
1 he: Com mince met ~~ 3.l'O ,. "'· on Monday. t},e 29th September. 1997. 111 Room 
t-;o n~ . rir>l Floor. Parliament llouse. New Delhi. 
:llf.il!lii:.RS PRESEJI.T 
I Shn Som l'al _ Chairman 
RAJY A SABH .\ 
2. Shn RHm Nath f-o, '"·" 
J Shri Annntr;i\' Dcuhankl'l D:t,,. 
4. Shn N. RaJcndran 
LOK SABHA 
5 Shri Ram Nagina Misl11u 
6. Shn Jagatvir Smgh Dro11~ 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8 Shri Rapbhau Th~kre 
9. Shl'i Vijay God 
10. Shn lshwa r Dayal Swam i 
.II. Shri Tara CIH111d Sahu 
12. Shri Brij Moh~m Ram 
13. Shn Manga t Rum Sharma 
14. Shn M.O.H. Farooq 
15. Prof M. Kam son 
J 6. Shri ldri' Ali 
17 Shr i Khelsai Sinl)h 
18. Shri I'.J. Kurien 
19. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
20 Shri N Dennis 
21 Shn Kunwar Sarvra1 Singh 
22 Shn Torno Riba 
.?3. Shri l..al B1hari Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sau~h Kumar Jomt '5ecretary 
Shn G.C . M1glani. Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Ja~on. Cornmntee O fficer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF L AW AND JUSTICE 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
1 Shri K.l... Mohonpu ri(l, Sel:rctary 
2. Dr. R<tghb ir Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri T. K. Vbwanathan, Legisla tive Counsel 
------
3 

.. 
i 
4 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
l Dr. V.K. Agg:uwal, Secretary 
2. Shri U K. Jha, Addauonal Legislative Counsel 
2 The Committee took up for consideration t~e Indian Majority (Amenomenr) Rill, 
1997 nnd heard the Secretary . Legislative Department, Ministry of La~>. and JustJ ,'c •"' 
vanous ospccl:. of the amendments proposed in the Dill. Responding to a qucrJ ~rom the 
Committee about the reasons for omi"<Sion of the w.>rd 'Indian' from the princtpa l Act, th<' 
s~cretary clarified that the Act W<ts quite old having heen enacted during the British 1 u:e 
when as a colonial power the Bmisher.; were enacting dtfferenl laws for different c;olome:. 
unde•· their rule and the worJ 'Indian' wus normally prefixed to every law enacted for India 
so as to distinguish it from the bw~ passed foi other Bntish colomcs. It was now sought 10 
be removed from the princip •• l Act in consonance wtth the ethos of an independent country 
Some more queries were also r3ised by we members of the Committee concemmg the points 
ad~ing out of the submis~ions made by the Secretary and as regaHh others he was directed 
to se nd written replies. 
3. The Commiuee. thereAfter tc'<>k up the Notatics (Amendment) Bill, 1997, for its 
con~tderallon. The Chamnan of the lornmittee. at the outset, brou~N certam aspects of the 
amendments as proposed m the Bill to the notice of the Secretary, Department of Legal 
Afftui~. Ministry of law and Justice . illld asked hnn to clarify those aspects, particularly. 
when they were not strictly in .:onformity with the recommendations or the Committee whic;h 
wa:. conslltuted by the Minbtr , to sru.Jv ;Ill aspects relating to the appointmen·. of Notanes 
and other m~ucrs relaung to the admin•\tration of the Act. The Secretary informed the 
Commiuee tlwt the proposed amendm~nt~ in the B1ll had been brought forward following 
discussions with the AJI India Notari<:~' As~ociat ion. The Law Ministers' conference held 011 
the 31st July and 1st AuguM, 1':197, had also concurred with these amendments. 
4. The members then sought ctanftcalt<•ns from the Secretary about the rationale behind 
malung a prova~tOn vtde Clau~e 4 in the Hill fo1 the Notaries to act as Protem Judge or 
Mag1Wate in the ~bsence o! )itting Judgl or Magistrate, Commissioner to record evidence 111 
~"Y civil or crimina l trial: and arbitrator, mediat or or conciliator, if so. required. The 
Sccn:tury replied thm many of these functions such dS recording of evidence were already 
bcmg. performed by the advocutes <~nd the proposc:d ;tmer.dment vide Clause 4 wa~ ju~: 111 
the nature of an enabling provision wnh a view to g•ve some rc~pectability to the statu~ of 
the Notaries. The Committee, however, did not feel covinced w1th this argument as tl1e 
amendment sought to give judicial/quasi-judicial powers to the Notaries without any 
accountability being attached thereto. One of the members of the Cornmiuee drew the 
attention of the Committee to the institution of Notaries prevalent in Pondicherry under 
French rule and suggested that the same could, if adopted, be an ideal proposition for the 
country. 
5. The Commiuce, therefore, felt the need to study in greater detail the various aspects 
related to the proposed amendments and in this context decided to examine the system of 
l'lotarie' prevailing in the United Kingdom, Switzerland, United Stales of America, 
M<tlaysia, Sweden and France and directed the Secretary to give a note in this regard. The 
Comminee also decided to visit Pondicherry at convenient time in near future to study the 
opcratton of the law of Notaries there vis-a-vis the one prevalent during the French rule and 
interact with some of the persons associated with the administratiort of the law during that 
period. The Comminee directed the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs to look into the 
Pond ichcrry model and send detailed replies to various points raised by the members on the 
subject The Commi ttee further decided to hear some of the representatives of the Delhi 
l'lotarie$ Association in the maner. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at lUXl A '1 on Tue:,Jay, 
the 30th September, 1997 . 
• 

l 
•x 
TE.'\ TH MEETING 
The ~._-, n:.ni•t.:c •1a: at .1.00 P.M. on Jlmrsda}, the 13th August, 1998, m Room No. 63, 
1 u ~.- t !onr, I'· rliJmcm H• ''C. N~v. j), >,._ 
\ t E~ffi EnS PRF;SE:>IT 
R \,!Y \ So\OHA 
~ ~ hn llan>r~J Bhard"'aj 
1 Shri H Hanuman'''·'Pra 
·I ~bn M Venk~iah ';;udu 
:> \!111 Pr:tfuJJ Goradia 
tJ Sl.n S. R<tmuchandrar Pillai 
7 Shr i K.M. Saifullah 
~. Shri C.M. Ibrah im 
'' Shn Janeshwar Misra 
10 '\hri Drupad l:lorgohain 
II Shri S Vidutllal~i Y1rmubi 
12. Dr (Ms.) P. 'klvt~ Da' 
LOK SAURA 
13. Shn Satya Pal Jain 
14. Shn Lal Dibari Tiwari 
15 Shd Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
lti, Shri Vaidya Vishnu D<tll 
17. Dr Swami Sachcludaoand l-bri Sakshi 
1:!. Maj. Gcn D.C. Khanduri 
19. Shri Ram Nagina M1shr ~ 
20. Shri Ravt Sitaram Natk 
21 Shn hhvarbhai Khodahhat Chavda 
22. Shri Moli LaJ Vora 
23 Shn Sudhir Giri 
24 Shri Samar Choudhur>· 
25. Shri Chada Surc~h Reddy 
26. Shr; S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Commi uee Officn 
- -----
Minute~ ol fir6t 10 ninth moetmg• of the Comm tllee (1998-99) related to some other matter>. 
5 

l 
6 
REPRESE NTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
1. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Secretary 
2. Smt. Sushma Jain, Join 1 Secretary 
3. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
2. • • • 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
5. • • • 
6. • • • 
7. • • • 
8. • • • 
9. • • • 
10. The Committee also took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Indian Majority 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997, and adop ted them without any change . Clause 1, the title and the 
enacting formula were also adopted . 
11. The Verbatim record of the procee dings was kept. 
12. The Committee then adjo urned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again at 12.30 P.M. on the 14th 
August , 1998. 
•• •Qmilled portions rcrer 10 some olhe r mauers . 
• 

xu 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9th September, 1998, in Room 
No. p3, First Ooor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Praoab Mukherjee __ Chairman 
RA,JYA SABRA 
2. Shn Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shn Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shn H. Hanumanlhappa 
5 Shri M. Venkaiab Naidu 
6. Shri Praruu Goradia 
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri K. M. Saifulla 
9. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
11. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
12. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwal'i 
13. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
14. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
15. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
16. Maj. Gen. B. C. Khanduri 
17. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
18. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
19. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhanan Reddy 
20. Shri lshvarbbai Khodabbai Chnvda 
21 Shri Motilal Vora 
22. Shri Sudhir Giri 
23. Shri Samar Choudhury 
24. Shri Mohan Singh 
25. Shrt Abdul Gha£oor 
26 Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
27. Shri Ramshelh Thakur 
28. Shri A. F. Golam Osman i 
29. Shri S. K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri II. C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
7 
• 

\ 
8 
2. The Committee considered its draft 46th. 47th and 48th Report on the (i) Indian 
Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997, (ii) Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997 and 
(iii) Administrators -Genera l (Amendment) Bill, 1998, respectively. Some members raised a 
few points with regard to draft 46th and 47th Reports. After a brief discussion the Chairman 
suggested that the spirit of the points raised in that regard could be suitably incorported '" 
the Reports. The Committee agreed to the suggestion and authorised the Chairman to make 
the necessary amendments/modification in the two Reports. The Committee thereafter 
adopted all the three Reports. 
2.1 The Committee authonsed its Chairman to decide about the dates for prese ntation/ 
l:•ying of these Reports in Rajya Sabha ~nd Lok Sabha in the next session of Parliament. 
The Commmee also authorised its Cha1rman and in his absence one member each of the 
Committee from the Rajya Sabba to preseO( the three Reports in that House. The 
Commmee further authorised two of its members from Lok Sabha, each 10 lay the three 
Reports there . The Committee left it to the Chairman to decide the names of the members 
for presentation I laying of the Reports. 
2.2 The Committee decided to lay the verbatim evidences connected With the three 
Repo rts on the Tab le of Rajya Sabha I Lok Sabha alongwith the Reports. 
3. • • • 
3.1 • • • 
4. • • • 
5. • • • 
6. • • • 
6.1 • • 
7 The Committee adjourned at 3.4S P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 
lOth Septem ber, 1998. 
· • •Omltlc.d portions refer 10 some o thet maUCIS . 
• 

As JNTROoucro "" RAIYA SABHA 
ON TiiE 13TH AUG., 1997 
.. 
BILL No. XLVID oF 1997. 
THE INDIAN MAJORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Majority Act, 1875. 
Bt it enacted by Parliament in the Fony-eighth Year of 
the Republic of India as foUows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Majority Shorr rule 
(Amendment) Act, 1997. 
9 of 1875. S 2. [n the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (hereinafter referred to Amend· 
as the principal Act), in the preamble, for the words "to rncnr of 
prolong the period of nonage, and to artam mote uniformity preamble 
and certain ty respecting the age of majority that now exists", 
the words "to specify the age of majority" shall be substituted. 
9 

10 
Amendment 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, the word ''lndi:~n·· ~hall be 
of section I. omitted. 
Substitution of 4. For sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act, tho:: following 
New secuon section shall be substituted. namely:-for s.:ctions 3 
and 4. 
Age 
majority 
persons 
domiciled 
India. 
or "3. (1) E very person domiciled in India shall attain the llgc of 
or majority on his completing the age of eighteen years and not 
before. in 
(2) In computing the ugc of any person, the day on which he 
was born is to be included as a whole day and he shall be 
deemed to have attained majority at the beginning of the 
eighteenth anniversary of that day"'. 

' I 
' 
• 
STATEME!'.'T OF OBJEcrs AND REASONS 
The lnJ1an Majority Act, 1875 which is a Central Act of 
general application and importance has been on the statute 
book for more than a century and the same needed review. 
2. The Government of India has received representations 
against the prescription of different ages for attaining the age 
of majonty in respect of minors under guardians appointed or 
declared by a Court of Justice, etc. at 21 years and others at 18 
years. Section 3 of the Indian Majority Act , 1875, inter alia, 
provides that the age of majority in respect of minors whose 
person or property, or both, a guardian, other than a guardian 
for a SUit, has been or shall be appointed or declared by any 
Coart of Justice before the minor has attained the age of 
eighteen years of age or in respect of minors whose property 
the superintendence of which has been or shall be assumed by 
any C<Jurt of Wards before the minor has auained the age of 
eighteen years shall be twenty-one years. The representations 
have been examined by the Government and it is found that 
there is no justification in discriminating the minors under the 
gu:ndi ans appointed or declared by a Court of Justice etc. as 
$t,oted above from the other minors. lt is, accordingly, 
proposed to amend section 3 of the Act prescribing a uniform 
age of majority of eighteen years for all minors. The Act h3s 
ubo U<;:<:n reviewed and certain archaic and redundant 
expressions and provisions are proposed to be omitted. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
New Dsvu; 
Tlte 8tlt August, 1997 RAMAKANT D . .KHALAP. 
11 

., 
STATEMEI'<T OF OBJECfS AND REASONS 
The lndia11 Majority Act, 1875 which is a Central Act of 
general application and importance has been on the statute 
book for more than a century and the same needed review. 
2. The Government of [ndia has received representations 
against the prescription of different ages for attaining the age 
of maJOrity in respect of minors under guardians appointed or 
declared by a Court of Justice, etc. at 21 years and others at 18 
years. Section 3 of the [ndian ¥ajority Act , 1875, inter alia. 
provides that the age of majority in respect of minors whose 
person or property, or both, a guardian. other than a guardian 
for a su1t, has been or shall be appointed or declared by any 
Court of Justice before the minor has attained the age of 
eighteen years of age or in respect of minors whose property 
the superintendence of which has been or shall be assumed by 
ony C..1urt of Wards before the minor bas anained the age of 
eighteen years shall be twenty-one years. The representations 
have been examined by the Government and it is found that 
there is no justification in discriminating the minors under the 
guardians appointed or declared by a Court of Justice etc. as 
~t.•led above from the other minors. lt is, nccordingly, 
pmposed to ame n~ section 3 of the Act prescribing a uniform 
3ge of majority of eighteen years (or all minors. The Act has 
also l.>~en reviewed and certain archaic and redundant 
expressions and provisions are proposed to be omitted. 
3. The Btll seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEw DEI .. m; 
The St/1 A t•gust, 1997 RAMAKANT D. KHALAP. 
11 

Preamble. 
Shon title. 
Age 
majonty 
persons 
dnmictled 
India. 
Age 
majorny 
<<>mputcd. 
• 
ANNE X URE 
EXTRACTS J>ROM TiiE INoJAN MAJoRITY Acr, 1875 
(9 O F 1875) 
• • • • 
WHEREAS, in t he case of persons domiciled in India it is 
expedient to prolong the period of nonage, and to attain more 
uniformity and certainty respecting the age of majority that 
now exists; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
1. This act may be called the Indian Majority Act, 1875. 
• • • • • • 
of 3. Subject as aforesaid, every minor of whose person or 
or property, or both, a guardian, other than a guardian for a suit 
within the meaning of Chapter XXXI of the C'.ode of Civil 
Procedure, has been or shall be appointed or declared by any In 
.,r 
how 
Court of Justice before the minor has attained the age of 
eighteen years, and every minor of whose property the 
superintendence has been or shall be assumed by any Court of 
Wards before the minor has attained that age shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the indian Succession 
Acl or in any other enactment, be deemed to have attained his 
majority when he shall have completed his age of twenty-one 
years and not before. 
Subject as aforesaid, every other person domiciled in India 
shall be deemed to have attained his majority when he shall 
have completed his age of eighleen years and not before. 
4. In computing the age of any penon. the day on which 
he was born is to be included as a whole day, and he shall be 
deemed to have attained majority, if he falls within the first 
paragraph of section 3, at the beginning of the twenty-first 
anniversary· of that day, and if he falls within the second 
paragraph of section 3, a1 the beginning of the eighteenth 
anniversary of 1ha1 day. 
11/ustrauons 
(a) Z is born in India on the fir•t day of January, 1850, 
and has an Indian domicile. A guardian of hts 
person is appointed by a Court of Justice. Z attains 
majority at the first moment of the first day of 
January, 1871. 
(b) Z is born in India on the twenty-ninth day of 
February, 1852, and has an Indian domicile. A 
guardian of his property is appointed by a Court of 
Justice. Z attains majority a! the rmt moment of 
the twenty-eighlh day of February, 1873. 
(c) Z is born on the first day of January, 1850. He 
acquires a domicile io India . No guardian is 
appointed of his person or property of any Court of 
Jus1ice, nor is he under the jurisdiclioo of any Court 
of Wards. Z attains majority at the first moment of 
the first day of January, 1868. 
12 