PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE 0~ HOME AFFAIRS 
FO RTY-SE CON D REPORT 
ON 
TilE LOTTERIES (REGULAT ION) BILL, 1998 
(!'RES ENTED TO TilE RAJYA SADHA 0:-1 THE 6TH JULY , 1998) 
(LAID 1:-1 THE LOK SADTIA ON THE 4TH JULY, 19?8) 
RAJ\' .\ SAD IIA SEC RETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY . I'JCJSIASI\ DIIA. 19:!0 (SAKA) 

C.S. (H.A.)-73 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITIEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY -SECOND REPORT 
ON 
THE LOTTERIES (REGULATION) BILL, 1998 
(PRESENTED TO TIIE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 6TH JULY, 1998) 
(LAID IN TilE LOK SABHA ON THE 4TH JULY, 1998) 
~2o4/RS-F-1 - A 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELID 
JULY , 199!VASADHA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. CoM"POSITION OF THE COMMITTEE. 
2. REPORT . . • • • • . . • 
3. REU!VAI"T Mtt~\TI"ES OF THE MEETINGS o F THE CoM"MlTTEE 
.n. o4/ RS- F-1 - B 
(iHii) 
1--4 
5-11 

• 
COMPOSmON OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee--Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Surcsh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiob Naidu 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri Prafull Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
9 Shri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
12. Shri Dnapad Borgohain 
13. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan 
14. Dr (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
"15. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Join 
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19. Shri Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidyn Vishnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrimati Meira Kumar 
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
31. Shri lshverbhni Khodabhai Chavda 
32 . Shri Motilal Vora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
34. Shri Sudhir Giri 
35. Shri Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
38. Mohd. AJi Asharaf Fatmi 
• Nomanaacd with effect from lllh June. 1998. 
(i) 

39. Shri Lalu Prasad 
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
43. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
44. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
@45. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
.SECRETARIAT 
(ii) 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
@Nomon>tcd with effect from 26th June, 1998 
22.o 4-/RS-F- :1-B 

.. 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Afl3irs, having been authorised by the Commiuee to present the Report on its 
behalf,. present this Forty-second Report of the Committee, rel~ting to the Lotteries 
(Regulation) Bill, 1998.' 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary StandiJlg 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajy:~ Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
referred' ' the Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998, as introduc~d in the Lok Sabha on the 27th 
May, 1998, and pending therein to the Committee for examination and report by 
July 3, 1998. 
3. The Ministry has submitted that the conduct of certain types of lonery trade 10 the 
country had been under scrutiny of the Government for quite some time. Complaints about 
malpractices involved in the lottery trade had :J!so been coming to the notice of the Ministry 
from time to time. The Central Government had been issuing guideiines to the State 
Governments from time to time to bring about uniformity in the conduct of lottery trade and 
to remove the clement of malpractices involved therein. The Supreme Court too in its 
interim order dated the 21st April, 1994 issued certain guidelines to regulate the loneries 
organized by the State Governments. But, even after all the measures of the Central 
Government and fixing of norms by Supreme Court for conduct of lotteries by the State 
Governments, the Ministry felt that there was an urgent need to bnng forward a legislation 
to remove evils from the lottery twde :tnd protect the intcresb of the gullible poor who are 
the worst sufferers. 
4. Considering the exigencies of the matter and as the Parliament wus not in session, 
the Lotteries (Regulation) Ordinance, 1997 was promulgated by the President on October l, 
1997. In order to give continued effect to the provisions of the Ordinance the Lotteries 
(Rcguhtion) Second Ordinance. 1997 and the Lotterie~ (Regulation) Ordinance, 1998 were 
promulgated by the President on December 30, 1997 "nd April 23, 1998, respectively. 
5. The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998 seeks to replace the Lotteries (Regulation) 
Ordinance, .1998. The salient features of the Bill are:-
(i) it bans the conduct and 
(ii) It regulates the conduct 
certain conditions; 
' sale of single digillin~Wnt lotterie~ in the country; 
' and sale of other types of lotteries by stipulating 
(iii) It enables the State Governments to ban the sale of lotteries of other States in 
their own jurisdiction; and 
(iv) It enables the Central Government to is~uc such directions as are considered 
necessary in this regard . 
6. Keeping in view the public importance and urgency the Committee (J 997-98) in its 
meeting held on the 30th June, 1997 suo moto decided to take up .. is~ues related to the 
Lottery Trade in the country and the desirubili ty of imposing :1 ban on the sale of lottery 
tickets" for detailed examination. The Commiuee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Home 
Affairs on the subject in its meeting held on thC< 11th July, 1997. The Committee also invited 
' Published in the Ciozene or Jnd1a, E•traordlnary Pan-11. Section 2, dJttd the 271h Mny, 1998 . 
.. R•JY• Sobhn Parhamcnwry Sultctin Pnn-ll. dated the t01h June. 1998. 

·---
2 
suggestions/views from the public, various organisations/institutions, State GovemmentsiUT 
Administrations in the maHer. While the subject was still under consideration of the 
Committee the President promulgated the Lotteries (Regulation) Ordinance, 1997 on 
October l, 1997. The Commillee in view of the promulgation of this Ordinance, in its 
meeting held on the 27th October, 1997, considered whether to continue examination of the 
subject and present its Report thereon or drop the subject from its agenda and take it up 
again in the event of the Bill replacing the Ordinance being referred to it. The Committee, 
however, deferred a decision in the mauer to a later date. The Committee could not 
deliberate on the issue further as it ceased to exist consequent on the dissolution of the 
Eleventh Lok Sabha on the 4th December, 1997. 
7. The Commillee considered the Bill in its sitting held on June 25, \998 and also heard 
the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the provisions or the Bill and the 
circumstances necessitating the present legislation. 
8. The Commillee in its, sitting held on June 30, 1998 briefly discussed the Bill and felt 
that it would not be possible to present the report thereon by the stipulated date i.e. 3rd 
July, 1998 and more time was required to further consider the Bill. The Committee decided 
that Hon'ble Chairman Rajya Sabha may be requested to grant a short extension of time 
upto 6th July, 1998 for presentation of its report. Accordingly, it authorised its Chairman, to 
approach Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for grant of extension of time. 
9. The Committee further considered the Bill in its silting held on the 2nd July, 1998 
and sought clarifications on the various provisions of the Bill from the Secretaries in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Department or Legal Artairs and Legislative Department. The 
Commillee thereafter took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 
10. The Commillee considered and adopted this Report in its silting held on the Jrd 
July, 1998. 
II. The Commillee notes with serious concern the adverse effec ts cast by the lottery 
trade on the public in general and persons belonging to the economically weaker sections of 
our society in particular. It observes that persons from middle income group, low income 
group and a large number of daily wage earners are lured most by the idea of making quick 
buck without sweating. The Committee notes that draws of lotteries are held every half an 
hour or 45 minutes and the lottery buye~ sit for the whole day purchasing tickets and 
waiting with a hope for a prize . This has the effect of turning people away from productive 
and purposeful avenues of employment. A large number of persons have been ruined on 
accou'nt of this trade. Cases of suicides by persons who lost everythin in hope of good 
fortune through purchase of lottery tickets are also coming to light at regular intervals. 
12. The Committee does not feel conv inced about the arguments advanced in favour of 
lollery trade which inter alia include providing employment to unemployed, being a source 
of revenue for the States organising them and investment of the profits earned through this 
trade on development and social welfare activities. The Committee disapproves 
development/welfare activities of this n:Hure which in turn does more harm to the society 
than good. The Committee is of the considered view that instead of providing employment 
through lottery trade Government should endeavour to find alternative productive 
employment for the unemployed persons. 
13. The ComrRittee notes the frequent incidents of irregularities and malpractices 
·wolved in the lottery trade and how unsuspecting buyer of lottery ticket is duped and 
cheated by the lottery mafia. 
' 
" . . 

3 
14. The Committee note that the Government has been seized of the question of lottery 
trade since 1960s, if not earlier . The Committee suo moto took up consideration of the 
subject and it heard the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in its meeting held on the 11th 
July, 1997. II also invited public opinion and views/comments from State Governments and 
Union Territory AdminislTations. Public notices to this effect were also published. Whilst the 
subject was still under consideration of the Committee and the Ministry of Home Affairs was 
aware of the exercise undertaken by it, the first Ordinance on lotteries was promulgated on 
October 1, 1997. This was followed by two successive Ordinances. The Committee strongly 
disapproves this course of action and considers it as an act of impropriety inasmuch as the 
Government did not wait for the recommendations of the Committee. When the evil was 
already prevalent in the society for quite some time~ what was the rationality of 
promulgating the Ordinance in haste when the subject was pending with the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee? 
15. Having considered the maner in all its aspects the Commiltee recommends thot as a 
first step the pre.sent Bill may be passed with some amendments as suggested in the 
succeeding paras. At the same time, in the light of the overwhelming view in the Committee 
for across the board ban on all kinds of lonerics, it strongly recommends to Government to 
come forward with a comprehensive Bill at the earliest in consultation with all the State 
Governments and the Union Territory administrations imposing complete ban on the lottery 
trade in the country having regard to the feasibility of effective implementation of the 
recommended legislation. 
16. The principal changes suggested by the Commiltee in the Bill and the reasons 
therefor are set out hereinafter:-
CLAUSE 4 
The Cause enumerates tbe conditions subject to which a lollery may be organised, 
conducted or promoted by a State Government. 
Sub-clause (e) of the clause provides that the prize money unclaimed within ~uch a time 
as may be prescribed by the State Government or not otherwise distributed, shall become 
the property of that Government. 
One of the conditions laid down by Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v/s. 
Suman Enterprises [1994 {4~ SSC 217) was that the sale proceed of the tickets either sold in 
retail or wholesale should be credited to the funds of the Government, however, the clause 
does not contain any such provisions. The Ministry of Home Atrnirs has stated that since the 
Bill relates to organisation, conduct and promotion of lolleries by the State Governments it 
is implied that the sale proceed of the louery tickets will get credited to the funds of the 
State Government concerned. The Commillee is not satisfied with the explanation and 
rec<>mmends that explicit provision in this regard may be incorporated in the Clause. 
Sub-clause (i) of the Cause provides that the number of bumper draws of a lottery shall 
not be more than six in a calender year. The Committee observes that the term "bumper 
draw" has not been defined in the Bill, as a result of which it can be interpreted differently 
by different organisers of the louery trade to escape from the effect of this provision. The 
Commillee understands that the intentio n of this provision is to limit the frequency of 
lotteries offering big prizes and thereby luring the common man for a quick buck. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the term "bumper draw" should be defined suitably 
to achieve the desired objective. 

4 
CLAUSES 
It empowen a State Government to prohibit within its territorial jurisdiction the sale of 
tickets of a lottery organised, conducted or promoted by another State. As this appears to 
be an enabling provision , one State Government may show favour towards the lottery 
orpniled by a particular State by not prohibiting it in its territory while banning the lotto·ry 
of another State Government. The Committee notes that as per proviso to Article 298 of lhe 
Constitution, the executive power of each State shall, in so far as a trade or business or such 
purpose is oot one wilh respect to which the State Legislature may make laws, be subject to 
legislation by Parliament. The Committee notes that as per Article 301, trade , commerce 
and intercoune throughout the territory of India shall be free, subject however , to other 
provisious of Part XD1 of the Constitution. The Committee fu~er notes that under Article 
302, Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade , commerce or 
intercourse between one State and another or within any part of the to:rritory of India as 
may be required in the public interest . Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 302, Article 
303 imposes restrictions on the legislative powen of the Union and of lhe States with regard 
to trade and commerce on grounds of giving preferential treatment to one State over 
another or discriminating between one State and another, by virtue of any entry relating to 
trade and commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule. 
The Clause appean to be violative ul Arti _cle 303. It is prr st discrirninawry . The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that this clause may be suitably modified with a view to 
ensuring its uniform application by all the States . 
CLAUSE 7 
The Qause provides for penal provisions for any person who acts as an agent, promoter 
or trader in any lottery organised, conducted or promoted in contravention of the provisions 
of this Act or sells, distributes or purchases the ticket of such lottery . Primary entity in the 
legislation is 'State'. U the State decides to itself organise lotteries then the violation of the 
provisions of the Bill by the concerned Government o£ficen is not punishable. The Clause 
may be suitably modified so as to include State authorities in addition to othen. 
17. The Committee agrees with the provisions contained in the remaining clauses of the 
Bill. 
18. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title wae adopted. 
19. The Committee recommends that the Bill, as reported by it, be passed. 
New Dl!l.Hl; 
July 3, 1998 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

I 
J 
l 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMI'ITEE 
•IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Commillee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25th June, 1998, in Main Comminee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Prafull Goradia 
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri S. Janeshwar Misra 
9. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
12. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
13. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dall 
14. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
15. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17. Shrimati Meira Kumar 
18. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
19. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
20. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
21. Shri Motilal Vora 
22. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
23. Shri Samar Choudhury 
24. Shri Mohan Singh 
25. Shri C. Srecnivaasan 
26. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
27. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
28. Shri A.F1 Golam Osmani 
•Minutes of firs\ 10 third meetinaa or 1he oommitteC trelate to some other matters discuss:td by the: comminc:c:.. 

6 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapao Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri R.D. Kapur, Additional. Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Ma1hot1'11, Joint. Secrel8ry 
• • • 
2. 1lle Chairman in the beginning welcomed the Additional Secretary, Ministry of 
Home Affairs and members of his team and asked him to make presentation on the 
Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998. Thereafter, the · Additional Secretary made the 
presentation. The Chairman and the Members of the Committee made submissions and 
sought certain clarifications on the Bill. The Additional Secretary replied to the queries. 
Thereafter, members made further submissions 011 the Bill. 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 7.00 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 
the 30th Jun e, 1998 . 
... Omitted portions relate to some other INitleR IIi• 1 d bJ lbe Committee. 

v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Commiuec met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30th June, 1998, in Room No . 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairma11 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri H. Hnnumanthappa 
4. Shri M. Venkniah Nuidu 
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
7. Shri Lui Bihari Tiwari 
8. Shri Pushpadun Shambhudan Gudhavi 
9. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dau 
10. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
11. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
12. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayecd 
13. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Ch:avda 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. Shri Mohan Singh 
16. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
17. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
18. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
2. 
3. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chauerjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Commiuee Officer 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
4. The Committee then brieOy discussed the Lotteries (Regul;otion) Bill, 1998 and felt 
that it would not be possible to present the Report thereon by the stipulated date 1.e. 
3rd July, 1998 and more t ime w:os required to further consider the Bill. The Committee 
decided that Hon'ble Chairman may be requested to grant a short extcmoon of time upto 6th 
July, 1998 for presentation of its repor t. Accordingly. it authorised the Chairman to 
approach Hon'ble Chairman for gran t of extension of time. 
••• Omitted portions rc1:ue 10 some other mntlcrs discussed by lhc Com1nit1ce. 
7 

8 
4.1 The Commiltee decided to seek further clarifications from the Secretaries in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department on the 
provisions of the Bill and decided to meet on 2nd July, 1998 for the purpose. 
5. • • • 
6. • • • 
7. • • • 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
9. The Committee odjoumed at 4.30 P.M to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 
2nd July, 1998. 
•• • Omine:d portions rclatt co some: o1hc1 m:allct'!\ discuMcd by 1he Commilltc. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 2nd July, 1998, in Room No. 139, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Pranab Mukherjee--Chairman 
RAJYA SABUA 
·2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
5. Shri Prnfull Goradia 
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
8. Shri Drupad .Borgohain 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Lal Bihar Tiwari 
11. Shri Vijay Goel 
!2. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
13. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dati 
14. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
•15. Shri Motilal Vora 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kuma r, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Challerjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF ROI\lli AFFAIRS 
I. Shri B.P. Singh, Secretary 
2. Shri R.D . Kapur, Additional Secret ary 
3. Shri V.K. Malhotra, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri P.C . Rastogi, Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
l. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Additional Secretary 
REPRESENTAT IVES OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
l. Shri R.L. Meena, Law Secretary 
2. Shri B.A. Agarwal, J.S. & L.A. 
2. The Committee resumed consideration of the Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998, and 
sought clarifications from the Secretaries i.n the Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of 
Legal Affairs and Legislative Department on the various provisions of the Bill. 
9 

I 
I 
\ 
--
10 
3. The Committee having considcrlld the Lotlery trade in all its aspects was of the 
t·on,>idcred v1ew that there was a need to put a total ban on all kind of Lotteries. As a first 
step, it, however. decided to pass the present Bill With amendments as require d in some of 
tis clauses. 
4. The Committee thereafter took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and 
suggested the following amendments-
CLAUSE 4 
The Clause enumerates the conditiMs ~ubject to which a lottery mny be organised. 
conducted or promoted by a State Government. 
Sub-clause (e) provides that the prize money unclaimed within such a time as may be 
prescribed by the State Government or not otherwise distributed, shall become the property 
of that Government The Committee, however, took note of one of the conditions laid down 
by Supreme Coun in the cuse of State of Haryana v/s Suman Enterprises (1994 (4) SSC 
217) wherein it has been mentioned that sale proceed of 1he tickets either sold in retail or 
wholesale should be credited to the funds of the Government. It found that this prov1sion 
has not been enumerated in the clause. The Committee was not satisfied with the 
explanation given in this regard by the Mini~try and recommended that a provision to this 
effect may be incorporated in the clau·;e 
Sub-clause (i) provides that the number of bumper draws of a lottery >hall not be more 
th s.x in a calandcr lear The Comm1ttee ob>erved that the term 'bumper draw' bas not 
been defined in the Bill and could be! mterpreted differently by different organisers of the 
Lottery trade to escape from the effect of this provision The Committee, therefore 
recommend ed that the rm 'bumpe1 dr· .. may be defined suitably to achieve the desired 
objective 
CLAUSE S 
The clause empowers of a State Government to prohibit within its territorial jurisdiction 
the sale of tkkets of a lottery organised, conducted or promoted by another State. The 
Comm 1ttec considered the clam;e at length and was of the opinion that the clause in its 
present form could be used by States in arbitrary and discriminatory manner which may 
wntamount to violation of Article 303 of the Constitution. The CommiHee, therefore, 
recommended that the clause m:1y be su1tably modifed to ensure its uniform application by 
all the States. 
CLAUSE 7 
The clause provides for penal provisiOns for any person who acts as an agent, promoter 
or trader in any loHcry organised, conducted or promoted in con travention of the proviSIOns 
of this Act or seUs distributes or purchases the t1cket of such louery. The Commiuee 
observed that primllry entity in the legislation was the 'State" and if the State itself decided 
to organise lotteries then the violation of the provisions of the Bill by the concerned 
Government officers was not punishable The Committee, therefore, recommended that the 
clause may be su1tably modified so as to include State authorities in addition to others. 
5. The Comm1ttee a&rced with the provisions contained in the remaining clauses of the 
Bill The Commiltee also adopted clause I. the Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill. 
6. The Committee then adjourned 111 6.20 P.M. to meet a&ain at 9.30 A.M. on Friday, 
the 3rd July, 1998. 

Vll 
SEVE NTH MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 9.30 A.M. on Friday, the 3rd July, 1998, in Room No. 63, First 
Floor. Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
4. Shri Pra full Goradia 
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
9. Shri Vijay Goel 
10. Shri Pushpadan Shambbudan Gadbavi 
11. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
12. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
13. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
14. Shri Motilal Vora 
15. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
16. Shri Sudhir Giri 
SECRETARI AT 
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chauerjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Comm iuee Officer 
2. The Commiuee co nsidere d ib draft Forty-second Report on the Lotteries (Regula­
tion) Bill, 1998 and adopted the s ~ me with: some amendments. 
3. The Commiuee decided 10 present/lny the Report in the Rajya Sabha on July 6, 
1998 and Lok Sabha on 4th July , 1998. It also decided to lay the Eviden ce tendered before it 
on the Bill in both the Houses. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence 
Shri $. Ramach;mdran Pillai to present/lay the: Report ;md Evidence in the Rajya Sabha and 
Shri Satya Pal Jain and in his absence Shri Vijay Gocl to lay the Report and Evidence in the 
Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.00 1\.M. 10 meet again at 3.00 P.M . on 
Wednesday, July 8, 1998. 
II 