PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 154
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23 , NOVEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 , NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)RD
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)

107
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(FORW ARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 ND NOVEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.) 299

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—16
CHAPTER  I : Background ............................................................................................. 1—3
CHAPTER  II : Presentation of Ministry of Home Af fairs ........................................ 4—5
CHAPTER  III : Issues Raised by the Members and response of the Ministry
of Home Affairs thereon ...................................................................... 6—14
CHAPTER IV : Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill and Recommendations
of the Committee .................................................................................. 15—16
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 17—29
5. A NNEXURE ...............................................................................................................................
THE B ORDER S ECURITY F ORCE (A MENDMENT) B ILL, 2011 ............................................ 31—40

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
*7. Shri Javed Akhtar
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri L. Raja Gopal
16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
17. Shri Naveen Jindal
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
* Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 st September, 2010 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who has resigned from the Membership
of the DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f.  the 13 th September, 2010.
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh V ardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Report on the  Border Security Force (Amendment)
Bill, 2011.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred
♣ the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill
2011 (Annexure-1) as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 18 th August, 2011 and pending therein, to
the Committee on 19 th August, 2011, for examination and report by 30 th September, 2011. After the
Bill was referred to the Committee, the Committee could not meet till 31 st August, 2011 i.e. its last
day of tenure due to engagement of Members in the Session of Parliament.  The Committee was
re-constituted w.e.f. 1
st September, 2011 and the first meeting of the Committee was held on
23rd September, 2011, in which it heard the presentation of the Home Secretary on the Bill. After
hearing the Home Secretary, the Committee sought extension of time from Hon’ble Chairman, upto
30
th October, 2011, for presentation of the report on the Bill which was acceded to.
3. The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011 seeks to amend Sections 4 and 139 of
the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
4. The Committee considered the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011 in three
sittings held on 23 rd September, 14 th and 24 th October, 2011. The Committee heard the official
presentation of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on 23 rd September, 2011 on the
Bill. As per practice, the Secretaries and senior officers of the Legislative Department and the
Department of Legal Affairs were also present in those sittings to respond to the queries of the
Members.
4.1 The Committee in its sitting on 14
th October, 2011 took up the Bill for clause-by-clause
consideration.
4.2 The Committee in its sitting held on 24 th October, 2011 considered and adopted this Report.
The Committee also authorized its Chairman to present the Report  to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
5. The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011;
(ii) Detailed background Note on the Bill as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) The Border Security Act, 1968;
(iv) Oral evidence tendered by the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Law and
Justice; and
(v) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on the queries raised by the
Members.
♣ Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 48728 dated 19 th August, 2011.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
24th October, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
BACKGROUND
1.0 According to Statements of Objects and Reasons of the Border Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2011, the Bill proposes to amend the long title, Section 4 and 139 of the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 to enable the Central Government to deploy the BSF in areas other than
the borders of India or its adjoining areas i.e. hinterland areas for internal security as well.
1.1.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs in the background note stated that the Border Security Force
was raised as an Armed Force of the Union in 1965 for ensuring the security of the Borders of
India and for matters connected therewith. The Border Security Force Act, 1968 was enacted to
provide for the constitution and regulation of an Armed Force of the Union for ensuring the
security of the borders of India and for matters connected therewith. Under Rule 15 of the BSF
Rules, 1969, the BSF has been assigned following tasks while deployed along the borders:–
(i) Promote a sense of security among the people living in the border area.
(ii) Prevent trans-border crimes, un-authorised entry into or exit from the territory of
India.
(iii) Prevent smuggling and any other illegal activity.
1.1.2 The Ministry stated that as on date, the Central Government has given powers to the BSF
personnel in border areas under the Customs Act, the Passport Act, the NDPS Act and the CrPC
by way of issuing suitable notifications under the respective legislations. These powers, so
conferred, primarily relate to arrest, search and seizure within the prescribed border belt, which
is 80 kms. in the State of Gujarat, 50 kms. in the State of Rajasthan and 15 kms. in the States
of West Bengal, Assam and Punjab.  No such limit has been prescribed in the case of J&K and
five North Eastern States viz., Meghalaya, Nagaland, Mizoram, Tripura and Manipur.
1.1.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note apprised the Committee that in the
recent times, apart from safeguarding the borders of the country (primarily with Pakistan and
Bangladesh), the BSF has acquired country wide presence as it has been assigned multifarious roles
and responsibilities in different parts of the country. A large segment of the force is deployed in
North-East, J&K for handling counter insurgency/anti-militancy operations and in the naxal affected
states like Chhattisgarh, Orissa etc. Besides, BSF is also extensively used during elections,
communal riots and other law and order duties including the natural calamities in various States,
in aid of civil authorities.
1.1.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs also apprised the Committee that recently, the BSF personnel
posted in the hinterland are facing certain limitations as to their effectiveness in aiding the State
Governments because of the fact that they cannot exercise the powers of arrest, search and seizure
under the CrPC in the absence of necessary legislation. While considering conferring of necessary
powers of search, seizure and arrest in the hinterland under the provisions of CrPC, Ministry of
Law and Justice was consulted by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Ministry of Law and Justice,
while furnishing their opinion on the matter had stated that powers under Sections 41 (1), 46, 47,
48, 49, 51 (1), 52, 53, 74, 100, 102, 129, 149, 150, 151 and 152 of CrPC cannot be given to
the BSF personnel in the hinterland unless Sections 4 and 139 of the BSF Act, 1968 are suitably
amended.

2
1.2 Section 4 of the BSF Act, 1968 reads as under:–
“4.(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Border Security Force for
ensuring the security of the borders of India.
(2) Subject to provisions of this Act, the Force shall be constituted in such manner
as may be prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Force
shall be such as may be prescribed.”
1.3 Section 139 of the BSF Act, 1968 was incorporated in the BSF Act, 1968 as an enabling
provision which provides that-
“The Central Govt. may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette direct
that, subject to such conditions and limitations, and within the local limits of such area
adjoining the borders of India , as may be specified in the order, any member of the Force
may:
(i) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passport
(Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the
Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, the Customs Act, 1962 or the Passports
Act, 1967 or of any cognizable offence punishable under any other Central Act;
or
(ii) for the purpose of apprehending any person who has committed any offence
referred to in clause (i), exercise or discharge such of the powers or duties under
that Act or any other Central Act as may be specified in the said order, being
the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, an
officer of the corresponding or lower rank is by that or such other Act
empowered to exercise or discharge for the said purposes”.
1.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs pointed out that though BSF has been used in the recent past
for various eventualities, Section 4 restricts the role of BSF to ensure the security of the borders
of India.  Therefore, in order to deploy the BSF in any part of the country for any emergent duties,
this Section needs to be amended for the effective utilization of the service of BSF in the hinterland
as well.
1.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that Section 4 and 139 of the BSF Act have
a close inter-relationship and both these sections were initially formulated to suit the requirement
of the Force in border areas.  During the enactment of the Act, the legislation, probably could not
foresee a situation where the BSF may have to be used for duties, other than those related to
security of borders of India. Presently, due to legal constraints, the State Governments on whose
request the BSF is deployed for maintenance of law and order, often find it not so effective, except
being of psychological value, in view of the fact that the personnel so deployed do not have the
necessary powers of search, seizure and arrest.  The Ministry felt that in the coming times, the
deployment of BSF personnel in the hinterland for fighting the menace of naxalism and terrorism
as also during elections and rioting, etc, is likely to increase and it is absolutely necessary that
suitable enabling provisions may be incorporated in the present BSF Act so that the force can be
put to best use in an effective manner without any legal complication in the absence of such
power.
1.6 Accordingly, following suitable amendments in Sections 4 and 139 of the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 have been proposed through the Border Security Force (Amendment)
Bill, 2011

3
(i) Section 4 (1) would read as under : “ There shall be an armed force of the Union called
the Border Security Force for ensuring the security of the borders of India and performing
such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government .”
(ii) Section 139 (1) would read as under : “The Central Govt. may, by general or special
order published in the Official Gazette direct that, subject to such conditions and
limitations, as may be specified in the order, any member of the Force may:–
(i) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passport (Entry
into India) Act, 1920, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Central Excise
Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999, the Customs Act, 1962 or the Passports Act, 1967 or of any cognizable
offence punishable under any other Central Act; or
1.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs argued that proposed amendment in section 139(1) is
consequential in nature as the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 has since been renamed as the
Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 has since been replaced
by the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
1.8 Justifying the proposed amendment in sections 4 and 139 the Ministry of Home Affairs
stated that similar provisions already exist in Sections 4 and 154 of the ITBP Act, 1992 and
Sections 4 and 153 of the SSB Act, 2007 as these Acts were formulated in recent times. The
Ministry also stated that as regards the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), Section 16 of the
CRPF Act, 1949 enables that the Central Government to confer or impose upon any member of
the force any of the powers or duties conferred or imposed on a police officer of any class or
grade by any law for the time being in force. Accordingly, vide Notification No.S.O.2821 dated
27
th July, 1976. The CRPF personnel have been empowered to exercise the powers of a Police
Officer under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 anywhere in the Country wherever they are
called upon to perform their duties. The Ministry therefore stated that considering the legal
constraints and the difficulties being faced by the State Governments as well as the Central
Government in proper utilization of the BSF in the hinterland, suitable amendments in Sections 4
and 139 of the BSF Act have been proposed.

4
4
CHAPTER-II
PRESENTATION OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
2.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 23 rd September, 2011, heard the Home Secretary on the
Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011. The Secretary (Internal Security), Ministry of
Home Affairs made presentation on the Bill.  Further explaining about the need for change in the
BSF Act, 1968, it was stated in the presentation that  there had been significant changes in the
nature of duties of BSF over a period of time from purely a border guarding force to other
important additional duties like, Counter Insurgency, Internal Security, Anti-Militancy and Anti-Naxal
Operations in North-East, J&K and LWE Affected Areas/ States, Deployment during Parliamentary
and Assembly Elections. States also requested for Panchayat Elections, assisting the State
Governments in aid to civil authorities for maintenance of Law and Order during internal
disturbances including communal riots etc, assisting the State Governments during Natural
calamities/disasters in different parts of the Country.
2.1 Outlining the limitation of the Present Provisions, he stated that the powers given under the
legislations like Cr.PC, etc. can be exercised only within the prescribed border belt, i.e. 80 kms.
in the State of Gujarat, 50 kms. in the State of Rajasthan, 15 kms. in the States of West Bengal,
Assam and Punjab. No powers, however, exist  in the States such as Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Odisha, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala etc. though BSF personnel are deployed in the hinterland for
Counter Insurgency, Internal Security (IS) and Anti-Naxal Operations, Elections duties, etc. He
further stated that no powers can be conferred in the Hinterland in the absence of the enabling
provisions  under the Act.
2.2 Giving further Justification for amendments brought in the Act, the Secretary (IS), in his
presentation made the following submissions:–
• The State Governments, on whose request the BSF is deployed are not able to use the
force effectively as the BSF personnel so deployed do not have the requisite basic
powers of search, seizure and arrest in the hinterland.
• In the absence of powers, deployment of BSF personnel is only of a psychological value.
• Such amendment shall further enable the Central Government to issue necessary
notifications by virtue of which powers can be bestowed on BSF in areas other than
Border areas
• Like the BSF, ITBP (Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force) and the SSB (Sashastra Seema
Bal) are also the Border Guarding Forces deployed on the Indo-China and Indo-Nepal
Borders respectively and performing additional roles in the hinterland.
• Provisions bestowing powers on CRPF on similar lines already exist under Section 16
of the CRPF Act, 1949 and the CRPF personnel vide Notification dated 27
th July, 1976
have been given powers of a Police Officer under the CrPC,  1973, wherever they are
called upon to perform duties.
• Such an enabling provision would permit the deployment of BSF personnel for internal
security duties in the hinterland and will allow the Government to empower them
appropriately to perform their duties.

5
• Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 has been renamed as Central Excise Act, 1944.
• Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 has been amended and renamed as Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999.
Issues raised by the Committee and the replies given by the Ministry
2.3 During the course of discussion, the Members of the Committee raised certain issues which
were replied by the Ministry. The issues raised and the replies of the Ministry are dealt in the next
Chapter.

6
6
CHAPTER-III
ISSUES RAISED BY THE MEMBERS AND RESPONSE
OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS THEREON
3.0 The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011 seeks to widen the scope for
deployment of the Force in the hinterland areas for counter-insurgency and anti-naxal operations,
during election period or even in maintaining law and order situation with additional power to
search, seizure and arrest which is otherwise not available to BSF. The proposed amendment,
therefore, is in a way, an enabling provision for the BSF which is already available to SSB and
ITBP.
3.1.1 During the sitting of the Committee held on 23
rd September, 2011 the Members of the
Committee raised some issues pertaining to the provisions and the implications of the proposed
amendments in the Bill. The issues raised by the members and the comments of the MHA thereto,
are enumerated as under:–
Issue Raised
3.2.1 Has there been any objection from any side on the issue of deploying the BSF in the
interior areas as well as to look after internal security? It is, in a way, a shortcoming in the
original law that is sought to be amended, though in actual practice, the government have been
using them all along.
Response of the Government
3.2.2 Responding to the query, the Home Secretary stated that no objection has been received so
far. The Home Secretary further stated that  the other paramilitary forces have enabling provisions.
Government had conferred powers on them, under various Acts, and using the BSF off and on for
internal security duties. But they have been handicap in performing their duties and discharging
their duties because they do not have any power to arrest or search, etc .
Issue Raised
3.3.1 Whether Amendment in section 4 will change the character, duties and responsibilities of
the BSF? Whether amending section 4 will not be liquidating  the entire Force to look after
only the internal security matters?
Response of the Government
3.3.2 The home secretary responding to the query made the following submissions:–
“we are not changing the character of the Force. What is happening in our country is that
the challenges, internal security challenges, are many.  We have a Force for dealing with
internal security challenges, i.e., the CRPF .  Now, we have been finding that the strength
of the CRPF is not enough and, often times, we need more personnel.
Now, one thing that I would like to clarify here is that whenever all these Forces
are deputed for any law and order maintenance or any internal security duty, they are only

7
deputed on the request of the State Government, on the requisition of the State Government.
They are not deputed otherwise. By and large, we have been finding, in the Ministry of
Home Affairs, that we run short of forces as compared to the demands from the State
Governments because the challenges are many. There are challenges in the North-East;
challenges in Kashmir; communal issues also crop up sometimes; and there is the challenge
in Central India with the Left Wing Extremism. We have other border-guarding forces as
well. We have the ITBP; we have the SSB; and we have the BSF .  Now, apart from CRPF ,
we have had to use the battalions of ITBP , SSB and BSF whenever any pressing requirement
comes up like elections or meeting any communal situation or if any problem exaggerates
in the North East or in Kashmir. So, we have had to use whatever Forces we have available
with us to meet such situations. The primary duties of the Force remain what they have been
raised for. For example, the primary duty of the ITBP remains border-guarding in the
Northern areas. The primary duties of the SSB remains border-guarding on the Indo-Nepal
border and the primary duty of the BSF remains border-guarding on the Western border as
well as the Bangladesh border. But we have battalions which we can deploy, because, we
have reserve battalions in all these Forces and when an exigency comes up, we have to
deploy them.”
3.3.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs in the written replies added further  that the amendment
would only make the legal position in line with the current practice of deployment of a small
fraction of the Force for urgent duties based on the request of State Government.
Issue Raised
3.4.1 When BSF personnel deputed from the border areas into the internal security
arrangement, they will tend to lose their focus and they will also lose their work culture and
whether BSF has surplus personnel for deployment to additional assignment?
Response of the Government
3.4.2 Responding to the queries of the Committee, the Home Secretary made the following
submission:–
“One, it is given that if we expose our forces more, their effectiveness reduces. In fact, over
time, that is what has happened in our country. In fact, over-exposure always reduces
effectiveness. We are aware of that and that is why our insistence with the State
Governments always has been that you must use your own State police first and only when
you find that your State Police is not sufficient or that you need assistance over and above
that, shall we deploy our Central paramilitary forces. So, we are very careful in making
available Central paramilitary forces for either internal security or law and order duties. Now,
in law and order duties, the CrPC is very clear that the forces are supposed to act under the
command of a Magistrate. That is in law and order. In internal security that is not the
situation. In internal security, the forces are supposed to act in widespread areas on their own
and there they need these powers. They need the powers to be able to arrest any militant or
any insurgent when they come across any militant or insurgent.  Otherwise, they would be
powerless and we will be deploying them with their hands tied behind their backs, especially
in areas where there is insurgency.  Now, Sir, insofar as border guarding is concerned, that
remains, and will remain, the primary duty of the Border Security Force, as it is for the ITBP
and the SSB. But there are exigencies when we have had to utilize their reserve battalions in
the interior.  But the essential tasks and border deployment does not get disturbed.”
3.4.3 In the written reply the Ministry of Home Affairs further added that the focus of BSF
would remain as Border guarding. Even presently out of 168 Bns of BSF, only 13 Bns are deployed

8
for Internal Security(IS)/ Anti Naxal Operations (ANO) duties and 7 Bns are in reserve for turnover
of Units for rest and relief; as also to meet any exigency. Thus BSFis already deployed for IS and
no additional force is being sought.
Issue Raised
3.5.1 Whether the officers and jawans who are deployed in NDRF , NSG, other paramilitary
forces and agencies are getting any deputation allowance or not? Deputation allowance is a
policy matter. BSF is going for some other responsibility. Will it be construed as deputation?
Response of the Government
3.5.2 No deputation allowance is being given to CAPFs for posting in NDRF/NSG. Only risk
allowance is being given to NSG personnel.
3.5.3 The Home Secretary responded to the query as under:–
“NSG is deputationist-Force. That is why it was envisaged that the NDRF will be
deputationist-Force so that the force-management will not become an issue. We depute
people for the NSG .  They get special allowance for the NSG. We depute people from the
BSF or SPG . They get a special allowance. We have converted battalions to NDRF. The
whole battalion has been converted.  So, it is not a deputation, and the personnel who go
there are rotated every five year.”
3.5.4 Regarding  the administration, it was stated that the administration continues with the BSF;
promotions, etc., continue with the BSF. They don’t have a separate cadre. The NDRF does not
have a separate cadre. Clarifying further, the home secretary stated that the deputation happens
when people go to another cadre.  Here, the cadre does not change. They retain their promotional
avenues in their parent Force. If the cadre is changed, then it becomes a deputation.
Issue Raised
3.6.1 Whether views of the State Governments were sought before bringing amendment to the
BSF Act? If so, what are their views?
Response of the Government
3.6.2 In response to the above query of the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed
the Committee that views/comments of all the State Governments on the proposed amendment to
section 4 and 139 of Border Security Force Act, 1968 were sought by the Ministry of Home
Affairs. The Ministry informed the Committee that comments were received from 13 states and 16
State Governments, where BSF is deployed, were reminded to expedite their views/comments,
However, the comments were not received till the finalization of the report.
3.6.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that the States of Himachal
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Goa, Karnataka, Mizoram, Orissa, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh
and West Bengal have concurred with the proposal of the Bill. The Government of NCT of Delhi
informed that since the BSF is not deployed in NCT of Delhi, as it is not a State/Union Territory
on the international border, the comments may be treated as nil.
3.6.4 The Ministry also stated that  the Sikkim Government expressed that law and order is a
state subject and it would be appropriate that BSF exercises these powers under the supervision
of the concerned District Administration. In regard to the other states, the Ministry stated that they
expressed no objection.

9
3.6.5 As regards, the final action taken to obtain the comments/views of the remaining State
Governments on the provisions of the Bill, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that consequent to
the meeting of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee, a reminder was issued on
27.09.2011 to the Chief Secretaries of the remaining 16 State Governments, with the request to
expedite their comments/views on the proposal positively by 07.10.2011. It was also mentioned
that, in the absence of their reply, the approval of the State Government will be presumed as
affirmation.  Chief Secretaries had also been asked telephonically to expedite the comments of the
State Government.
3.6.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed that since no comments had been received
till 13.10.2011, it may be presumed that they have no comments to offer.
Issue Raised
3.7.1 There is a talk of using Army to deal with left-wing extremism. Is there any hidden
agenda to regularise this, because BSF is being used to combat some movements within the
country, not on borders. Is it a step towards use of regular Army? What is the agenda of the
Home Ministry?
Response of the Government
3.7.2 There is no proposal of using Army to deal with Left Wing Extremism. There is no hidden
agenda of Government of India in getting the enabling provision inserted in the BSF Act. The
proposed provisions are in line with the provisions already existing in other CAPF Acts.
Issue Raised
3.8.1 Will the BSF act under the State Government or will the BSF act independently with the
powers confirmed by the Central Government?
Response of the Government
3.8.2 BSF would act under the State Government in aid of civil power and on the request of the
State Governments.
Issue Raised
3.9.1 Why the Government should not raise a different force for maintaining internal security
instead of empowering BSF , ITBP, SSB etc.?
Response of the Government
3.9.2 In response to the query, the Home Secretary responded as under:–
“The problem of raising a separate force would have been that the size of the Force was
not going to be very big. So, that would have led to stagnation in the Force and the force-
management would have become an issue. Therefore, on reflection, in the Ministry of Home
Affairs, it was thought that instead of raising a separate Force just like the NSG , the NDRF
can be a deputationist-Force.”
3.9.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its written reply further added that Internal Security
situation is dynamic and sometimes the State Governments need additional forces beyond what can
be given by CRPF which is the CAPF dealing exclusively with IS/ANO in the Country. ITBP and
SSB have already been enabled under their respective Acts to have such powers.

10
Issue Raised
3.10.1 Government wants more powers to perform other duties which may be entrusted by the
Central Government. What does that mean? Will it infringe upon the federal structure of our
Constitution?
Response of the Government
3.10.2 The Home Secretary during the deposition before the committee commented as below:–
“In the Home Ministry, we have been very conscious of the need to ensure that we do not,
in any way, even slightly infringe upon the federal character.  Basically, whatever records
were shown to me, all deployments are made only on the specific request of the State
Governments and repeated requests of the State Governments.  There are enabling provisions
and basically it has never been that the Government of India has ever or the Ministry of
Home Affair has ever acted unilaterally in these matters.”
3.10.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further in its written reply informed that this will not infringe
the federal character of our Constitution as BSF would be deployed only on the request of the State
Government and in the aid of Civil Power. The enabling provision is required for enabling the State
Governments to use the BSF effectively in the hinterland.
Issue raised
3.11.1 The BSF personnel so deployed do not have the power of search, seizure and arrest in
the hinterland. What is the justification of seeking more powers?
Response of the Government
3.11.2 Elaborating justification, the Ministry of Home Affairs in the written reply submits as under:
“If we deploy BSF, for example, in the North-East and they come across some insurgent
group in a particular area, they need to arrest those people. If they do not have the powers
for arrest under the CrPC. then they cannot legally arrest any person. That is the problem.
If we deploy BSF, for example, in Kashmir and they come across some militant, they need
to arrest that militant. They need powers for that. Right now, those powers are limited only
to a certain belt within the border area. If they are deployed in the hinterland, that power
is not available to them. So, that limits their utility.”
3.11.3 The Home Secretary also stated:
“that the powers which were right now conferred on the BSF can be exercised only within
a certain number of kilometers of the border, only in the border areas; but they have been
asked to deploy the BSF in the interior areas also under various exigencies such as
communal problems or even elections.
Issue Raised
3.12.1 What is the experience of ITBP and SSB of having such enabling provisions?  Is it
positive or otherwise?
Response of the Government
3.12.2  CRPF, ITBP and SSB Acts have similar enabling provisions. These powers have only
facilitated deployment of units of these forces for assisting the State Governments in using this
CAPF more ef fectively.

11
3.12.3 During the course of the discussion the Home Secretary stated that SSB is a new force and
it has a different character. He also stated that the experience with ITBP was very good and
wherever they had deployed ITBP , they proved to be very effective. He also informed the
Committee that there have never been any complaints .”
Issue Raised
3.13.1 Ideally speaking, military and paramilitary forces should not be deployed to manage
internal security matters. The Home Minister should advise or interact with State Governments
in order to strengthen their existing police forces and modernize their existing police forces.
Response of the Government
3.13.2 Responding to the query of the committee, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“Our attempt in the Home Ministry has been to strengthen the State Governments and we
have been requesting the State Governments to fill up their vacancies. We have been giving
them assistance and we have been urging them to modernize their police forces. We have
had a scheme for modernization of police forces and we are seeking to extend it and
enhance the Budget for the next five years. For this, we are in dialogue with the Planning
Commission and the Finance Ministry. For this year, I have got that extension and I am
quite certain that we will get extension for the next five years so that we can help the States
to modernize their police forces. We have been emphasizing the need for the State
Governments to strengthen their own police forces and fill up vacancies so that they are
able to manage their internal problems on their own. That is the message which we have
been giving.
3.13.3 In the written reply the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that BSF is a Central Armed Police
Force and there is no problem in deploying a CAPF to manage internal security matter in aid to
civil power on the request of the State Governments concerned.
Issues raised
3.14.1 Why have the BSF personnel not been deployed in Indo-Bhutan border areas and in the
Assam-West Bengal border areas? These two international and inter-State borders are very
strategic and crucial. Because of the non-deployment of the BSF before 2004, the United
Liberation Front of Assam and the National Democratic Front of Bodoland got upper hands to
set up some camps inside Bhutan and still there is infiltration of maoists through Assam and
West Bengal border via Bhutan. Why are the BSF and the Government of India not serious
enough in this matter? The SSB people are deployed, but they are useless. Rather they were
found involved in some timber trading business.
Response of the Government
3.14.2 The Ministry in the written reply informed the Committee that the Government, some time back,
on the basis of a Report of the Group of Ministers, which was constituted to look into these issues,
decided that one border will be managed by one force so that there is no multiplicity. So, the Indo-
Bhutan border is to be managed by the SSB. The SSB is a new force. It was also stated that the
government was trying to improve the forces, and that forces are not deployed between States.
Issue raised
3.15.1 In the case of natural calamities and communal riots, the Forces can be sent at the

12
request of the State Government under the command of the State Home Secretary. But for
maintenance of law and order, sending the Border Security Force in any part of the country
cannot be allowed.
Reponses of the Government
3.15.2 During the course of the discussion the Home Secretary replied as under:–
“… all these deployments are made only on the request of the State Government or in
consultation with the State Government. …more often than not, we have not been able to
give the State Governments the quantum of Force which they have asked for. …the
requirements of the State Governments or the demands from the State Governments have
always outstripped the availability of the Forces which we have. …..because there are
certain essential duties from which we cannot take our Forces away. It has never been the
case that we have used or we have deployed some Force unilaterally .”
Issues raised
3.16.1 BSF will have to fight naxals who are staying in the hilly areas, in the jungles and are
trained in the jungle warfare. To combat them, we also need Forces who are trained in jungle
warfare and know how to survive in the jungle, with no food supply.
Response of the Government
3.16.2 On the issue raised, the Home Secretary during his deposition responded as follow:–
“The other point which was raised was regarding the specific nature of the Forces and the
training required for different duties. Take the Border Security Force for example. Apart
from their duties of guarding the border, they are also trained for operations in the jungle;
they are also trained in internal security operations. That is a part of their training and that
is why we are able to use them in the North-East and in J&K. So, we use them only if
they have the required aptitude and the capability and they have been trained for it. Even
when we have deployed them for duties in the North-East, etc., we put them through an
orientation course.
Issue Raised
3.17.1 Will the patrolling and surveillance at Border not suffer quantitatively as well as
qualitatively as a result of withdrawal of forces from border areas?
Response of the Government
3.17.2 Responding to the query, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that
patrolling of border would not suffer as there is no plan to thin out the Force at the borders for
deployment for IS/ANO duties and only the reserve battalions are being deployed.
Issue Raised
3.18.1 Service conditions of BSF and similar other forces require a re-appraisal to make these
more attractive.
Response of the Government
3.18.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that the following steps have been taken to improve

13
the service conditions of BSF personnel in the recent past:–
(a) Better living conditions and amenities in BOPs and other establishments;
(b) Increased Risk and Hardship Allowances;
(c) Troops are encouraged to keep families at family station;
(d) Troops are permitted to avail adequate leave;
(e) In BOPs, jawans are given adequate rest and relief;
(f) The Government has sanctioned a number of Key Locations Plans (KLP) in
hinterland, which would facilitate the troops to keep their families in their home State;
and
(g) After implementation of 6
th CPC, the rank of ADIG has been upgraded to the rank
of DIG and the rank of ASI/GD has been introduced thus providing better
promotional avenues.  Moreover, the MACP scheme has also been extended to Force
personnel assuring three financial upgradation in the career at 10, 20 and 30 years
of service.
Issue Raised
3.19.1 Is there any proposal to accord facilities to these forces at par with Armed forces, taking
into consideration the new tasks being assigned to them which are normally performed by Armed
Forces at the Border?
Response of the Government
3.19.2 The Ministry in the written reply stated that the international borders are being manned by
the BSF, and not by the Army. The BSF is deployed with Army only on the Line of Control, and
in these areas, BSF is performing the similar tasks which is being performed by the Army at Line
of Control. The Ministry also stated that in consideration of the risk and hardships being faced by
the CAPFs, the risk and hardship allowances on the similar lines as granted to the Army, has been
granted to the BSF.
Issue Raised
3.20.1 The Govt. should accord similar powers to Assam Rifles operating in N.E. Region. The
Assam Rifles are under the Administrative control of Home Ministry.
Response of the Government
3.20.2 Assam Rifles is under operational control of Ministry of Defence and they have not sought
any such power.
Issue Raised
3.21.1 Since the present bill is aimed to enable the Central Government to deploy Border
Security Force in areas other than the borders of India or its adjoining areas, it will infringe
the Constitutional rights of State Governments and Chief Election Commissioner and as such
the Bill, in its present form, is unconstitutional.

14
Response of the Government
3.21.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs responded by stating that CAPFs are deployed only on the
request of the State Governments or the Election Commission in the aid of civil power. Similar
provisions already exist in the CRPF, SSB and ITBP Acts and the same have in fact helped in the
effective use of the CAPFs so deployed in the State Governments either at the request of the State
or the Election Commission.

15
15
CHAPTER-IV
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 14 th October, 2011 took up the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill. The Home Secretary, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and
Additional Secretary, Legislative Department were present during the course of clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill by the Committee.
Clause 2
4.1 Clause 2 proposes amendment in Section 2 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 which
pertains to the long title. In the said Section of the principal Act, after the words “borders of
India”, the words “or of any part of the territory thereof” are proposed to be inserted.
4.1.1 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3
4.2 Clause 3 intends to amend Section 2, sub-section (1), clause (a), Sub-clause (ii) of the
principal Act. The clause 3 proposes to insert the words “or in any part of the territory thereof”
after the words “borders of India”.
4.2.1 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 4
4.3 Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend in Sub-section (I) of Section 4 of the principal Act,
1968. The proposed amendment intends to insert the words “or of such part of the territory
thereof, as the Central Government, may by notification, specify” after the words “Borders of
India”.
4.3.1 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 5
4.4 Clause 5 proposes two amendments i.e. (a) of sub-section (I) and (b) in clause (i) in
Section 139 of the principal Act.
4.4.1 In the opening portion of sub-section (I), the words “adjoining the borders of India” are
proposed to be omitted.
4.4.2 In clause (i) of sub-section (I) for the words and figures “the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947”, the words and
figures “the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999” are proposed to be substituted.
4.4.3 The Clause is adopted without any change.

16
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
4.5 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted without any change.
4.5.1 The Committee adopts the Bill without any changes and commends for being passed.
4.5.2 The Committee also suggests that the concerns expressed by the Members of the
Committee, as enumerated in Chapter III may be addressed appropriately.

17
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23 September, 2011 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L. K. Advani
7. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
8. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
13. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R. K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri U. K. Bansal, Secretary (IS)
3. Dr. N. S. Kalsi, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Neeraj Kansal, Director
5. Shri Raman Srivastava, Director General, BSF
6. Shri Arvind Ranjan, Special DG, BSF
7. Shri Hari Gopal Garg, Chief Law Officer
8. Shri Vijay Yadav, Law Officer
19

20
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri N. K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. S. D. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Shri Udaya Kumara, Deputy Legislative Counsel
4. Ms. V eena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representative of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri R. L. Koli, Additional Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting of the re-constituted
Committee on Home Affairs. He expressed his pleasure  that most Members of the previous
Committee had been re-nominated. Shri Khagen Das, Shri Babulal Marandi, Shri Baijayant Panda,
Members, Lok Sabha, have been nominated to the Committee for the first time. Shri Sansuma
Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary and Shri Adhi Sankar are back in the Committee after a long gap. He
hoped the Members would extend their active participation and co-operation in carrying out the
responsibilities entrusted to the Committee. He wished all the Members a successful tenure in the
Committee.
2.1 Thereafter, he informed the Members that the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill,
2011 was referred to the Committee by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 19
th August, 2011 for
examination and report by 30 th September, 2011. After the Bill was referred to the Committee, it
could not meet till 31 st August, 2011 and its tenure had ended on that day. The Committee was
reconstituted on 15 th September, 2011 w.e.f. 1 st September, 2011 and the first meeting of the
reconstituted Committee was being held that day. The Chairman also informed the Members that
the Home Secretary was called that day to make presentation on the said Bill.
3.0-3.2 * * * *
Examination of Bills
3.3 The Chairman, thereafter, stated that two Bills, namely, the Enemy Property (Amendment
and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 and the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011 were
pending before the Committee. The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011, seeks to amend
certain sections of the BSF Act, 1968, and to widen the scope for deployment of Border Security
Force so that it could be used for counter-insurgency and anti-naxal operations in other than border
areas.
3.4 The Chairman further stated that the background note on the Bill and the related papers,
as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs, was circulated by the Secretariat.
Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
4.0 Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officers of the Ministry
of Home Affairs to the sitting of the Committee, and asked him to make presentation on the Bill.
4.1 Thereafter, the Secretary (Internal Security) made presentation on the Border Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2011. The main points of presentation are as under:–
(i) Role of BSF as envisaged in the Existing BSF Act, 1968
• BSF was raised as an Armed Force of the Union  in December 1965, for ensuring the
security of the Borders of India and for matters connected therewith
*** Relates to other matter.

21
• Deployed along the borders of Pakistan and Bangladesh, it has been assigned following
tasks under Rule 15 of the BSF Rules, 1969.
• Promote a sense of security among the people living in the border area;
• Prevent trans-border crimes, un-authorised entry into or exit from the territory of India;
• Prevent smuggling and any other illegal activity.
(ii) Need for change
• There had been significant changes in the nature of duties of BSF over a period of time
from purely a border guarding Force to other important additional duties like, Counter
Insurgency, Internal Security (IS), Anti-Militancy and Anti-Naxal Operations in North-
East, J&K and LWE Affected Areas/States, Deployment during Parliamentary and
assembly Elections.
• Also requested by the States for Panchayat Elections, assisting the State Governments
in aid to civil authorities for maintenance of Law and Order during internal disturbances
including communal riots etc, assisting the State Governments during Natural calamities/
disasters in different parts of the Country.
(iii) Corresponding powers to perform the role and duties
• To enable the BSF to accomplish the given tasks, Section 139 was incorporated in the
BSF Act, 1968, as an enabling provision to give powers  to BSF personnel under the
Central and the State legislations within the local limits of such area adjoining the
borders of India; and
• The Central Government has given powers of search, seizure and arrest  to BSF
personnel in border areas under the following acts by issuing suitable Notifications
under the respective legislations viz., Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), 1973; Customs
Act, 1962; Passport Act, 1967;Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS)
Act, 1985
(iv) Limitation of the Present Provisions
• The powers given under the legislations like Cr.PC, etc. can be exercised only within
the prescribed border belt, i.e., 80 Kms in the State of Gujarat, 50 kms in the State
of Rajasthan, 15 kms in the States of West Bengal, Assam and Punjab.
• No powers, however, exist  in the States such as Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha,
Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala etc. though BSF personnel are deployed in the hinterland for
Counter Insurgency, Internal Security (IS) and Anti-Naxal Operations, Elections duties,
etc.
• No powers can be conferred in the Hinterland in the absence of the enabling provisions
under the Act.
(v) Proposed changes
• Amendments  in Section 4 and 139 in the  BSF Act, 1968  as an enabling provision
to ensure change in legal position for effective performance of duties by BSF personnel
• These minor changes will bring BSF Act, 1968 in line with  the provisions already
existing in the enactments for similar forces namely ITBP Act, 1992 and SSB Act, 2007

22
• Some consequential corrections in the names of some Acts in view of change in their
names by respective Ministries
(vi) Justification for amendments
• The State Governments, on whose request the BSF is deployed are not able to use the
Force effectively as the BSF personnel so deployed do not have the requisite basic
powers of search, seizure and arrest in the hinterland.
• In the absence of powers, deployment of BSF personnel is only of a psychological
value.
• Such amendment shall further enable the Central Government to issue necessary
notifications by virtue of which powers can be bestowed on BSF in areas other than
Border areas
• Like the BSF, ITBP (Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force) and the SSB (Sashastra Seema
Bal) are also the Border Guarding Forces deployed on the Indo-China and Indo-Nepal
Borders respectively and performing additional roles in the hinterland.
• Provisions bestowing powers on CRPF on similar lines already exist under Section 16
of the CRPF Act, 1949 and the CRPF personnel vide Notification dated 27
th July, 1976
have been given powers of a Police Officer under the CrPC,  1973, wherever they are
called upon to perform duties.
• Such an enabling provision would permit the deployment of BSF personnel for internal
security duties in the hinterland and will allow the  Government to empower them
appropriately to perform their duties.
• Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 has been renamed as Central Excise Act, 1944.
• Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 has been amended and renamed as Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999.
5.0 Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised the following queries:–
(i) Jurisdictional dichotomy between powers of BSF and State Police if BSF is conferred
power of search, seizure and arrest in hinterland areas;
(ii) Whether the existing BSF strength is sufficient to safeguard the borders of the
country, if they are deployed for other duties;
(iii) assigning multifarious roles and responsibilities in different parts of the country to the
BSF personnel can detract the BSF personnel from its designated basic task;
(iv) whether it would not be appropriate to restrict the role of BSF personnel to ensure
the security of borders of India and to create specialized task force to combat the
menace of naxalism, insurgency/anti-militancy operations, law & order situations
including the natural calamities;
(v) Experience of conferring power of search, seizure and arrest to ITBP and SSB in the
hinterland areas.
(vi) Deputation allowance to BSF when going for risky ventures like combating the
menace of naxalism, insurgency/anti-militancy operations, law & order situations and
the natural calamities.

23
5.1 The Home Secretary and the Secretary, Internal Security responding to the queries of the
Chairman and the Members stated that the demand of the State Government for police forces
always over stripped  the supply side and Para Military Forces are called upon to undertake their
jobs only in the case of exigencies. Moreover, Border Security Forces are also skilled in jungle
warfare to combat the menace of naxalism and anti-militancy activities. If a separate police cadre
is created for these activities, it would be of a small size and there would be problems of
stagnation in the service. The Home Secretary further added that sending BSF in the hinterland
under the existing service rules did not amount to deputation, and therefore, they would not be
granted deputation allowances.
5.2 The Chairman then asked the Home Secretary to send written answers to the unanswered
queries. The Chairman then informed the Home Secretary that the Committee would meet again on
30.09.2011 to hear his views on recent bomb blast in Mumbai, Delhi and Agra.
6.0 The Committee then discussed the future course of the action on the Bill in the light of the
presentation made by the Home Secretary. The Committee felt that it needs to hear one or two
stakeholders and further hear the Home Secretary.  Besides, at least two more sittings for in-house
discussion, clause by clause consideration and adoption of the report would also be required to be
held.  The Committee also took note of the fact that it has to further examine and give report on
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 on which it has been given
extension of time upto 30
th October, 2011. The Committee felt that it would not be possible for
it to complete all stages of consideration of the Bill and present its report by 30 th September, 2011.
In view of the above, the Committee unanimously decided to seek extension of time upto the
30
th October, 2011 for presenting the report on the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
and authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. to meet again on 30 th September, 2011.

24
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 14 th October, 2011 in Committee Room
“A”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Baijayant Panda
8. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
9. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
10. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
11. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R. K. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri U. K. Bansal, Secretary (IS)
3. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
4. Shrimati Rashmi Goel, Joint Secretary
5. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary
6. Dr. N. S. Kalsi, Joint Secretary
7. Shri R. R. Jha, Joint Secretary
8. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
24

25
9. Shri Arvind Ranjan, Special DG, BSF
10. Shri N. Sandhu, Director (IB)
11. Shri D. P. Sinha, Additional Director (IB)
12. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
13. Shri D. Diptivilasa, Joint Secretary
14. Shri Rakesh Maria, ADGP, ATS, Maharashtra
15. Shri B. K. Gupta, Commissioner of Police, Delhi
16. Shri P. N. Aggarwal, Special Commission of Police
17. Shri H. G. Garg, CLO, BSF
18. Shri Dinesh Singh, Custodian, Enemy Property
19. Shri S. C. Sinha, DG, NIA
20. Shri Sanjiv Kumar Singh, IG, NIA
21. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
22. Shri Prakash Mishra, Special DG, NIA
23. Shri P. K. Srivastava, DIG (Int.), UP
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri N. K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
4. Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D. R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
3. Shri S. R. Mishra, DLA
Representatives of Government of NCT of Delhi
1. Shri P. K. Tripathi, Chief Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Mishra, Chief Engineer, PWD
2. * * * *
3. Thereafter, Chairman apprised the Members of the agenda of the day i.e.in-house discussion
and clause-by-clause consideration on (i) Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011; and (ii)
The Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 and further clarifications of
Home Secretary and the Chief Secretary, NCT of Delhi, Chief Engineer, PWD (Delhi Government)
on recent bomb blasts in Mumbai, Delhi and Agra.
I. The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
4. The Committee then held internal discussion on Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
The Chairman informed the Members that the Bill had been discussed in detail by the Committee and
in the earlier meeting, the Home Secretary was asked to seek views of the remaining 16 State
Governments on the Bill. The Chairman informed the Members that the Ministry furnished the following
information in regard to the views of State Governments and other queries raised by the Member.
*** Relates to other matter.

26
(i) There had been no objection from any State;
(ii) The amendments would only make the legal position in line with the current practice
of deployment of a small fraction of the Force for urgent internal security duties
based on the request of the State Government;
(iii) Focus of BSF would remain as Border Guarding Force as out of 168 Bns of BSF,
only 13 Bns are deployed for internal security/anti-naxal operations duties and 7 Bns
are in reserve for rest and relief and to meet any exigency;
(iv) Remaining 16 States were again given time till 7
th October, 2011 for sending their
comments. No comments have been received from these States although they were
reminded on phone also;
(v) There was no proposal of using Army to deal with Left Wing extremism; and
(vi) Regarding experience of ITBP and SSB in enabling these provisions, these powers
have only facilitated deployment of units of these forces for assisting the State
Governments in using this CAPF more effectively.
4.1 On the contention of a Member that the Bill was unconstitutional, the Chairman observed
that it could not be the case because the other two Bills passed earlier for ITBP and SSB were
also having the similar enabling provision which had been approved by the Parliament.
4.2 The Committee took up clause by clause consideration of the Border Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2011. Clauses 2, 3, 4 and 5 were adopted without any change. Clause 1, the
Enacting Formula and the Title were also adopted without any change. The Committee also
suggested that the concerns expressed by the Members of the Committee, may be addressed
appropriately.
5.0–7.13 * * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 1.40 
P.M. to meet again on 24 th October, 2011.
*** Relates to other matter.

27
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 24 th October, 2011 in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
8. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Babulal Marandi
13. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
16. Shri Harsh Vardhan
17. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
27

28
2. Shri R. R. Jha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Dinesh Singh, Custodian, Enemy Property
4. Shri D. B. Sahu, Additional Custodian, Enemy Property
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V . K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Shri N. K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. G . Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
5. Shri K. V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representative of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D. R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
3. Shri S. R. Mishra, DLA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. He
informed them about the agenda of the day which was to
(i) consider and adopt draft 154
th Report on Border Security Force (Amendment)
Bill, 2011; and
(ii) consider the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second Bill, 2010 clause-
by-clause and draft 155 th Report thereon and adopt the report.
I. Draft 154 th Report on the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
3.   The Committee then took up draft 154 Report on Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill,
2011 for consideration. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Report without any
change.
4.0-12.0* * * *
13. The Committee, then, decided to present the following Reports to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha during the inter-session period since the House is not in session as the Committee has been
given extension upto 30
th October, 2011 to present the Reports on the Border Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 and the Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Bill, 2010:–
(i) 152 nd Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 136 th Report on Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the
country;
(ii) 153 rd Report on the Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 135 th Report on Border Fencing and Floodlighting
Projects along Indo-Pak Border;
(iii) 154 th Report on the Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011; and
*** Relates to other matter.

29
(iv) 155 th Report on the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010
alongwith Evidence tendered before it.
14. The Committee also authorized its Chairman to present the reports to Hon'ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
16. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 
A.M.

ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN THE RAJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XXXV  of 201 1
THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Border Security Force
(Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Boarder Security Force Act, 1968 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, after the words
“borders of India”, the words “or of any part of the territory
thereof” shall be inserted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in
clause ( a), in sub-clause ( ii), after the words “borders of India”,
the words “or in any part of the territory thereof” shall be inserted.
33
Short title
and
commencement.
47 of 1968. Amendment
of long title.
Amendment
of section 2.

34
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
the words “Borders of India”, the words “or of such part of the
territory thereof, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify” shall be inserted.
5. In section 139 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) in the opening portion, the words “adjoining the
borders of India,” shall be omitted;
(b) in clause ( i), for the words and figures “the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946,
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947”, the words and
figures “the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Foreigners,
Act, 1946, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999”
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment of
section 139.
1 of 1944.
31 of 1956
7 of 1947.
1 of  1944.
31 of 1946.
42 of 1999.

35
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Border Security Force Act, 1968 has been enacted to
provide for the constitution and regulation of an Armed Force of the
Union for ensuring the security of the borders of India and for
matters connected therewith.
2. The long title and section 4 of the aforesaid Act provide
that the Border Security Force shall be for ensuring the security of
the borders of India. Section 139 of the aforesaid Act contains
provisions relating to powers and duties that may be conferred or
imposed on the members of the Border Security Force within the
local limits of areas adjoining the Borders of India.
3. However, the Border Security Force is also deployed in
areas other than the borders of India due to various exigencies.
Certain exigencies during which the Border Security Force is so
deployed are,—
(a) to counter insurgency operations and anti-naxal
operations;
(b) for internal security duties, (including duties during
elections, communal riots, maintenance of law and order);
4. In view of the necessity of deploying the Border Security
Force in areas other than the borders of India or its adjoining areas
for the exigencies specified in the preceding paragraph, it has
become necessary to amend the long title, sections 4 and 139 of the
Border Security Force Act, 1968 to enable the Central Government
to deploy the said Force in areas other than the borders of India or
its adjoining areas.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
P. CHIDAMBARAM
N
EW D ELHI;
The 8th August, 2011.
35

36
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend section 4 of the
Border Security Force Act, 1968 and clause 5 thereof proposes to
amend section 139 of the said Act. The proposed amendments only
involve extending the areas of operation of the Border Security
Force from the existing border areas to the areas other than border
of India or its adjoining areas and to confer on the members of the
said Force powers and duties in those areas under various central
laws specified in the Act. As the said Force has already been
constituted and functioning, no financial implications are involved in
the proposed Bill.
36

37
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend sub-section ( 1) of
section 4 so as to widen its scope by providing that the Border
Security Force shall ensure security not only in the border areas but
also in other parts of the territory of India. For that purpose, it is
proposed to empower the Central Government to notify the
territories in which the Border Security Force shall ensure security.
2. The matter in respect of which the said notification may
be issued is a matter of procedure and administrative detail, and as
such, it is nto practicable to provide for it in the proposed Bill itself.
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
37

38
38
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE B ORDER S ECURITY F ORCE A CT, 1968
(47 OF 1968)
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an
Armed Force of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders
of India and for matters connected therewith.
** * **
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “active duty”, in relation to a person subject to this
Act, means any duty as a member of the Force during the
period in which such person is attached to, or forms part of,
a unit of the Force—
(i) which is engaged in operations against an
enemy, or
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on
patrol or other guard duty along the borders of India,
and includes duty by such person during any period declared
by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette as a period of active duty with reference to any area
in which any person or class of persons subject to this Act
may be serving;
** * **
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION  OF THE F ORCE AND CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE OF THE
MEMBERS  OF THE F ORCE
4. ( 1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the
Border Security Force forensuring the security of the borders of
India.
** * **
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
139. ( 1) The Central Government may, by general or special
order published in the Official Gazette direct that, subject to such
conditions and limitations, and within the local limits of such area
adjoining the borders of India, as may be specified in the order, any
member of the Force may,—
Definitions.
Constitution
of the Force.
Powers and
duties conferable
and imposable
on members of
the Forec.

39
(i) for the purpose of prevention of any offence
punishable under the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920,
the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Central Excises
and Salt Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, the Customs Act, 1962 or the
Passports Act, 1967 or of any cognizable offence punishable
under any other Central Act; or
* *** *
34 of 1920.
16 of 1939.
1 of 1944.
31 of 1946.
7 of 1947.
52 of 1962.
15 of 1967.

40
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.