 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2020/ Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
 
229 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
MANAGEMENT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND RELATED ISSUES 
 
 (Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2020)  
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON …..………NOVEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON ….…NOVEMBER, 2011)

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
C.S. (H.A.)-450 
      
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
MANAGEMENT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND RELATED ISSUES 
 
                                     
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha 21st December, 2020)  
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2020/ Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) - (ii)  
2.  PREFACE (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iv) - (viii) 
4.  REPORT      1 - 67 
 Chapter – I   
INTRODUCTION 
1 - 3 
 Chapter – II 
INDIA’S PREPAREDNESS TO TACKLE THE PANDEMIC 
4 - 10 
 Chapter - III           
AUGMENTATION OF HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
11 - 31 
 Chapter-IV 
 SOCIAL IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
32 - 48 
 Chapter -V 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
49 - 63 
 Chapter-VI 
REVISITING THE LEGISLATIONS AND KEY LESSONS LEARNT 
64 - 67 
5.  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
 
68 - 81 
6.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 83 - 102 
7.  ANNEXURES 104 - 160 
 
 
 
 

 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. #Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. *Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi 
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
29. Shri Ravneet Singh 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Ms. Naina Gupta, Assistant Research Officer 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
_______________________________________ 
* Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e .f. 4 th February, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by resigna tion of  Shri Shamsher Singh 
Manhas, MP, Rajya Sabha  from Committee w.e.f. 31st January, 2020. 
#  Shri Dinesh Trivedi nominated w.e.f. 22 nd July, 2020 consequent upon the vacancy arose on the expiration of term of Shri Manish Gupta from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2020.  
 (i) 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Dr. Anil Jain  
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
6. @Vacant 
7. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh 
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
9. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmishta Sethi 
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
30. Shri Ravneet Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
_______________________________________________________________________________________ 
 @ Vacant on the expiration of term of Shri Neeraj Shekhar from the mem bership of Rajya Sabha on 25 th November, 
2020 
(ii)

PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Twenth Ninth Report on 'Management of COVID-19 Pandemic and 
Related Issues‘. 
 
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on 15 th July, 2020 decided to examine the subject 
'Management of COVID- 19 Pandemic and Related Issues‘ and held three meetings, i.e., on 15 th 
July, 2020, 19 th August, 2020 and 27 th August, 2020.  In these meetings the Committee heard the 
views of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare
, Ministry of Railways, ICMR, AIIMS, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium  Enterprises, 
Indian SME Forum, Laghu Udyog Bharti, Federation of Indian SME, Department of Financial 
Services, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Food and Public Distribution, Confederation of 
Indian Industries, National Sample Survey Office, Indian Statistical Institute and Government of 
NCT of Delhi.  
 
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has mainly relied upon 
the following documents:- 
 
(i) Background Notes furnished by the Departments/Ministries for various meetings; 
(ii) Presentations made by Home Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium  Enterprises, Department Of Financial 
Services, Department of Food and Public Distribution and other officials during 
various meetings of the Committee;  
(iii) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affai rs, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium  
Enterprises, Ministry of Education, Department of Health Research, CII, TISS, 
IRDAI, CMIE and various other stakeholders and experts to the questionnaires on 
the subject sent by the Secretariat; and  
 (v) Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the 
Committee's meetings, as furnished by the Departments/Ministries and other 
stakeholders during various meetings of the Committee. 
(vi) Verbatim transcripts of the meeting of the Committee held on 15 th July, 2020, 19 th 
August, 2020 and 27th August, 2020. 
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 18 th December, 2020 and 
adopted the same. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For further convenience, 
abbreviations used in the report have been compiled in a table under the Acronyms section.  
 
 
18th December, 2020 
New Delhi 
Agrahayana 27, 1942 (Saka) 
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                          
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
(iii) 
 
 

 ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AIFIs All India Financial Institutions  
AICTE All India Council of Technical Education 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy  
AIDS Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome 
AFMS Armed Force Medical Service  
ARDS Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome  
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist  
BSL Bio Safety Level 
BC Business Correspondents  
BBIL Bharat Biotech International Ltd  
BoCW Building and other Construction Workers  
CII Confederation of Indian Industry  
CHAMPION
S
 
Creation and Harmonious Application of Modern Processes for Increasing 
the Output and National Strength 
 
CPs Commercial Papers  
CRS Cytokine Release Syndrome  
CMIE Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy  
CFR Case Fatality Ratio  
CBNAAT Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test 
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 
CRR Cash Reserve Ratio  
COPD Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
CDSCO Central Drug Standard Control Organisation  
CLCSS Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme  
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises  
CSOs Civil Society Organisations  
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises  
DCGI Drug Controller General of India  
DHR Department of Health Research 
DGHS Director General of Health Services  
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DTH Direct to Home 
DAISY Digitally Accessible Information System  
DIKSHA Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing 
DRDE Defence Research Development Establishment 
DM Disaster Management  
DOPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
DNG Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
DAE Department of Atomic Energy 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs  
DFS Department of Financial Services  
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation 
DM Act Disaster Management Act 
EG Empowered Group 
EPF Employees' Provident Fund 
EPS Employee Pension Scheme  
ESDP Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme  
ECR Electronic Challans cum Returns  
EPFO Employees' Provident Fund Organisation 
ETBs Energized Textbooks  
ELISA Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
ENA Extra Neutral Alcohol  
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme  
EXIM Bank Export-Import Bank of India 
FSN Farming System for Nutrition 
FCI Food Corporation of India 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FPI Foreign Portfolio Investment 
GeM Government e Marketplace 
GoM Group of Ministers  
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GOI Government of India  
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HFCs Housing Finance Companies  
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus 
HCQ Hydroxychloroquine  
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IISER Indian Institute of Science Education and Research 
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
IIP Index of Industrial Production  
ICI Index of Core Industries  
iGOT Integrated Government Online Training 
IDSP Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme  
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
 
 
 
(v)

 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IJMR Indian Journal of Medical Research  
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering And Tourism Corporation 
INR Indian Rupee 
ICGEB International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
IIFCL India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. 
IPRs Intellectual Property Rights  
JMG Joint Monitoring Group  
JAM Joint Admission Test for Masters/ Jan-Dhan-Aadhar-Mobile  
KCC Kisan Credit Cards  
LDM Lead District Manager  
LPA long-period average  
LTV Loan To Value  
LMCS Lean Manufacturing Competitiveness Scheme  
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MERS Middle East Respiratory Syndrome  
MEA Ministry of External Affairs  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development 
MSMEs Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises  
MUDRA Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency Ltd.  
MCCD Medical Certification of Cause of Death  
MPC Monetary Policy Committee  
MFIs Micro Finance Institutions 
MFs Mutual Funds 
MSEs Micro and Small Enterprises  
MSE-CDP MSE Cluster Development Programme  
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development  
NCC National Cadet Corps  
NBFCs Non-Banking Financial Companies 
NDTL Net Demand and Time Liabilities  
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd  
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NDMP National Disaster Management Plan  
NHB National Housing Bank 
NIACL New India Assurance Company Limited  
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NROER National Repository of Open Educational Resources  
NSS National Service Scheme 
NSSO National Sample Survey Organisation 
NSIC National Small Industries Corporation  
 
(vi)

 
NARI National AIDS Research Institute  
NIV National Institute of Virology 
NISHTHA National Initiative for School Heads‘ and Teachers‘ Holistic Advancement 
NIMHANS National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences 
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority  
NEC National Executive Committee  
NIAID National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI  National Institution for Transforming India 
NIOS National Institute of Opening Schooling 
NGOs Non- Governmental Organisations  
NITI National Institute for Transforming India  
NCDC National Centre for Disease Control  
NPA Non-Performing Asset  
PHEIC Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
PDS Public Distribution System 
PPE Personal Protection Equipment 
PMGKY Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana 
PMS Procurement and Marketing Support  
PMJDY Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana  
PM-GKAY Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana  
PMEGP Prime Minister‘s Employment Generation Programme  
PMS Post Marketing Surveillance  
PMI Purchasing Managers Index  
PCGS Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme  
RATs Rapid Antigen Tests  
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RT-PCR Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain Reaction  
RRBs Regional Rural Banks  
SARI Severe Acute Respiratory Illness  
SARS Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome  
SARS-CoV Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus 
SDMA State Disaster Management Authority 
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund  
SDRMF State Disaster Risk Mitigation Fund  
SEC Subject Expert Committee  
SAEs Serious Adverse Events  
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India  
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle  
SBICAP State Bank of India Capital Market 
SLF-MF Special Liquidity Facility For Mutual Funds  
 
 
(vii)

 
SII Serum Institute of India  
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures  
SCIC Standing Committee of IIT Council  
SLF Special Liquidity Facility 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle  
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries  
TReDS Trade Receivables Discounting System  
UG Under Graduate 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UTs Union Territories 
USA United States of America 
UAM Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum  
VTMs Viral Transport Media   
VLP Virus Like Particles  
VRDLs Virus Research & Diagnostic Laboratories  
WHO World  Health Organisation 
XVFC Fifteenth Finance Commission 
YUKTI  Young India Combating COVID with Knowledge, Technology and 
Innovation 
YoY Year over Year  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii)

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Brief about Corona viruses 
 
1.1.1 Corona viruses are a large family of viruses that may cause illness in animals or humans. 
Rarely, animal Corona virus can evolve and infect people and then spread between people. In 
humans, several Corona viruses are known to cause respiratory infections ranging from the 
common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). Corona viruses are named for the crown-like spikes 
on their surface. There are four main sub-groupings of Corona viruses, known as alpha, beta, 
gamma, and delta. Human Corona viruses were first identified in the mid-1960s. The seven Corona 
viruses that can infect people belong to alpha and beta groups and they are: 
 
COMMON HUMAN CORONA VIRUSES
 
  
(i) 229E (alpha Corona virus) 
(ii) NL63 (alpha Corona virus) 
(iii) OC43 (beta Corona virus) 
(iv) HKU1 (beta Corona virus) 
 
OTHER HUMAN CORONA VIRUSES 
 
(i) MERS-CoV (the beta Corona virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, 
or MERS) 
(ii) SARS-CoV-1 (the beta Corona virus that causes a severe acute respiratory 
syndrome, or SARS) 
(iii) SARS-CoV-2 (the novel Corona virus that causes Corona virus disease 2019, or 
COVID-19) 
 
1.1.2 People around the world commonly get infected with human Corona viruses 229E, NL63, 
OC43, and HKU1 that cause mild respiratory illness. Sometimes Corona viruses that infect animals 
can evolve and make people sick and become a new human Corona virus. Three recent examples of 
this are SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, and MERS-CoV. The transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 is 
higher than SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV and even H1N1 (2009). Case Fatality Rate is less than 
SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV and H1N1 (2009). India had managed to keep the country insulated 
from SARS Corona virus outbreaks in the past. 
 
1.2 The Present outbreak of novel Corona virus and COVID- 19 
 
 

2 
 
1.2.1 The outbreak of the Novel Corona virus disease was initially noticed in a sea food market in 
Wuhan City in Hubei Province of China in mid- December 2019. The Novel Corona virus — called 
severe acute respiratory syndrome Corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes COVID-19. 
 
1.2.2 COVID-19 Pandemic, detected as an outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology in China 
was notified to W.H.O. on 31st December, 2019. The outbreak was confirmed to be due to a novel 
Corona virus on 7 th January, 2020. World Health Organisation (WHO) [under International Health 
Regulations] has declared this outbreak as a "Public Health Emergency of International Conce rn" 
(PHEIC) on 30 th January 2020. The disease spread to all provinces of China and presently is being 
reported from countries/territories/areas worldwide. The COVID-19 was declared Pandemic by the 
World Health Organization on 11 th March, 2020. The pandemic is still ongoing. As of 10 th 
December, 2020, around 69.6 million cases and 1.58 million deaths due to COVID-19 have been 
reported globally (source: MoH&FW). 
 
1.2.3 In India the first travel-related case was reported from Kerala (Cochin) on 30th January, 
2020. Subsequently, the disease spread to almost all States/UTs. As of 10 th December, 2020, a total 
of 97,67,371 cases and 1,41,772 deaths have been reported in India (source: MoH&FW). 
 
1.2.4 The patients affected with COVID-19 have symptoms of fever, cough, breathing difficulty 
and other respiratory problems with wide variation from mild to severe (including the development 
of severe acute respiratory illness or SARI). 
But, there are large number of cases with no or 
minimum symptoms and are known as Asymptomatic patients. 
 
1.2.5 The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note dated 
4th  May, 2020 that the overall Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) is 6.8 % globally, which is considerably 
lower than that was reported during SARS (15%) and MERS- outbreaks (37%). The CFR varies by 
location and intensity of transmission. The mortality is high among elderly persons, particularly 
those with co-morbid conditions like coronary artery disease, diabetes, hypertension, chronic 
respiratory diseases, etc. 
 
 
1.2.6 The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in its updated 
background note dated 13 th July, 2020 that the proactive delineation of containment and buffer 
zones, aggressive testing, early and timely detection, adherence to clinical protocols & better 
ICU/hospital management helped India in having one of the lowest fatalities in the world. 
The 
present Case Fatality Ratio across the globe is. 2.27% whereas in India it is 1.45% (as on 10 th 
December, 2020) (source: MoH&FW). 
 
1.3 Impact and Management of ongoing Global Pandemic 
 
1.3.1 COVID-19 Pandemic has created an unprecedented global crisis and the Government of 
India is treating the same as National Disaster. When the lockdown was imposed in March, 2020 no 
one was aware of the magnitude of this problem. Pandemic hit the country with devastating effect 
when the economy was already sliding. Reviving the economy is crucial for restoring the jobs both 
in the organized and informal sectors. The MSMEs are one of the worst-hit sectors of the economy 
due to the COVID-19 Pandemic and measures are needed for its restructuring and revival.  More 
than 30% of the production comes from MSMEs, which employ a sizeable part of the Indian 
workforce. About 45% of exports also come from the MSME sector.  Therefore, any sharp decline 
in this sector has an overall impact on the Indian economy. 
 

3 
 
1.3.2  Our country has the largest PDS network which is instrumental in meeting the objective of 
the National Food Security Act, 2013 in normal circumstances.  However, the COVID-19 Pandemic 
has particularly affected the poor and the vulnerable sections, both in rural and urban areas, in the 
form of loss of livelihoods and incomes. A database of the numbers and demographic distribution 
of such sections will help in planning for the security of their livelihoods in case of a Pandemic like 
COVID-19. 
 
1.3.3 The responsibility of the management of this unprecedented crisis has been on the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, including the phase-wise lockdown, unlocking, resumption of the economic 
activities, inter-State movement of people and goods, state of preparedness and coordination with 
the States. During the meeting of the Committee held on 15 th July, 2020, the Home Secretary made 
a presentation before the Committee on the management of COVID-19 Pandemic. The Committee 
was informed that the national lockdown was imposed w.e.f. the 25 th March, 2020 as large-scale 
restrictions imposed by various States had no uniformity in implementation. The Home Secretary 
apprised the Committee that the guideline issued during the first lockdown brought uniformity by 
stopping all inter-state movement except permissible activities covered under essential services. 
Later on, certain relaxations were also added to these guidelines. When the lockdown was extended, 
new guidelines were issued for opening up more activities in the rural economy. Many essential 
commercial activities were allowed that also provided employment opportunities to people who had 
suddenly lost their employment. In these guidelines, the concept of national directives was brought 
out. A few of the important points of these national directives were wearing masks, maintaining 
social distance, avoiding spitting in public, prohibition of liquor consumption in public, working 
from home, etc., as these were found to be effective in checking the spread of infection. In the thir d 
phase of lockdown, the concept of the negative list was introduced.  There was a negative list of 
activities which were prohibited.  All other activities were permissible except in containment zones 
and red zones. The Home Secretary also informed about Unlock 1.0 and 2.0 where most of the 
activities were relaxed in a graded manner except restrictions in certain zones.  Further, the 
Committee observed that activities have been relaxed in a much calibrated manner during the 
different phases of lockdown and unlock to manage the crisis. 
 
1.3.4 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been involved in taking necessary ac tions to 
control the spread of COVID-19 and also in expanding testing facilities, laboratories, and in setting 
up the Core Group for COVID-19 vaccine candidates. The public health system has played a critical 
role in handling this Pandemic and infrastructural up-gradation along with the response 
mechanisms. 
 
1.3.5 
Although the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been 
at the forefront in coordinating the national response, the COVID-19 Pandemic has wider 
implications and adversely impacted various sections of the society. This unprecedented crisis was 
affecting people globally and was likely to stay for long. The Standing Committee was of the 
considered view that there was an urgent need to listen to everyone involved in the management of 
the crisis to deliberate and to learn from the experiences gained in better management of such crisis 
in the future. Therefore, the Committee, heard the views of various stakeholders in the Committee 
meetings held on 15 th July, 2020, 19 th August, 2020 and 27 th August, 2020 to discuss and acquaint 
itself with the various aspects of the Pandemic situation, its impacts on various sectors and the 
assessment of the effort made by the Government of India to control the spread of this Pandemic. 
The Committee also consulted various experts to understand their perspectives about the causes and 
consequences of the Pandemic. 

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
INDIA'S PREPAREDNESS TO TACKLE THE PANDEMIC 
 
2.1 Early Measures taken by the Government before the declaration of the Pandemic by 
W.H.O. 
 
2.1.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note apprised the Committee about the pro-
active steps taken by the Central Government before the first case was reported in India are as 
under- 
 
(i) India adopted a proactive, pre-emptive and graded response to deal with the 
unprecedented global crisis declared as a "Pandemic" by the World Health Organization. 
The Government was proactive in regulating, restricting and even prohibiting in-coming 
international passenger traffic through immigration checks to contain the spread of COVID-
19 in India. 
 
(ii) The Government of India also managed and controlled the visa-issuance process and 
effective screening of passengers tested and traced for COVID-19 and had taken quick and 
timely measures in anticipation of the potential crises reaching our country even before 
India had the first confirmed case and geared up all its Ministries much before WHO 
declared COVID-19 to be a "Public Health Emergency of International Concern". 
 
(iii) On 17 th January 2020, Union Health Secretary advised all State/UT authorities to 
examine and take necessary actions for adequate hospital preparedness to meet with any 
potential emergency. 
 
(iv) First Travel Advisory was issued on 17 th January, 2020 and additional advisories 
related to international travel were issued periodically. Travel restrictions were imposed and 
existing visas were suspended periodically to commensurate with the severity and spread of 
the disease from the countries which reported a high number of cases and deaths. 
Progressively, flights in India were restricted.  
 
(v) On 18th January 2020, thermal screening was started for all passengers coming from 
China and Hong Kong at three international airports. From 4 th March, 2020 thermal 
screening was initiated for all international flights and an advisory to follow standard health 
protocol for COVID-19 was issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(MoHFW). The thermal screening was progressively extended to seaports and land borders.  
 
(vi) Central Government took all steps to protect the people of our country much ahead 
of what many other countries took subsequently. India started thermal screening of 
travellers/ passengers even before the first case was reported in India while as per WH O 
Situation Report No. 67 dated 27th March, 2020, most of the other countries initiated thermal 
screening in stage II and stage III of the infection in their respective countries. 
 
2.2   Subsequent Measures 
  

5 
 
2.2.1 The Committee was also informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note 
about the continuous review, monitoring and evaluation of preparedness and response measures 
done at different levels which are as under- 
(i) The Central Government constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 3 rd  February, 2020 
under the chairmanship of Dr. Harsh Vardhan, Union Minister of Health & Family 
Welfare and Ministers from other Ministries viz. M/o Civil Aviation, M/o External 
Affairs (MEA), M/o Home Affairs (MHA), M/o Shipping, M/o Chemical and Fertilizers 
as members, to review, monitor and evaluate the preparedness and response measures 
being taken regarding the management of COVID-19 in the country. The Committee of 
Secretaries under the Cabinet Secretary is reviewing the situation regularly. 
 
(ii) The MHA under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 had constituted 11 Empowered 
Groups on different aspects of COVID-19 management in the country to make informed 
decisions on issues ranging from (i) medical emergency planning, (ii) availability of 
hospitals, isolation and quarantine facility, disease surveillance and testing, (iii) ensuring 
the availability of essential medical equipments, (iv) augmenting human resource and 
capacity building, (v) supply chain and 
logistics management, (vi) coordination with the 
private sector, (vii) economic and welfare measures, (viii) information, communications 
and public awareness, (ix) technology and data management, (x) public grievance and 
(xi) strategic issues related to lockdown. 
 
(iii)The senior officers in the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare are constantly reviewing  the 
evolving scenario. The Joint Monitoring Group (JMG) under the Chairmanship of 
Director General of Health Services (DGHS) advises MoHFW on technical matters. 
Meetings at regular intervals to review the COVID-19 situation in the country have been 
held under the Chairmanship of the Union Home Minister. 
 
(iv) From 21 st March, 2020 onwards, control room operations in MHA has been expanded by 
making its 
functioning 24X7 under the supervision of senior officers of the level of Joint 
Secretaries along with the representatives of key Central Ministries. A number of 
helplines were dedicated to the people of the North-Eastern Region. Control Rooms 
were opened to attend to the queries of States/UTs or other Ministries on lockdown 
measures, addresses inter-Ministry and inter-state coordination issues, etc.
 
 
(v) To contain the spread of COVID-19 in the community, on 22 nd March, 2020 mass 
transportation services i.e. metro and rail traffic was suspended till 31 st March, 2020. On 
22nd March, 2020, all international flights coming to India were suspended and land 
borders were sealed for incoming persons. On 24 th March, 2020, domestic air traffic was 
also suspended. 
 
2.3 Coordination with the States/ UTs and Other Stakeholders 
  
2.3.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs was asked regarding the details of consultations/ coordination 
with the State Governments before imposing nationwide lockdown w.e.f. 
25th March, 2020.  
 
2.3.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its response to the questionnaire stated that the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare had conducted regular 
video conferences with the State Health 
Departments. One such meeting took place on 27 th January, 2020 in which the issues of contact 
tracing, availability of PPE kits, sanitizers, testing facilities and other related measures connected 
with surveillance of persons under quarantine were discussed. Members of the National Disaster 

6 
 
Management Authority (NDMA) had interaction by way of video conference with the SDMAs/ 
Disaster Management Departments in February, 2020 on various aspects of the COVID-19 
situation. In February and March, 2020 before the national lockdown, the members and officers of 
NDMA visited some states and interacted with the Chief Secretaries of states and other officers 
regarding the seriousness of the measures to be taken. On 20 th March, 2020, the Prime Minister 
interacted with Chief Ministers of all the States via video conferencing to discuss measures to 
combat COVID-19. On 22 nd March, 2020,
 Cabinet Secretary held a high-level meeting with Chief 
Secretaries of all the States/ UTs via video conference. Given the need to contain the spread of 
COVID-19, it was agreed that there was an urgent need to extend the restrictions on the movement 
of non-essential passenger transport including inter-state transport buses.  The Ministry also stated 
that before the declaration of national lockdown w.e.f. 25 th March, 2020 most of the State 
Governments/UTs had already declared lockdown (fully and partially) in their respective State/ UT 
based upon their assessment of the situations. Therefore, Nationwide Lockdown was announced 
considering the global experience and the need for consistency in the approach and implementation 
of various measures across the country.  
 
2.3.3 The Committee was also informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note 
about the 
additional steps taken by the Central Government before imposing lockdown which are as 
under-  
 
(i) To enable, Secretary, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) for taking effective 
measures for containment of COVID-19, on 11 th March, 2020, Union Home Secretary, 
is the Chairperson of National Executive Committee (NEC), delegated power under 
Section 10(2)[(i) & (l)] of Disaster Management Act, 2005 to Secretary, MoHFW to 
enhance preparedness and containment of COVID-19 and other ancillary matters 
connected thereto. This enabled MoHFW to issue advisories on COVID-19 
management. 
On 16th March, 2020, MoHFW issued an advisory to States/ UTs on social 
distancing measures which were to remain in force till 31st March, 2020. 
 
(ii) To augment the availability of funds with the State Governments, COVID-19 was declared 
as a notified disaster by Central Government on 14 th March, 2020 to assist the State 
Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) placed at the disposal of respective State Governments. 
This allowed SDRF to be used to supplement the State resources for setting up 
quarantine facilities; sample collection and screening; setting up additional testing 
laboratories; cost of consumables; purchase of personal protection equipment (PPE) for 
healthcare, municipal, police and fire authorities; purchase of thermal scanners; 
ventilators, air purifiers, and consumables for Government hospitals.
 
 
(iii)The Prime Minister in his address to the nation on 19 th March, 2020, appealed to everyone 
to observe "Janta Curfew" on 22 nd March, 2020. The MHA also advised States and UTs 
to observe "Janta Curfew" across the country on 22 nd March, 2020 to promote voluntary 
social distancing as a measure to control the COVID-19. All the citizens of the country 
voluntarily observed the "Janta Curfew" wholeheartedly and conveyed their strong 
determination to deal with this global crisis by rising to the occasion in a mature and 
determined manner. 
 
 
(iv) To enforce social distancing, most of the States/UTs imposed restrictions on the movement 
of public transport, inter-state movement, closure of educational and coaching institute, 
schools, shops, commercial establishments, offices, factories, etc under the Epidemic 
Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management (DM) Act, 2005 and Criminal Procedure 

7 
 
Code, 1973.  By 24 th March, 2020, most of the State and UT Governments issued 
complete/partial lockdown orders by invoking the provisions of the above-mentioned 
Acts. To bring uniformity across the country, DM Act, 2005 was invoked on 24 th March, 
2020 to take effective measures for ensuring social distancing and to contain the spread 
of COVID-19.
 
 
2.4 Impact assessment before announcing the nationwide lockdown and measures 
identified by the Governments to minimize various adverse impacts 
 
2.4.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its response to the questionnaire stated that the COVID-19 
has been a unique Pandemic wherein the nature of the disease, its short-term or long-term health 
and social impacts, disease dynamics, curative and preventive aspects were hardly known even a s 
late as March, 2020. Understanding of the disease has evolved over the last few months and the 
lockdown strategies have also been fine-tuned based on improved understanding. Consequently, 
countries have adopted a variety of lockdown strategies based on their circumstances and 
understanding.  
  
2.4.2 Several fiscal and monetary measures were taken by Governments and central banks across 
the world to contain the unprecedented health crisis caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic and its 
economic fallout. Similarly, measures have been taken by the Central and State Governments in 
India to minimize various adverse impacts. Accommodative policy stance from the Reserve Bank 
of India and the Government of India could be one of the reasons that the Indian economy has 
shown signs of normalcy responding 
to the staggering easing of restrictions. The fiscal measures 
have been in the form of free grain and cash transfers to the affected and partial loan guarantees for 
small firms, to begin with and several medium-term supply-side
 reform measures on land, labour 
and law. In combination with the support from RBI liquidity measures, the overall package was 
worth about 10 percent of GDP. A large part of the support has come from RBI liquidity measures, 
public sector enterprises, and future liabilities. The structural reforms are expected to improve the 
economy in the longer run.  
 
2.4.3 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare was closely monitoring the emerging situation in  
China right from the beginning in coordination with the World Health Organization. As a part of its 
pre-emptive, graded response to the evolving scenario, the Government of India took a series of 
steps much before the disease outbreak was declared a Pandemic, even before the outbreak was 
declared a public health emergency of international concern by the WHO (
on 30th  January, 2020) 
ranging from issuance of travel advisories, screening at points of entry, community-based 
surveillance, follow up of international travellers, building upon a network of laboratories
 for 
undertaking COVID-19 testing, development and dissemination of technical guidelines including 
those for social distancing, etc. The States were asked to assess preparedness and response measures 
against the possible spread of disease which were followed up. 
 
2.5 The imposition of lockdowns, gradual relaxations leading to unlocking 
 
2.5.1 To the reasons for announcing a nationwide lockdown on 
24th March, 2020, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in its response to the questionnaire stated that India was not the first country to 
impose a lockdown. Many countries had imposed a lockdown to fight COVID-19 Pandemic. 
Considering the success and experience of other countries to fight the COVID-19 Pandemic, the 
nationwide lockdown was announced to contain the spread of infection. U
nlike the case of China, 
where the city of Wuhan in the province of Hubei was identified as the source of the virus, it was 

8 
 
not possible in India to earmark any particular place as the source. Therefore, firm measures were  
required to be imposed throughout the country, so that during the lockdown period, the capacities in 
terms of testing, quarantine, isolation and hospital beds, ICU beds, etc. could be enhanced. Though 
complete or partial lockdown imposed by the States/UTs were in the right direction, however, it 
was felt that there was a lack of uniformity in the measures adopted, as well as in their 
implementation that might not fully serve the objective of containing the spread of the virus.  
 
2.5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note apprised the Committee about the 
management of COVID-19 pandemic and co-ordination with State Governments, resumption of 
economic activities, inter-state movement of people, goods and persons and 
evacuation/transportation of Indians stranded outside India, state of preparedness and phased 
unlocking (guidelines issued by MHA for phased re-opening on 30 th May, 29 th June, 29 th July, 29th 
August, 30 th September, 27 th October, 2020 and 25 th November, 2020) that are given in detail as 
Annexure I.
   
 
2.6 Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of
 strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
2.6.1 The Committee was informed in the meeting held on 15 th July, 2020 that the main purpose 
of implementing the lockdown measures was to contain/ slow down the spread of Coronavirus by 
breaking the chain of transmission and to provide additional time to ramp up capacities at all levels. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note dated 13 th July, 2020
 stated that during that 
period the capacities and health infrastructure were ramped up.  There existed a total of 3914 
facilities for COVID-19 patients in the country with 3,77,737 isolation beds (without ICU support), 
39,820 ICU beds and 1,42,415 oxygen-supported beds along with 20
,047 ventilators. In terms of 
healthcare logistics, cumulatively 213.55 lakh N95 masks, 120.94 lakh PPEs and 612.57 lakh HCQ 
tablets were distributed.
 
 
2.6.2 R
egarding gains of the lockdown, Home Secretary briefed the Committee in the meeting 
held on 15 th July, 2020 that during the lockdown, a huge health infrastructure was created, 
capacities were put in hospitals and increased testing capacities  were also made available. There 
was a massive increase in supplies of equipments, oxygen, issuance of guidelines and protocols; 
undertaking of research administering of medicines also showed some prophylactic effects.     
 
2.6.3 
The Committee was also informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note 
that the laboratory network is continuously being strengthened. Adequate laboratory reagents are 
available with ICMR and the number of samples being tested for detection of COVID-19 has been  
substantially growing every day 
because of the sharply focused "Trace, Test, Treat" strategy in 
coordination with the States/UTs. The rate of recovery among COVID-19 patients has continuously 
improved over the days.  
 
2.6.4 As of 10 th December, 2020 during last 24 hours, 801,081 samples have been tested taking 
the total number of samples tested up to 147,787,656.   
 
2.6.5 The Committee was further informed that as part of the strategy for COVID-19, to reduce 
Case Fatality Rate by ensuring effective clinical management of all COVID-19 positive p atients, 
specialist doctors from AIIMS, New Delhi were providing expert guidance and knowledge support 

9 
 
to doctors manning ICUs in state hospitals. This tele-consultation exercise was to be extended to 
another 61 hospitals which have bed capacity ranging from 500-1000 on a twice a week basis. 
Enhanced focus on "Test, Trace, Treat", further augmented with various measures has facilitated 
widespread COVID-19 testing by States/UTs. 
 
2.6.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that the Union Health Ministry has 
issued several guidelines and the same have been made available on the website of the Ministry 
(www.mohfw.gov.in) targeting various groups/activities such as (i) Travel (ii) Behavioural Health, 
(iii) Citizens, (iv) Hospitals, (v) States / Departments / Ministries, (vi) Employees, etc. 
 
2.6.7 Regarding community surveillance, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW)  
informed the Committee in its meeting held on that the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
(IDSP) has followed up a cumulative total of 32,35,135 persons from 37 States/UTs. Of the total 
32,35,135 persons enrolled for the community based follow up by IDSP, 11,31,852 persons have 
completed 28 days of the observation period
. Guidelines on clinical management of COVID-19 was 
updated in July and widely circulated. These include case definition, prevention of infection control, 
laboratory diagnosis, early supporting therapy, management of severe cases and complications. 
 
2.6.8 On Human Resource & Capacity Building front, the Committee was informed 
by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs that various cadres of personnel and volunteers across sectors and 
departments can be involved in not only COVID-19 related work but also to ensure the maintenance 
of other essential medical services. It has been worked out by pooling manpower resources from 
various institutions that inter-alia include Defence, Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH), National Cadet Corps (NCC), National Service Scheme (NSS), 
Nehru Yuva Kendra (NYK), and other public sectors, and private sector enterprises. To build the 
capacities of human resources to manage patients in hospitals; as well as non-medical personnel, 
front line workers, who may be involved in non-medical duties
 such as logistics, surveillance, etc., 
for COVID-19 management, training resources for medical and non-medical personnel have been 
made available on the website of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Online training 
programmes and webinars for physicians and nursing personnel are being conducted by AIIMS and 
training Modules have also been made available on iGOT (online platform) by DOPT 
(https://igot.gov.in/igot/). The training modules have been translated into different regional 
languages. The health infrastructure and other capacities are being expanded to reduce the case 
fatality ratio and COVID-19 effects. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.9 The Committee observes that several steps were taken much ahead of what many other 
countries took subsequently for the screening of travelers and passengers coming from 
abroad into India.  All international flights were also prohibited in a graded manner.  While 
doing so, the Central Government was conscious of the need to bring back stranded Ind ian 
citizens abroad to the safety of their homes. The Committee, however, observ es that 
incoming international passengers including those who en tered throughout March, 2020 
were screened only for high temperature and there w as no testing facility established at the 
airports. Thus, asymptomatic patients as also those who travelled after taking medicines for 
controlling temperature could not be diagnosed at a t ime when they could practically be the 
only source of infections of COVID-19 in the country. 
 
2.6.10 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government for the manage ment 
of COVID-19 Pandemic and understands that the primary effect of nationwide lockdown was 

10 
 
to have a uniform set of regulations, to delay peak infections and provide time to the he alth 
system to mop up adequate health care infrastructure, personnel and equipments. The 
lockdown gave the country time to ramp up its public health infrastructure, build the 
capacity of hospitals and health care workers. The Committee also understands that  one of 
the key elements of the pandemic control strategies across the globe has been to shut down 
economic and social activities, and to impose social distancing with varying degrees of 
stringency. 
 
2.6.11 The Committee notes that necessary measures were taken by the Government to 
minimize the severe impact of the lockdown. The Government ensured the availability of all 
essential commodities. The Government announced Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana 
(PMGKY), wherein targeted relief was for the most vulnerable sections of the society. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs also allowed flexibility in the State Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF) 
guidelines  to cater to the requirement of setting up relief camps for migrant workers an d 
other needy persons.  Since the crisis was unprecedented, the overall plan for  its management 
was coordinated through meetings of the Prime Minister with Chief Ministers/ 
Administrators and other high-level meetings involving Senior Officers of Centre and States.  
These meetings contributed towards effective coordination between the Central Government 
and all the States/ Union Territories to ensure efficacious implementation of the decision 
taken for mitigation of distress and distribution of relief by the civil administration at district 
and sub-divisional level. The steps were taken to ensure that the poor people in both ur ban 
and rural areas are not deprived of any benefit of social security, food and shelter  as 
announced by the Government.  
 
2.6.12  The Committee, however, observes that the sudden imposition of lockdown 
necessitated by the challenging situation and the fear of the rapid spread of the virus di d 
result in unprecedented disruption. The lockdown led to the stoppage of Intra-State and 
Inter-State movement of people, goods, shutdown of factories, hotels, eateries, tourism, etc ., 
and other economic activities that led to unprecedented disruption and severe social and 
economic fallouts. The migrant labourers, factory workers, daily wage earners were  the worst 
affected. The civil administration in the States and the districts prepared to respond  to the 
challenge and establish shelters and quarantine facilities. As there was no timely
 
dissemination of the information in the district areas about the arrangements being mad e for 
food, shelter and other facilities, anxiety and uncertainty gripped the migrant labourers and 
workers and led to their movement in large number to their home States. This stopped only 
when effective mitigating measures were taken by Central and the State Governments.    
 
2.6.13
 From the benefit of the experience gained while addressing these challenges, the 
Committee recommends that the Government should draw up a national plan and guidelines 
under NDMA, 2005 and Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. An e ffective functional institutional 
mechanism is needed for co-ordination between the Ce ntre, states and Union Territories for 
quick response to such a crisis in future. This would ensu re efficacious implementation of all 
decisions to contain pandemics and equitable/timely dist ribution of relief at district and sub-
divisional levels to the intended beneficiaries in urban an d rural areas.  

11 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
AUGMENTATION OF HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
3.1 Management of COVID- 19 
 
3.1.1 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has raised awareness about the recent outbreak  
and has taken necessary actions to control the spread of COVID-19. Both the Departments i.e. the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Health Research along  with the 
premier institutes under the Ministry like the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Delhi have been in the forefront in handling the 
COVID-19 Pandemic by putting together scientific and medical knowledge from time to time on 
various aspects including surveillance, clinical management, infection prevention and control, 
sample collections, upgrading and expanding testing capacities, transporting and discharging of the 
suspected or confirmed cases, issuing the treatment protocols and keeping the country informed 
about the progress that has been made. 
 
3.2 Testing for COVID-19 
 
3.2.1 From January 2020 up to December, 2020, there has been a calibrated and phased expansion 
of testing strategy based on evidence of the spread of the virus to avoid indiscriminate testing and 
conserve resources. Action was taken to increase the number of labs, streamline the supply of 
testing kits and include point of care devices in the testing arena. Regarding testing, the Joint 
Secretary, MoH&FW informed the Committee in the meeting held on 15th July, 2020 as under- 
  
"In terms of testing, if you see, we started with one testing lab in January.  
Today, we have around 1,400-plus locations where testing takes place. We 
are able to do around 3,00,000-plus tests every day."   
 
3.2.2 The details of the testing labs, total tests done and testing capacity per day from April to 
December, 2020 is given below- 
 
Date Testing Labs Total Tests done Testing 
Capacity 
per day 
1
st
 April 151  4208 30,000 
1
st
 May 254 9,02,654 90,000 
1
st
  June 676   38,37,207 1,65,000 
10th December 2229 15,07,59, 726 10,00,000 
 
3.2.3 Total Operational (initiated independent testing) Laboratories reporting to ICMR
 as on 10th 
December, 2020 is as below:- 
 
Government laboratories 1191 
Private laboratories 1038 
Real-Time RT PCR for COVID-19 1227 (Govt: 528 + Private: 699) 

12 
 
TrueNat Test for COVID-19 874 (Govt: 624+ Private: 250) 
CBNAAT Test for COVID-19 128 (Govt: 39 + Private: 89) 
Total No. of Labs 2229 
        (Source: Indian Council for Medical Research) 
 
3.2.4 The testing capacity has been scaled up from about 30,000 tests per day on 1 st April, 2020 
to more than 1 million tests per day on 10 th December, 2020. In addition to RT-PCR, testing 
platforms have also been expanded to include TrueNat, CBNAAT and Rapid Antigen point-of-
care test. After a steady increase in the number of COVID-19 cases across the country, now there 
has been a downtrend of cases. The daily new cases are now below 50,000 as depicted by the 
following graph- 
 
 
 
(Source: Indian Council for Medical Research) 
 
 Source:Indian Council for Medical Research) 
 

13 
 
3.2.5 The Committee notes that the daily new cases was 24, 879 in July, 2020 and increased up to 
97, 894 in September and has now declined to 31, 521 in December, 2020. The trajectory of daily 
COVID-19 cases in India from (July-December), 2020 is given below- 
Sourc
e: Indian Council for Medical Research 
 
3.2.6 The active COVID-19 cases in India have reduced to below 4 lakh in December, 2020 
which is less than 4% of the total cases which also depicts a high recovery rate. The trajectory of 
both active and recovered cases from March to December, 2020  is as per the graph given below- 
 
 
Recommendation 
3.2.7 The Committee notes that the testing capacity has been expanded significantly since 
the imposition of the first lockdown in late March, 2020. The Committee appreciates that in 

14 
 
the management of the crisis, India demonstrated its capacity to scale up the responses as the 
situation evolved. The number of testing laboratories was only 1 in the month of January, 
2020 which was increased to 151 on 1 st April, 2020 and as of 10 th December, 2020, the total 
number of labs approved for COVID-19 testing has increased to 2229. The number of 
isolation beds, ICU beds and PPE kits have also been increased from approximately 1.74 lakh, 
22 thousand and 3.87 lakh in mid-April, 2020 to more than 15 lakh, 80 thousand and 6 crore 
respectively, as on 10 th December, 2020. There has also been a robust response from the 
Government in increasing the testing capacity per day from 30 thousand on 1 st April to 10 
lakh as of 10th December, 2020. 
 
3.2.8 The Committee sought to know the hurdles faced in expanding the lab network and 
measures taken to address them. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in its response to the 
questionnaire stated that the Indian Council of Medical Research had initiated testing of COVID-19 
with 13 testing laboratories and ICMR-NIV, Pune in January, 2020. The number of testing labs has 
been increased exponentially over the past months. Various hurdles were faced in expanding the lab 
network which are as follows- 
 
(i) Lack of laboratories having facilities with molecular-based testing 
(ii) Trained manpower 
(iii) Lack of adequate equipment  
(iv) Understanding of Biomedical Waste Management 
(v) Availability of Lab Technicians, data entry operators and other staff 
(vi) Lack of diagnostic commodities - Viral Transport Media (VTM), RNA Extraction 
kits and   RT-PCR kits. 
(vii) The Dependency of diagnostic commodities on international players 
 
3.2.9 The following measures were taken to address the hurdles faced in expanding the lab 
capacity: 
 
(i) The ICMR increased its efforts by adding private testing RT-PCR laboratories, 
expedited approval mechanisms by NABL and initiated TrueNat/ CBNAAT based 
testing in district-level hospitals and other testing facilities. 
 
(ii) The Government of India identified 14 Centre of Excellence Institutes as a Mentor 
Institute for mentoring all government and private medical colleges in their 
catchment area. 
 
(iii) The testing was increased by the introduction of rapid antigen -based testing. 
 
(iv) The ICMR purchased and deployed 57 RT-PCR machines and 125 RNA Extraction 
machines in various laboratories across the country. ICMR also supported the 
laboratory network w.r.t VTM, RNA Extraction kits and RT-PCR kits. 
 
(v) Data entry operators were deployed by the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology through Common Service Centres in the States. 
 
(vi) Owing to the sudden and unprecedented nature of the Pandemic, initially, India 
completely relied on the import of testing kits and polymer swabs primarily from the 
United States, Germany, China and Italy to conduct COVID-19 tests.  

15 
 
 
 
3.3      Development / Validation of diagnostic kits 
 
3.3.1 The ICMR instituted fast track mechanisms for the validation of RT-PCR diagnostic 
material (RT-PCR kits, antibody ELISAs/ Rapid kits, RNA extraction kits and VTMs). A total of 
24 Institutions have identified and designated to perform validation.  
 
3.3.2 In case of sub-optimal proficiency, indigenous kit manufacturers were encouraged, advised 
and promoted to improvise their kits and re-submit for evaluation.  
 
3.3.3 The ICMR-National Institute of Virology has very effectively used the SARS-CoV-2 virus 
isolated at the Institute to develop the IgG ELISA test. Technology transfers were effectively made 
to seven indigenous companies. The kits are available in the market. IgG ELISA is useful to 
conduct serosurveys in vulnerable populations and also understand the proportion of the population 
infected and recovered from COVID-19. 
 
3.4 Commissioning alternate Testing Platforms 
 
3.4.1 To facilitate testing at the district level, the ICMR also tapped the rich resource of available 
Truenat machines for TB diagnosis. The Truenat COVID-19 screening and the confirmatory test 
were quickly validated by ICMR and the machines were deployed to test even in district-level 
hospitals. Since the Truenat platform comes with an inbuilt sample collection in viral lysis buffer, 
the virus is inactivated and the bio-safety requirements are minimal while handling the sample. 
Similarly, alternate platforms working on GeneXpert and Abbott machines engaged in testing TB 
and HIV viral load testing respectively, were also mapped and operationalized. 
 
3.4.2 The ICMR and the AIIMS, Delhi independently evaluated the stand-alone rapid point of 
care antigen detection assay which does not require a specialized machi ne and can be interpreted 
with a naked eye. A test is a promising tool for quick diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 in field settings. 
On validation of Standard Q COVID-19 Ag kit the test has been found to have a very high 
specificity with moderate sensitivity. It is now being used as a point of care diagnostic assay for 
testing in the containment zones as well as hospitals in combination with the gold standard RT-PCR 
test. Following this, an Expression of Interest was displayed on the ICMR website inviting 
proposals from manufacturers of antigen test kits. A total of 11 antigen test kits were validated and 
three (including SD biosensor) were approved.   
 
3.5. Clinical trials/ research studies 
 
3.5.1 The ICMR convenes the National Task Force on COVID-19 Chaired by Member, N iti 
Aayog and co-chaired by Director, AIIMS, Delhi. Under the aegis of this Task Force, four re search 
groups had been constituted: (i) Operational research; (ii) Epidemiology & surveillance; (iii) 
Clinical research; (iv) Diagnostics. Several research studies were planned and conceptualized. 
Major research studies are as follows: 
 
(i) The ICMR-National AIDS Research Institute (NARI) has taken lead as the country 
coordinator for the WHO Solidarity Trial which was initiated to look at the beneficial 
effects of Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), Lopinavir-Ritonavir combination therapy, 
Interferon beta-1a and Remdesivir. The trials were initiated on 30 th April, 2020. Based 
on conflicting results, now HCQ and Lopinavir-Ritonavir arms were dropped. 

16 
 
 
(ii) To guide evidence-based policy decisions, an observational study was conducted to 
understand the benefits of using Hydroxyl-chloroquine in health-care workers.  
 
(iii)The ICMR concluded the PLACID trial to understand the effect of convalescent sera in 
moderately ill COVID patients in 450 subjects at 60 sites. 
 
(iv) A nation-wide COVID-19 clinical registry was launched by ICMR to systematically 
document the clinical signs and symptoms of COVID-19 patients in a uniform clinical 
proforma. So as to understand various disease presentations and plan treatment 
modalities accordingly. 
 
(v) The ICMR also launched a network of National Bio-repositories for collecting and storing 
various samples of COVID-19 patients to aid in the development of diagnostics, 
studying various biomarkers of disease severity, etc. 
 
 
3.5.2 Three special COVID supplements of ICMR's scientific journal – Indian Journal of Medical 
Research (IJMR) were released recently that included 24 editorials, perspectives, policy piece s, 
protocols, short commentaries, review articles and original research papers from ICMR and non-
ICMR researchers. These supplements highlight the high quality of research conducted in  India 
towards understanding COVID-19. 
 
 
3.6 Epidemiological studies 
 
3.6.1 The ICMR conducted a nation-wide serological survey to estimate the overall serological 
prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The serological survey was conducted in 71 districts of the 
country. The findings have been disseminated to the states as well as relevant departments of 
Central Govt. 
 
3.7 Identifying treatment options 
 
3.7.1 The ICMR partnered with Department of Biotechnology (DBT)/ Indian Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) for the development of monoclonal antibodies for the 
treatment of COVID-19 patients. Technical mentorship is from Emory University, USA. 
 
3.7.2 The ICMR-NIV evaluated more than 30 drug candidates / repurposed drugs for identifyin g 
promising treatment options for COVID-19.  
 
3.8 Issuing timely advisories for public health action 
 
3.8.1 Under the aegis of the National Task Force, The ICMR issued several pertinent advisories 
related to testing strategy including pregnant women, pooled testing, etc.; expanded platforms for 
testing, liberalization of testing, use of rapid antigen test for diagnosis, use of hydroxychloroquine 
prophylaxis in health care workers & close contacts; treatment protocols, use of IgG ELISA tests 
for serological surveys, etc. 
 
3.8.2 The Committee sought to know the details of costs prescribed for testing and treatment and 
the extent of their compliance. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare stated that the cost of the 

17 
 
first step screening assay is Rs. 1500/test and additional confirmatory assays are Rs. 3000/ test. As 
of 10th December, 2020, the cost of the first step screening assay and additional confirmatory assays 
test have been reduced and are in the range of Rs. 800 to 1600 in majority of the States. However, 
the ICMR strongly appealed that those private laboratories should offer COVID-19 diagnosis at no 
cost. The ICMR Transfer of Technology to 7 companies for the development of anti ‐ SARS 
CoV‐ 2‐ IgG antibody detection ELISA for screening human serum samples - ICMR fixed up a 
Maximum Sale Price/Maximum Retail Price (excluding Taxes), an amount of Rs. 204/- (Rs. Two 
hundred and four only) per test kit, to all the companies with which such Transfer of Technology 
has been signed. 
 
3.9 Details of financial and other material assistance provided to various States/UTs by the 
Government of India 
 
3.9.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the Government of India (GOI) has continued its 
commitment to provide States its share of taxes, inspite of the poor collection of taxes. GOI's 
releases to State Governments of Central Share of Taxes and Duties (share as per recommendation s 
of the XVFC) for April and May were as per BE 2020-21.  Rs. 46,038 crore for each of the above 
months was released to the States. For June and July the releases were partially adjusted to tax 
collections and stood at Rs. 41,966 crore. In all, a total amount of Rs. 1,76,099 crore has been 
released to all states as states share in taxes and duties. 
 
3.9.2 Depending on disease burden and request for financial assistance made by the States, the 
financial allocations to States were rationalized by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfa re. The 
financial assistance was made to meet the expenditure incurred on-field surveillance requirements, 
laboratory strengthening, procurement of testing reagents and to meet other contingencies. The 
allocations made to the States are at Annexure-II. Certain critical items were procured centrally 
(including personal protective equipments, ventilators, drugs, testing equipments and reagents). The 
State-wise list of PPE, ventilators, drugs supplied has been given at Annexure-III. 
 
3.10 Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
3.10.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the Government of India in order to augment the 
availability of funds with the State Governments, declared COVID-19 as a notified disaster on 14 th 
March, 2020 to assist under the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) placed at the disposal of 
respective State Governments. This allowed SDRF to be used for supplementing the state resources 
in setting up of quarantine facilities; sample collection and screening; setting up additional testing 
laboratories within the Government; the cost of consumables; purchase of personal protection 
equipments (PPEs) for healthcare, municipal, police and fire authorities; purchase of thermal 
scanners; ventilators, air purifiers, and consumables for Government hospitals. 
 
3.10.2  The Government of India, on 28 th March, 2020, allowed the State Governments to use 
SDRF for providing food and shelter to homeless people including migrant laborers, who were 
stranded due to lockdown measures. 
 
3.10.3  To make adequate funds available to the State Governments for effective response against 
COVID 19, as a special dispensation, the 1st instalment of Rs. 11,092 crore as Central Share of State 
Disaster Risk Mitigation Fund (SDRMF) for the financial year 2020-21 was released in advance to 
all States on 03rd April, 2020. 
 

18 
 
3.10.4 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has already approved the India COVID- 19 
Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package of Rs. 15,000 crore. The said 
package seeks to support States/UTs in various aspects of management of the COVID-19 Pandemic 
and provides support for the establishment of COVID dedicated facilities for treatment of COVID-
19 cases including critical care, enhancement in testing capacities, engagement and training of 
necessary human resources and procurement of essential equipment and protective gear for the 
health care personnel engaged in COVID-19 duties, etc. In this regard, funds have already be en 
already been made available to States/UTs under the said Package. Personal Protection Equipments 
(PPEs), N95 masks, ventilators and medicines have also been centrally procured and supplied to the 
States/UTs, supplementing the efforts being made by States/UTs. 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.10.5 The Committee notes with appreciation that the public health care system and 
Government hospitals rose to the occasion in bearing the unprecedented burden. Th e 
Committee is of the considered view that the Government responded to the challengi ng 
situation promptly and appreciates its quick adaptation to the emerging evidence about this 
highly contagious disease, though the country during the initial phase suffered from a 
shortage in medical supplies, availability of beds in hospitals, low level of testing and serious 
impact on other non-COVID health services. There has been a response to the situation by  
both Central and State Governments along with district administration in identifying the 
cases and reserving the required number of beds for COVID-19 patients as and where  there 
was a need. 
 
3.10.6 The Committee observes that t he pandemic has pushed both Central and State 
Governments to incur heavy expenditure on COVID-19 treatment and related services. Th e 
Committee is of the view that the public sector healthcare delivery system needs to be fu rther 
strengthened in all the States/ UTs and a uniform healthcare system should be establ ished 
across the country to deal with the Pandemic on a sustained basis in future. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends that in the long term, there should be more investments in health 
infrastructure for the rapid scaling up of public health services. A strong and effective public 
health infrastructure is necessary to respond to such a Pandemic due to which thousands o f 
COVID-19 patients are getting admitted to hospitals in addition to the non-COVID-19 
patients.  
 
3.10.7 The Committee opines that the threat of COVID-19 has highlighted the huge disparity 
of infrastructure and services in public and private hospitals.   There has to be sufficient 
capacity of beds available both in public/government and private hospitals. The Committee 
also observes the disproportionate availability of ICU beds in private and public sector 
hospitals. After the onset of the Pandemic, the largest share of the burden of extend ing 
comprehensive healthcare has been borne by the Government hospitals as private hosp itals 
are either inaccessible or not affordable for everyone. Therefore, more allocation  should be 
made for public hospitals to strengthen the Public Health Infrastructure so that they can 
equip themselves appropriately to handle such Pandemics in the future. 
 
3.10.8 The Committee notes that  in the initial phase of spread of the virus, Central and  State 
Government along with the civil administration and health care workers co-ordinate d the 
relief work and responded by creating bed facilities, opening laboratories, ope ning of railway 

19 
 
coaches and health care centre for COVID-19 patients with a large number of beds to h andle 
the Pandemic. However,  it is vital to build up massive health care infrastructure, special 
protocols, etc. for the care of patients in these dedicated hospitals to manage the Pandemic 
like COVID-19 in the future. 
 
3.10.9 The Committee opines that a precise study on test rate, recovery and fatality rate is 
important to discern the pattern.  There is also a need to identify the States where  the testing 
facilities need to be expanded as the testing facility is not the same across the States and Union 
Territories. Even within States also, districts should be identified and adequate h ealth 
infrastructure should be made available there. 
 
3.10.10The Committee, further, recommends that relevant data should be made available for  
the research community duly following data anonymization, security and privacy laws which  
can provide required input for COVID-19 management and access, analyze and provide r eal-
time context-specific solutions to control the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
 
3.10.11 In the Committee Meeting held on 15 th July, 2020 the representative of the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare stated that the whole country got engaged in managing the thre at and 
cases of the unprecedented COVID-19 Pandemic. There is sufficient logistics availability in ter ms 
of PPE kits, N95 masks and ventilators; protective equipments, treatment-related materials and 
logistics are available now at the State level; hospital infrastructure has been upgraded and the 
primary focus has been not only on the estimations but also to track how the cases are happening.  
 
3.10.12 He further stated that they came up with the concept of a dedicated hospital and it 
was classified into three aspects.  First, the care center, where pre-symptomatic or mild patients can 
be housed; second, is the health centre where people who need oxygen support can be taken and, 
third is the hospital where the person who becomes critical can be taken. The Home Secretary also 
stated that in 12 days, a 1,000-bed hospital in Delhi was built with the efforts of DRDO and was 
supported by a private group.  All beds have an oxygen facility and 250 ICU beds are with 
ventilator support.  It is fully functional and is being operated by the Armed Force Medical Se rvice 
(AFMS) people. 
 
3.10.13 The Committee acknowledged the commendable work done by Centre and State 
Governments but at the same time raised concerns regarding the selling of beds by private hospitals, 
black-marketing and overpricing of some medicines like Remdesivir and Tocilizumab that was 
effective in the treatment of the virus. The Committee emphasized to include the use of other cost-
effective and easily available medicines including AYUSH  medicines in the advisories of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, steps should be taken to curb rumour-mongering related to 
the Pandemic and that only active cases should be highlighted instead of the total number of case s 
to prevent people from panicking. 
 
3.10.14 One of the Members of the Committee in its meeting held on 15 th July, 2020 raised a 
query regarding the selling of beds by private hospitals.  He stated that- 
 
"We have heard and there have been media reports that most of the private 
hospitals were selling beds.  They were not admitting patients in the name of 
Corona.  Somebody gave Rs.10 lakh to Rs.15 lakh for the package.  There have 
been some viral reports. I have personal experience of one case.  They told me that 
they cannot admit it. The victim was a doctor himself. I spoke to the Health 
Minister. Despite the instructions of the Health Minister, they did not admit that 

20 
 
doctor. Then, I again complained to the Health Minister.  Ultimately, he was 
admitted.  Earlier, they were not ready to admit him. Does the Ministry of Health 
have some checks and controls over these private hospitals?  They were fleecing 
these patients." 
 
3.10.15 In the Committee Meeting held on 19 th August, 2020, Secretary, Department of 
Health Research stated that this is once in a century sort of an epidemic that the country is facing 
but there has been a very calibrated response from the Ministry of Health and the Departmen t of 
Research and ICMR. Within the limited resources, the Ministry has worked hard and for the first 
five months, the ICMR and 26 Institutes have worked 24x7.  
 
 
3.10.16 The Director, All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), Delhi informed the 
Committee about the efforts made by AIIMS to handle COVID-19. He briefly outlined the steps 
taken in the development of infrastructure & capacity building including equipments, distribution of 
testing kits, mixed modes of testing, human resource management, etc. He added that 13,262 health 
personnel were trained on infection-related practices for COVID-19. The AIIMS has also provided 
teleconsultation facilities to 1,26,280 people on various issues related to COVID-19. 
 
3.10.17 One of the Members of the Committee raised the issue of the use of Ayurveda 
medicines/ herbs in the treatment of COVID-19 as under:- 
 
"The second important thing is about patients and public participation.  This is 
a disease. Many dimensions of the disease are unknown to the people and even 
the doctors.  We are learning, we are in the process of learning................. Many 
people who are not reporting to hospitals.  They are Corona patients but they 
are treating themselves by the indigenous method and they are getting cured.  
Suppose, I am a Corona patient and I am admitted to a hospital, and I am 
getting treatment, according to your protocol, but I am not getting kaadha, I am 
not just having other things. So, my question is that what you are doing for the 
holistic approach to the patients who are already admitted.  Are they getting 
other medicines, alternative medicines, along with the medicines or not" 
 
3.10.18 The Director, AIIMS, Delhi replied that- 
"as far as Ayurveda and Yoga are concerned.  We have a centre in AIIMS, that is, 
the CIMR – the Centre for Integrated Medicine and Research.  A large number of 
projects there are done on Ayurveda and Yoga.  We have, at least, more than thirty 
projects on Yoga and have found it to be useful from migraine to strokes to broncho 
diseases and COPD.  Also, several drug trials have been done with various 
companies, like, Maharishi Ayurveda and others, where we have shown that these 
drugs have utility, both, in lowering cholesterol and as hypertensive.  I  have done 
a study and we have found it to be useful in asthma also that you can reduce the 
requirement of an inhaler if you use certain ayurvedic drugs and do good yoga.  
So, we are moving in that direction too.  But, I do agree that a lot more needs to be 
done.  We have to lead in terms of showing its utility, as far as the whole world is 
concerned.  So, a lot of work needs to be done there.  We need to develop an 
integrated strategy of how we can get Ayurveda into allopathic and develop it as a 
holistic approach.  That is something that we, in the AIIMS are trying to work on".   
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 

21 
 
3.10.19 The Committee appreciates the commendable work that has been done by the 
AIIMS in helping the other institutions in the States, particularly, about the treatment 
protocols.  
 
3.10.20 The Committee also appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and health workers who rose to the occasion in tackling this unprecede nted 
health crisis and also expresses deep gratitude towards the frontline health workers and the  
Corona Warriors who have lost their lives on duty. 
 
3.10.21 The Committee strongly recommends that there is a need for a comprehen sive 
public health Act, preferably at the national level with suitable legal provisions to support the 
Government in keeping checks and controls over the private hospitals as there have bee n 
reports about the selling of hospital beds by them. Learning from the experience of this 
Pandemic, the Government should seriously examine it. The Act should also keep a c heck on 
the black marketing of medicines and product standardization. The Committee further 
recommends that the people should be made aware through awareness campaigns regard ing 
cheaper and effective repurposed medicines to prevent them from panicking and spending a 
huge amount of money on expensive drugs. The Committee recommends that good quality 
and affordable medicines should be provided to everyone, especially at a cheaper /subsidized 
rate to the marginalized sections of the society specially at the time of Pandemic like      
COVID-19.  
 
3.10.22 The Committee recommends that a holistic approach should be adopted to tre at the 
patients who are already admitted to hospitals due to COVID-19. The Committee is of 
considered view that in the absence of certified vaccine/ medicines, the Ministry of Ayurveda, 
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) has huge potential in 
preventive and providing curative healthcare of this Pandemic. For immunity- boosting of 
both the patients and common people, kadha/ herbs/ spices as part of diet and Yoga may be 
suggested and promoted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in coordinat ion with 
the Ministry of AYUSH and AIIMS. As an alternate source of medicine to treat COVID-19, 
Ayurveda/traditional systems should be researched and awareness should be raised regard ing 
their efficacy in the treatment of COVID-19. 
 
3.10.23 The Committee observes that there is a need for sustained and focused efforts for 
managing the crisis as also creating awareness in the communities, ensuring testing 
infrastructure and upgrading health infrastructure particularly in remote and rural ar eas. 
The availability of pulse oximeter in the villages, remote and inaccessible areas as a cheap and 
effective way to detect silent hypoxia is important. The Committee, therefore,  rec ommends 
that the remote rural areas should be specifically monitored by the States under the ove rall 
technical guidance from the Centre. 
 
3.11 Vaccine for COVID-19 
 
3.11.1 COVID-19 has emerged as a global Pandemic and has caused significant morbidity and 
mortality all over the world. There is no specific drug to treat or prevent the spread of this disease 
and few one repurposed drugs and broad-spectrum antiviral are being used for treatment which have 
shown varying benefits. The Development of effective vaccines appears to be a promising tool to 
help develop immunity and reduce disease transmission. As per WHO, there are currently more 
than 50 COVID-19 vaccine candidates in trials and is working in collaboration with scientists, 

22 
 
business and global health organisations through the ACT accelerator to speed up the Pandemic 
response. 
 
 
 
3.12 Status of development of Indigenous vaccines 
 
3.12.1  In the Committee Meeting held on 19 th August, 2020, Secretary, Department of Health 
Research informed the Committee about the National Taskforce to handle COVID-19, clinical trial s 
of vaccines namely, Cadila Healthcare and Covaxin (Bharat Biotech Research Ltd.). He also 
informed that the phase III trials of Oxford-Astrazeneca's vaccine (partnered with Serum Institute of 
India) in India have commenced in August.  
 
3.12.2  The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has submitted an updated note on 8 th 
December, 2020 regarding progress made in development of indigenous vaccine that based on the 
evaluation of applications in consultation with the Subject Expert Committee (SEC), The Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) has, so far, granted permission to conduct the 
clinical trial of Coronavirus vaccines as under: 
(i) Permission to conduct phase I/II clinical trial with Inactivated Corona Virus 
vaccine (Intramuscular) on 29 th June, 2020 to M/s Bharat Biotech International Ltd., 
Hyderabad. 
 
(ii) Permission to conduct Phase I/II clinical trial with Novel Corona Virus -
2019-nCov vaccine on 2nd August, 2020 to M/s Cadila Healthcare Ltd., Ahmedabad. 
 
(iii) Permission to conduct Phase II/III clinical trial with ChAdOx1-nCov-19 
vaccine on 3rd August, 2020 to M/s Serum Institute of India Pvt., Ltd., Pune 
 
(iv) Permission to conduct Phase I/II clinical trial with Inactivated Corona virus 
vaccine (Intradermal) on 20th August, 2020 to M/s Bharat Biotech International Ltd., 
Hyderabad 
 
(v) Permission to conduct Phase II/III clinical trial with Gam-COVID Vac 
Combined vector vaccine (component one and component two) on 22.10.2020 to 
M/s Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd., Hyderabad 
 
(vi) Permission to conduct Phase III clinical trial with Inactivated Corona Virus 
vaccine (Intramuscular) on 23 rd October, 2020 to M/s Bharat Biotech International 
Ltd., Hyderabad 
 
(vii) Permission to conduct Phase I/II clinical trial with Covid-19 vaccine 
containing SARS-CoV-2 Receptor Binding Domain of SARS-CoV-2 on 27 th 
October, 2020 to M/s Biological E Ltd. Hyderabad. 
 
3.12.3 Further, the Ministry mentioned that no application has been received till date for the  
grant of Emergency Use Authorisation (EUA) of vaccine for prevention of COVID-19. 
 
3.12.4 Regarding the action plan for ensuring universal coverage of anti-COVID vaccination in the 
country, ICMR informed that once efficacious vaccine/s against COVID become available, 
established channels of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will be engaged to ensure 

23 
 
universal coverage including the population of the country belonging to different age groups and 
genders. 
 
3.12.5 The Committee sought to know the details regarding the Emergency Response system that 
has been placed across the country for COVID-19 tests and how does it function.  The Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare in its response stated that the Ministry of MoH&FW in partnership with 
the State Governments has an operational Integrated Disease Surveillance Program (IDSP). The 
IDSP is responsible for syndromic surveillance at the district level and above. The system is 
designed to detect outbreaks in an early stage so that effective public health interventions can b e 
instituted. Each state has a multidisciplinary rapid response team for outbreak investigation. IDSP 
also has district level labs which perform ELISA based diagnosis of common bacterial and viral 
infections. Additionally, DHR/ICMR has commissioned 115 Virus Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratories (VRDLs) which are operational at tertiary level Medical Colleges of the country. The  
VRDLs are state-of-the-art facilities equipped with a serological and molecular diagnosis of 20-2 5 
viral pathogens of public health importance as well as emerging/re-emerging and new viral 
pathogens. These labs are linked with ICMR-National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune which is 
the apex virology institute in the country. Through NIV, the VRDLs are trained in biosecurity and 
biosafety practices for handling new/exotic pathogens. Additionally, the country has a network o f 
one Biosafety Level 4 (BSL-4) lab at NIV and around 20 BSL3 labs in different Gov ernment 
Institutions which can be used for work on high-risk pathogens as per need.  
 
3.12.6 The Committee further sought to know that whether any Pre-Clinical Work for the 
development of the vaccine by Bharat International Ltd (BBIL) and Cadila Healthcare has be en 
done, whether any safety data in this regard has been published and the platform was established for 
the development of the vaccine in BBIL and Cadila Healthcare. The Ministry of Health and Fami ly 
Welfare in its response stated that Bharat Biotech International Ltd. has conducted pre-clinical 
toxicity studies to establish the safety of the inactivated COVID-19 vaccine candidate which has 
been developed in partnership with ICMR-NIV, Pune.   
 
3.12.7 These studies have been conducted in mice, rats and rabbits. The vaccine has been found to 
be safe. The data was submitted to DCGI/CDSCO for approval of human clinical trials. After 
obtaining due permissions, human trials are underway. Parallel pre-clinical toxicity studies in 
hamsters and monkeys have also been completed recently at ICMR-NIV. Following four 
manuscripts have been submitted in international peer-reviewed journals for publication: 
(i) Safety and dose-ranging studies of BBV152 (COVAXIN) in mice, rats and rabbits. 
 
(ii) Safety and protective efficacy of BBV152 in hamsters. 
 
(iii) Safety and protective efficacy of BBV152 in non-human primates 
 
(iv) Results of phase I clinical trial of BBV152. 
 
3.12.8 All the above manuscripts are currently under review. 
 
3.12.9 Similarly, Cadila Healthcare has developed a DNA vaccine candidate for COVID-19 which 
has been proven to be safe in mice, rats, guinea pigs and rabbits. The vaccine has been found to be  
safe. The data was submitted to DCGI/CDSCO for approval of human clinical trials. After due 
permissions, human trials are underway. Recruitment of participants for phase I/II clinical trials has 
been completed. 
 

24 
 
3.12.10 Regarding the platform that was established for the development of the vaccine in 
BBIL and Cadila Healthcare, the MoH&FW submitted that the vero cell line in which the SARS-
CoV-2 virus is grown before inactivation and development of vaccine formulation is WHO 
prequalified and has been used previously for production of other vaccines like Japanese 
encephalitis, Chikungunya and Zika. ZydusCadila has developed a DNA vaccine candidate for 
SARS-CoV-2. The company has previously not developed such a vaccine. Information on the 
vaccine platforms with ZydusCadila is not available with ICMR.  
 
3.12.11 The Committee sought to know whether the Drugs Controller General of India has 
done any emergency use authorization regarding any vaccine in the past and the details of 
emergency use authorization in respect of therapeutic drugs. The Ministry of Health & Fa mily 
welfare stated that as per available records, Central Drug Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) 
has not approved any vaccine in the past for emergency use authorization. 
 
3.12.12 As regards to authorization in respect of therapeutic drugs for COVID-19, it may be 
mentioned that considering the emergency and unmet medical needs, CDSCO, has so far approved 
three drugs (Remdesivir Injection, Favipiravir tablets & Itolizumab Injection) under accelerated 
approval process under New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rule, 2019 for restricted emergency use in 
the country for treatment of COVID-19 infection with various conditions/restrictions.  
 
3.12.13 On the effectiveness of Hydroxychloroquine, Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director, AIIMS, 
Delhi, informed the Committee in its meeting held on 19 th August, 2020 that some experimental 
data has shown that the Hydroxychloroquine might be useful and might have some protective 
benefit because those who have taken it have got less COVID-19 infection, as compared to those 
who have not taken it.  Therefore, they have continued to advocate that it can be given as a 
prophylactic dose. 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.12.14 The Committee observes that there is a global recognition of the Indian 
scientists who are engaged in producing vaccines and respect for India's institutional potential 
and capacity developed over the decade that has made India the largest drug manufacturer in  
the world.  
 
3.12.15 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by ICMR in handling the COVID-
19 Pandemic. The Committee recommends that while undertaking vaccine trial s all necessary 
and mandatory requirements must be duly fulfilled and all phases must be com pleted. Trials 
on small animals, human trials should be mandatorily undertaken on a sufficient sample size 
population. The Committee notes that no emergency use authorization has been given in  the 
past by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO). Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that if at all emergency authorization would be given, it should  be 
given by Government with proper consideration and caution and this provision should be 
used in rarest of the rare cases. 
 
3.12.16 The Committee opines that periodic press conferences should be held to kee p 
people informed about the progress made in vaccine development and the expected time of 
availability of a vaccine. The Committee also recommends, establishing a network fo r 
collecting samples of different patients from different places at different points of time  for 
future study. The Committee is of the considered view that once vaccination begins, it will 
restore the confidence among people and help in sustained revival of economic activitie s and 
creation of jobs. 

25 
 
 
 
 
3.13 Partnership building- involvement of the private sector, corporate, NGOs and ot her 
stakeholders 
 
3.13.1 The Committee sought to know from the MHA about the efforts made to involve the private 
and corporate sector and the civil society for building the required partnerships to fight the 
Pandemic and the outcomes thereof. The MHA in its reply has stated that the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare advised the State Governments to involve the private and corporate sector and Civil 
Society Organizations for the fight against COVID. The core areas of the partnership were in 
laboratory support, treatment, human resource, material logistic, vaccines, therapeutics and 
diagnostics. 
 
3.13.2 NDMA coordinated a series of meetings from 5 th March, 2020 onward with NGOs/CSOs to 
discuss the steps required to contain the spread of Coronavirus and the possible role for Civil 
Society Organizations. So far five such meetings have been coordinated by NDMA.  During these 
meetings participating Civil Society Organisations (CSOs)/ Non- Governmental Organisations 
(NGOs) informed about their ongoing activities/ efforts related to containment of COVID-19 
including awareness generations, food and dry ration distribution, sanitizers and masks distribution, 
etc. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
            
3.13.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA) in combating the Corona Virus Pandemic as they have swiftly responded by building 
synergy between the Centre and States over handling the Pandemic through Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs), guidelines, awareness generation and most importantly, acting 
as a nodal centre for funding manpower deployment to meet exigencies. The Committe e 
understands that this Pandemic is unprecedented even for the NDMA which is a dedicate d 
body for Disaster Management. Therefore, the Committee recommends that a separat e wing 
may be formed in NDMA that will specialize in handling /managing the Pandemics like  
COVID-19 in the future. This wing may take a leading role in building a partnership of 
Government with the public sector, corporates, NGOs and other stakeholders. 
 
 
3.13.4 The MHA has also formed an Empowered Group (EG 6). This group coordinates and has 
been actively and closely working with over 92,000 NGOs across the country who genuinely work 
in the public interest and helping them in charting the best course of the response action. These 
NGOs, given their connection with spatial and sectoral issues, have been a natural partner of the 
Government to tackle the unforeseen needs which have arisen in these testing times. The 
mobilization of these 92,000 NGOs has resulted in commendable outcomes as reported by State and 
District Administrations, where NGOs are actively engaged in:  
 
(i) Assisting and supporting the local administration in setting up community kitchens 
particularly for migrants and homeless population working in urban areas. 
(ii)  Creating awareness about prevention, hygiene, social distancing, isolation, and 
combating stigma.  
(iii) Supplementing the government efforts to provide shelter to homeless, daily wage 
workers and urban poor families. 

26 
 
(iv)  Extending support for distribution of PPE kits and protective provisions – sanitizers, 
soaps, masks, gloves, etc. for community workers and volunteers.  
(v) Supporting the government in setting up health camps. 
(vi)  Identifying hotspots and deputing volunteers and caregivers to deliver services to the 
elderly, persons with disabilities, children, transgender persons, and other vulnerable 
groups.  
(vii)  Developing a communications strategy in different vernaculars whereby they become 
active partners in creating awareness at the community level so that COVID-19 spread 
is tightly controlled.   
(viii) NGOs coordinated and worked closely with the district administrations and state 
governments so that measures of care, quarantine, and treatment go hand in hand. 
 
3.13.5 The public response has also been quite proactive in taking up preventive measures 
including social distancing measures, use of masks, and community engagement in managing 
COVID-19. In several parts of the country, people have understood the gravity of the situations and 
have started behaving responsibly. The State Governments have also put in place systems of 
collection of fine, to deal with deviant behavior like spitting in public, not wearing a mask in public 
places, etc. 
 
3.13.6 To the perception that the fight against the Pandemic has been guided more by the top-down 
approach as against the required bottom-up approach for more effective management, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs stated that the COVID-19 Pandemic is the defining public health emergency of 
this century. As not much was known about this disease, to fight against such a Pandemic a top-
down approach in terms of technical support and infrastructure up-gradation coupled with 
community involvement has been adopted and will be continued to ensure a coordinated response. 
Government at Centre and State level involved panchayats, urban bodies, local self-governments, 
NGOs, volunteers, civil society in its fight against the Pandemic. Panchayats and local self-
government took various measures and approaches based on the local requirements. 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.13.7 The Committee observes that there is a need to establish more inclusive governance for 
building up a strong community resilience system and the ability to co-exist with COVID-19. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that there should be an open a nd 
transparent data sharing mechanism between scientists, public health professionals and the 
public at large as this will strengthen Pandemic control measures build consensu s and evolve 
an ecosystem of engagement, faith, and trust.   
 
3.13.8 The Committee further recommends that the measures should continuously be taken 
to avoid social stigma and fear of isolation and quarantine, by making people aware and 
treating them with respect and empathy. An interdisciplinary team of public health 
specialists, grassroots political and social leaderships and volunteers can also raise awareness 
about modes of transmission and methods of prevention of COVID-19 in the community 
which can be done by adopting emergency risk communication methods and broad-base d 
community engagement strategies. 
 
3.14 Health Insurance Coverage 
 

27 
 
3.14.1 In the Committee meetings held on 19 th August, 2020 and 27th August, 2020, the Committee 
raised concern  about the health insurance cover provided to the COVID-19 patients. Until June, 
2020 hospitals were not accepting any insurance coverage. Moreover, insurance companies were 
not accepting it for a claim. Therefore, the patients did not get any support. The Committee came to 
know that, Corona Pandemic was not on the list when insurance policies were issued and because of 
that, claims were being refused. Subsequently, it was reported that the Government asked the 
IRDAI to launch COVID-19 specific products and issue directions.  The Committee specifically 
sought to know from the IRDAI about the initiatives taken to provide
 insurance coverage to 
affected people after the outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic, given its scale of impact, detai ls 
of products available for covering COVID-19 cases and the extent of coverage of each pr oduct. In 
its response, IRDAI stated the following- 
 
(i) Since the onset of the Pandemic, the IRDAI is continuously monitored its impact on the 
general public and the health insurance industry. It took a range of proactive measures to 
provide relief to policyholders, to safeguard the interest of policyholders and to make 
available affordable standard COVID-19 specific products to the common man. To allay 
any doubt, a clarification was issued by IRDAI soon after the onset of the Pandemic to 
the effect that all comprehensive health insurance schemes also covered treatment costs 
for COVID-19. The summary of important measures initiated by IRDAI is attached as 
"
Annexure IV".  
(ii) Indemnity policies that cover costs of hospitalization also provided coverage to COVID -
19. 
  
(iii) Keeping the need of the general public in view, IRDAI developed a standard COVID-19 
specific product called; Corona Kavach and directed all the general and health insurers 
to offer the product. Besides, IRDAI also developed a benefit-based COVID-19 specific 
standard product called Corona Rakshak and encouraged insurers to offer the same.  
Details of COVID-19 specific products offered by various insurers are attached as 
"
Annexure V".  
 
3.14.2 The Committee also enquired about the actions that have been taken to help COVID-19 
patients getting admission into hospitals with  the help of their insurance protection. The IRDAI in 
its response stated that in case of any need for hospitalization, a patient with an insurance policy 
gets in touch with the insurance company for authorization to be admitted. To ensure guidance and 
smooth admission, the IRDAI has instructed the insurers that in COVID-19 cases, such 
authorization should be issued within 2 hours of the request. If the insurance company has an 
arrangement with the hospital for a cashless facility, then the insurance company settles the bill at 
the time of discharge. In case a cashless facility is not available, the patient pays the hospital bill 
and seeks reimbursement from the insurer. IRDAI has also instructed insurers to settle claims in 
case of a cashless facility within 2 hours of the request so that patients can be discharged 
smoothly. 
 
3.14.3 Regarding details of complaints received by the IRDAI regarding the settlement of 
insurance claims; basic
 reasons for such complaints and measures taken to address the reasons for 
claimants, the IRDAI informed the Committee that- 
 
(i) In case of complaints regarding the settlement of claims, the policyholder has the option 
to approach the Insurance Ombudsman. 
  
(ii) The complaints generally related to overcharging by hospitals, denial of the cashless 

28 
 
facility, variation in levying charges towards consumables such as PPE kits, gloves and 
masks, etc. ,or on other non-medical expenditures. Claims not part of terms and 
conditions claims filed within the waiting period, amounts claiming over sub-limits, 
non-disclosure of material information at the time of buying policy were also some of 
the reasons for such complaints. 
 
(iii) Immediately after the onset of the Pandemic the Authority on 04 th March, 2020 took 
proactive measures and directed all the insurers to expedite the settlement of claims. 
The insurers were also instructed that any claim to be rejected had to be reviewed by the 
Claim Review Committee.  In compliance with the regulatory framework specified by 
the IRDAI, all the insurance companies have already put in place a well-structured 
grievance redress mechanism. In case of any grievances, the policyholder may approach 
the concerned grievance officer of the insurance companies. Further, given the 
prevailing situation, the Authority has time and again advised the insurers to be 
sensitive towards the requirement of policyholders and directed to ensure quick and 
timely settlement of claims. 
 
(iv) As part of the regulatory framework, the Authority notified various regulations for the 
timely settlement of claims. Turnaround times were specified for settlement of claims, 
for granting pre-authorization requests and for the final discharge of the insured patient 
from the hospital. 
 
(v) An integrated grievance redress system is already in place with IRDAI to track the 
complaints of the policyholders and to monitor the grievance resolution by all the 
insurance companies.   
 
(vi) The IRDAI also monitors the activities of all insurers on an ongoing basis.   
 
3.14.4 The Committee also sought to know the important lessons learn t from the COVID-19 
experience to further
 streamline the health insurance policies for ensuring quick and wider 
benefits of people in such situations. The IRDAI in its response stated the following- 
 
(i) The COVID-19 Pandemic is challenging for the health insurance industry on various 
fronts. Based on the media reports and COVID-19 specific business data the 
Pandemic has increased awareness of the need for health insurance and its 
importance. 
  
(ii) The IRDAI has made efforts to create standard health insurance products. It is 
expected that this would help the customers to choose the right product and enhance 
the trust of the policyholders of health insurance services.  
 
(iii) The healthcare systems need to be well prepared with well-defined medical protocols 
to handle any health contingencies in the future. Expanding the healthcare 
infrastructure to tier 2, 3 and 4 cities and rural areas needs focus. 
 
(iv) To make insurance part of the overall economic culture of Indian society, there is an 
urgent need to mandate the provisioning of health insurance for all organisations, 
entities and other business establishments that are employing a certain number of 
employees or workers. 
 

29 
 
(v) There is a need to have regulatory oversight on all hospitals working in the country 
to provide quality healthcare and to promote fair practices, increase transparency and 
accountability and to prevent unethical practices. 
 
(vi) The Pandemic has also opened up new vistas for treatment like telemedicine/ 
teleconsultation. It is an opportunity for the insurance industry to develop products to 
cover such treatment. 
 
(vii) The COVID-19 has also highlighted the lack of adequate hospital infrastructure. The 
need and importance of primary health care; a good network of such centres should 
have helped in managing the Pandemic more effectively. The insurers will be more 
confident in developing products to cover OPD treatment if there is a robust PHC 
system. 
 
(viii) Medical inflation which is resulting in an escalation of costs of treatment 
necessitates a periodical increase in the premiums charged by insurance companies. 
Further, the variation in the costs of treatment for insurance cases (when compared 
to the costs charged by hospitals for non-insurance cases) and prescription of 
unnecessary diagnostic tests also lead to an escalation of the cost of treatment. For an 
insured patient, it is another factor for the periodical rise in premium rates. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.5  
The Committee observes that in the initial phase of Pandemic, insurance 
coverage was not given to many people who suffered from COVID-19. The private hospitals  
were charging exorbitantly high rates for the treatment of COVID patients who ha d to suffer 
a lot due to lack of any insurance coverage. The Committee  appreciates the efforts made by 
the IRDAI to create standard health insurance products and recommends that the he althcare 
systems need to be well prepared with well-defined medical protocols to han dle any health 
contingencies in future. Expanding the healthcare infrastructure to tier 2, 3 and 4 cities and 
rural areas needs focus. The Committee further recommends that transparency and 
accountability need to be increased to provide quality healthcare and to promote fair 
practices. There is a need to have regulatory oversight on all hospitals working in the  country 
to prevent refusal to accept insurance claims. The Committee strongly recommen ds that the 
target should be to make COVID-19 treatment cashless for all people that are having 
insurance coverage. 
 
3.15 COVID-19 situation in Delhi 
 
3.15.1 The Committee, in its meeting held on 27 th August, 2020, heard the views of the Chief 
Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi to have an understanding of the overall strategies adopted 
to handle the Pandemic.  
 
3.15.2 The Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi, apprised the Committee in the meeting 
held on 27 th August, 2020 about the status of COVID-19 cases in Delhi vis-à-vis India; health 
infrastructure and clinical interventions in Delhi; other institutional interventions and welfare 
measures that were undertaken in terms of the entire COVID-19 management in Delhi; specific 
arrangements for international passengers in Delhi, etc. 
 

30 
 
3.15.3 The Committee was informed that under the aegis of MHA, a Panel of experts comprising 
the representation from National Institute for Transforming India (NITI) Aayog, National Centre for 
Disease Control (NCDC), Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (MoHFW), a focused response based on the situational analysis of the COVID-19  
outbreak in Delhi was rolled out. The 4-T strategy that includes tracing, tracking, testing and 
treatment was meticulously followed. The testing capacity enhancement was substantial as the 
number of tests that were being done in Delhi till the 14 th June, 2020, averaging about 3,500 to 
4,000 a day. Broad based Testing Strategy resulted in seamless access to testing for the citiz ens and 
reduction in the burden of disease, Niche focuses on HRG's/SSG's and other vulnerable segments 
have reduced mortality/spread of disease, there has been an improvement in recovery and doubli ng 
rates and significant decline in hospital admissions and positivity rate from 37.68 % on 14 th June, 
2020 to 7.7 % on 22 nd August, 2020. Case Fatality Rate has also been reduced from a peak of 4.1% 
on 16th June, 2020 to 1.64% on 10 th December, 2020. As of 10 th December, 2020 there are 18,852, 
7942 and 562 beds in hospital, dedicated COVID care centre and dedicated COVID health centre 
respectively in Delhi out of which more than 21, 000 beds are vacant in total.  
 
3.15.4 The updated information on the status of COVID-19 cases, patient management, testing, 
containment zones, etc., in Delhi (as on 10th December, 2020) 
 
 COVID-19 Positive Cases Status on 9th December, 2020
  
 
Positive Cases 1575 
Tests Conducted 64069 
Positivity Rate 2.46 % 
Recovered/Discharged/Migrated 3307 
Deaths 61 
Death Rate (Based on last 10 days data) 2.27 % 
 
 
 COVID-19 Patient Management 
 
 Total beds Occupied Vacant 
Hospital 18852 5193 13659 
Dedicated COVID Care Centre 7942 338 7344 
Dedicated COVID Health Centre 562 106 456 
Home Isolation 11541 
* 260 beds of CCC are occupied by persons under quarantine including 
travelers who came By Vande Bharat Mission and Bubble flights 
 
 
 
฀  COVID-19 Testing Status
  
 
RTPCR/CBNAAT/True Nat tests conducted today 29441 
Rapid antigen test conducted today 34628 
Total tests done so far 7005476 
Tests per million 368709 
฀  COVID-19 Positive Cases Status : Cumulative 
 

31 
 
Cumulative Positive Cases 601150 
Cumulative Positivity Rate 8.58 % 
Recovered/Discharged/Migrated 572523 
Deaths 9874 
Case Fatality Rate 1.64 % 
Active Cases 18753 
 
฀  Total Number of Containment Zones as of date: 6430 
฀  Calls received in Control Room: 317 
฀  Total number of calls dispatched to ambulances: 1302 
฀  Total number of calls refused: Nil 
 
 
3.15.5 The Committee was apprised that in Delhi, the Government of Delhi and MHA are doing 
their level best to triangulate the deaths from three sources. The first source is the number of deaths 
that are being reported by the hospitals. The second source is the total bodies that are being 
cremated or buried in the various crematoria and burial grounds are being looked at through the 
municipal corporations. The third source is the numbers of bodies that are being looked at, which 
are being disposed of by the hospitals through their morgues and mortuaries.  So, these sources of 
data are periodically triangulated to confirm that the actual level of deaths is in that broad range as 
they have been indicated and there is no big difference and they are broadly calibrating  with each 
other.  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.15.6 The Committee appreciates the effort made by the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
Government of NCT of Delhi in building India's biggest COVID-19 care centre consisting of 
10,000 beds and also the timely interventions made to control the spread of the virus in the 
national capital. The Committee
 observes that the district-specific or the area-wise total 
number of cases are not being maintained and reported by the Delhi Government. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Delhi Government should maintain and release 
district-wise data of the positive cases, recovered cases and the testing status. This will bring 
more transparency and will make people aware of the situation in their localities. The 
Committee further recommends that the balance should be maintained between RT-P CR and 
RAT and issuing of Medical Certification of Cause of Death (MCCD) should be made  
compulsory for all hospitals to get the exact number of COVID-19 deaths in Delhi.
 
 
3.15.7The Committee expresses concern over the recent spike in the incidence  of the COVID-
19 cases in Delhi due to the combined effect of series of festive events, increase in air pollution 
and advent of the winter season. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Min istry of 
Home Affairs to review the situation in Delhi and co-ordinate with the Government of NCT of 
Delhi to adopt a robust strategy for containment and mitigation of the recent surge in c ases 
and take necessary measures to prevent the subsequent waves of infections in Delhi. 

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
SOCIAL IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
4.1 Introduction 
4.1.1 The changing scale and contours of the COVID-19 Pandemic had an accumulative social  
impact in India. While on one hand, the Pandemic and the lockdown have challenged the very way 
in which Indian cities function, and how they are organized, life in villages and rural hinterlands; on 
the other hand also impacted the disturbance of supply chains due to the return of migrants. 
There 
are several dimensions of social impact, nature of impact and the groups impacted.  
4.1.2 The causes of social impact includes curbing of mobility, work from home, occupations 
dependent on public spaces, needs of Pandemic safety behaviour, education at home, psychological 
impact specially on children, prejudices against people and communities and social isolation/ 
stigma issues associated with the Pandemic, issues of food security, availability of COVID-19 and 
non-COVID-19 health services and return of migrant workers to their home town.  
4.1.3 The nature of impacts include loss of livelihoods and incomes, loss of access to health 
infrastructure, food and shelter, loss of social interactions, mental health issues, anxieties on 
account of the uncertainty of Pandemic and loss of personal mobility, lack of infrastructure support 
for education at home and likelihood of interruption in education and dropouts, physiological and 
psychological impacts on children/young people, stress on account of staying together in crampe d 
and dingy houses, inter-generational conflicts, domestic abuse and alcoholism, inadequate food, 
lack of nutrition, lack of access to PDS, interruption in long term treatments, expensive treatments, 
migrants forced to return home walking long distances by foot, creation of a culture of fear, etc.
1 
4.1.4 The Committee was informed about the several vulnerable groups and issues faced by them. 
Some of these have been detailed in the successive paragraphs.  
4.2 Social impact on migrant workers and the poor 
4.2.1 
The COVID-19 Pandemic has severely impacted migrant workers and the poor, due to the 
shutting down of industries and factories during lockdowns. The Committee, therefore, sought the 
information from the Ministry of Home
 Affairs whether it had anticipated the problems that a large 
number of migrant workers were likely to face on account of the complete lockdown. The Ministr y 
stated that the Central Government was fully conscious that during the period of an inevitable 
lockdown, no citizen should be deprived of basic amenities of food, drinking water, medication, etc. 
The Central Government, therefore, worked out a financial package to take care of such inevitable 
hardship. Under the "Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana", a package of Rs.1.70 Lakh Crore wa s 
announced. The Central Government, on realizing the problems being faced by migrant workers, 
announced many relief measures for their welfare and issued instructions to State Governments to 
mitigate the problems faced by them.  
4.2.2 On the objective behind preventing the exodus of migrant workers
, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated that the Central Government took the required steps to prevent the spread of COVID-
19 in the country. The measures were essential in the interest of the general public and for ensuring 
the safety and health of citizens. The Government was conscious of the plight of poor people 
including migrant workers. The movement of migrant workers on their own in large numbers 
d
efeats the very object of the preventive measures taken by the Central Government. If such a group 
                                                           
1 TISS stated in a detailed analytical response based on r esearch and extensive fieldwork undertaken by faculty  members of TISS in the Mumbai, 
Tuljapur and Hyderabad campuses in the year 2020. 

33 
 
of persons in large numbers was permitted to reach their home villages in rural India, there was the 
possibility of them carrying COVID-19 infection to the rural population of their respective village 
which had remained untouched at that time. For this apprehension, the resistance of many villages 
to permit such migrant workers to enter their villages was also reported. The country was dealing 
with an unprecedented situation and any lapse at any end by anyone could have result in the loss of  
precious human lives. Accordingly, a decision was taken not to permit further movement of such 
migrant workers and required them to stay wherever they have reached while providing shelter, 
food and medical facilities to them and observing social distance norms. 
4.2.3 
Keeping these factors in mind, the Central Government, through the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, issued directives/orders/advisories to all State Governments to strictly comply with and 
enforce the lockdown for the specified period and follow social distancing norms which would 
mean the complete prohibition of inter-district and inter-State migration of any population 
including the migrant workers. 
4.3 Institutional mechanism for monitoring the movement of migrant workers, their 
welfare and protection of rights  
 
4.3.1 The Ministry of Labour and Employment while replying to the questionnaire, informed the 
Committee that 
to safeguard the interest of the migrant workers the Central Government has 
enacted the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) 
Act, 1979 which, inter-alia, provides for payment of minimum wages, journey allowance, 
displacement allowance, residential accommodation, medical facilities and protective clothing, etc. 
The provisions of various labour laws like the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923, the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, the 
Employees' Provident Funds and the Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the Maternity Benefit 
Act, 2017 are also applicable on migrant workers. The Government has also enacted the 
Unorganized Workers' Social Security Act, 2008 to provide for social security and welfare of 
unorganized workers including migrant workers. 
 
4.4 Measures taken for the return of migrant workers to their places of domicile 
 
4.4.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note also apprised the Committee of the  
evacuation/transportation Plans made for migrant workers, students, etc. during the lockdown 
period which are as follows- 
 
i. Due to the lockdown migrant workers, pilgrims, tourists, students and other persons were 
stranded in a different part of the country. States/UTs were directed to make adequate 
arrangements for providing them with shelters, food, water, health facilities and also proper 
counselling. States/UTs were also allowed to use the State Disaster Response Fund for this 
purpose and an amount of Rs. 11,092 crore was released in advance on 3 rd April, 2020 to all 
States to augment funds with them.  
 
ii. Under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) guidelines dated 15 th April, 2020, several 
economic activities were allowed to operate. MHA issued an Order on 19 th April, 2020 to 
allow the movement of stranded labour within the State/UT so that these workers could be 
engaged in industrial, manufacturing, construction, farming and MNREGA works. 
  
iii. To enable the movement of migrant workers, pilgrims, tourists, students and other persons 
to their native places, MHA issued an order on 29 th April, 2020. Their movement by buses 
was to be facilitated by the sending and receiving State/UT. State/UTs were also mandated to 

34 
 
follow adequate health safeguards during their movement. On the requests of several States, 
the MHA issued an Order dated 1 st May, 2020 to allow the movement of these stranded 
persons by train by observing the health safeguards. A detailed Standard Operating Protocol 
(SOP) was also issued by the Ministry of Railways for their movement by running special 
'Shramik' trains. Indian Railways based on the request from State Governments started 
operating "Shramik" special trains beginning 1st May, 2020. 
 
iv. The Indian Railways from 1 st May 2020 till 6 th July, 2020 had operated 4,611 Shramik 
Special trains as "Trains on Demand" and as per the requests made by States. Approximately 
63.07 Lakh migrants were facilitated to reach various destinations. The State Government and 
railways provided food and water free of cost. The Railways up to 6 th  July, 2020 had served 
1.95 crore meals and over 2.18 crore packaged drinking water bottles (Rail Neer) apart from 
the services provided by the respective State Governments. Also, 35 lakh free meals were 
distributed to the needy by IRCTC and commercial staff. 
 
4.4.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note also apprised the Committee about the 
measures taken by the Ministry of Labour & Employment towards the problems of Migrant 
Labours during the COVID-19 Pandemic which are as follows- 
 
i. There is around 2.58 crore live registered buildings and other construction workers (BoCW) 
in the country and the majority of them are migrant workers. The workers are registered with 
various BoCW Welfare boards of the State/UT Governments. 
 
ii. Advisory had been issued by the Ministry of Labour and Employment to all States/UTs on 
24th March, 2020 and 27 th March, 2020 for extending financial assistance to construction 
workers during the outbreak of COVID-19. In response, 31 State/UT Governments had 
provided cash benefits (ranging from Rs. 1000/- to 6000/- per worker) by DBT from cess fund 
to 1.82 crore workers across the country involving an amount of approx. Rs.4970.00 crore. 
 
iii. Further, some States also started releasing second instalment. Also, 5 States/UTs 
(Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Mizoram, DNH and Daman & Diu) also gave food relief packages 
to around 29 lakh workers from the cess fund. 
 
iv. EPFO had operationalized the PMGKY package for providing relief of the payment of 
employee's & employer's share of EPF & EPS contributions (24 percent of wages) in the EPF 
accounts of low wage-earning (less than Rs.15000/-) EPF members for six months by 
Government of India and to incentivize medium and small establishments employing up to 
100 employees to retain their low wage-earning employees.  
 
v. Under this package benefits amounting to Rs.775.75 crore have been disbursed/are in 
process of being disbursed to 48.85 lakh eligible employees reported in the 3.07 lakhs 
Electronic Challans cum Returns (ECR) filed from March, 2020 onwards by the employers. 
 
vi.  The EPF Scheme has been amended to provide for an advance from EPF account to the 
extent of 75 percent of EPF balance or three-month wages whichever is lower as part of the 
PMGKY package.  
 
vii. Online COVID-19 Advance Claims of 14.48 lakh members have been processed and an 
amount of Rs.4308.5 crore has been disbursed to Bank accounts of EPF members. 
 

35 
 
viii.  Rate of EPF contributions was reduced from 12 to 10 percent of basic wages and 
dearness allowances for three wage months (May, 2020 to July, 2020) under Atma Nirbhar 
Bharat which would benefit 4.3 crore employees/ members and employers of 6.5 lakh 
establishments to tide over the immediate liquidity crisis. 
 
ix. As a result of the reduction in statutory rate of contributions from 12 to 10 percent, the 
employee shall have a higher take-home pay due to a reduction in a deduction from his pay on 
account of EPF contributions and the employer shall also have his liability reduced by 2 
percent of wages of his employees. 
 
x. Definition of Inter-State Migrant Worker is proposed to be expanded in the Draft Labour 
Code on Occupational Safety and Health to cover all workers, including organized, 
unorganised and self-employed workers. This will facilitate them to receive more benefits in 
the future. 
 
4.4.3 In the meeting held on 15 th July, 2020, the Home Secretary informed the Committee that in 
later March, 2020, relief camps were set up for providing food to migrant workers who had lost jobs 
and to homeless people or any stranded migrant or anybody who wanted the relief and to augment 
this, Rs.11,000 crores were released from the SDRF to the States on 3 rd April, 2020.  On 29 th April, 
2020 the movement of migrant workers was allowed, 41,000 camps and shelters were set up in the 
country and more than 14 lakhs people were housed there.  Besides this, there were 30,000 food 
camps also.  About 17 lakh workers, stayed with their employers or in industry campuses where 
they were being provided shelter and food.  There were many other places where food packets and 
food was being given.  The MHA issued various advisories whenever the issues of migrant labour's 
or labourers' movement came up.  Starting on 27 th March, 2020, States were asked to prevent 
exodus, to take steps to set up shelters and give food packets, to have essential items available to 
them and to open helplines for such people.  Again on 28 th March, 2020, the MHA issued another 
advisory regarding the publicity of location of relief camps as people started walking on roads.  
Then, Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY) was launched which had a lot of relief 
measures for the poor people.  The MHA also advised to States to provide tented accommodation,  
proper food, hygiene and social distancing for the people who have come on highways. 
Besides,some movement of migrant workers in the trucks and tankers were also observed.  The 
MHA issued an advisory again to stop such movement and to keep them in proper relief camps.  
4.4.4 The Home Secretary further stated that- 
 "there was a large number of people gathering at Anand Vihar and moving to 
Uttar Pradesh.  But, subsequently, for the next one-and-a-half month, there 
was no such thing.  Migrant labourers stayed put in their places where they 
were.  All the States cooperated very well and managed them in camps or 
their places of stay, and their food requirements were also managed well. 
Their health, hygiene and all were also taken care of. Of course, when the 
lockdown got extended for a little longer period, the labour wanted to move.  
We had opened up activities thinking that they might go back to work.  
Perhaps, that understanding, to a much extent, was not correct.  They wanted 
to go back, and, then, at that point of time, it was decided that we should run 
trains and also buses." 
4.4.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its response to the questionnaire furnished the details of 
temporary relief centres arranged for the benefit of migrant workers in their home States and for 

36 
 
those who returned to their native States and the total number of migrant workers sheltered in such 
centres which are at Annexure VI. 
4.4.6 
The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Labour and Employment through a 
questionnaire about the lessons learned from the experience of hardships faced by the migrant 
workers during the present Pandemic. The Ministry responded that the National Database of 
migrant workers along with their bank details, seeded with Aadhaar will be of immense help to 
provide financial assistance/relief package to the workers through DBT. 
 
4.4.7 The Committee was also apprised by the Ministry of Labour and Employment that the 
problems of migration/migrant workers are sought to be addressed through a multidimensional 
course of action through rural development, provision of improved infrastructural facilities, 
equitable dispersal of resources to remove regional disparities, employment generation, land 
reforms, increased literacy, financial assistance, etc. A national database for unorganized workers 
including migrant workers is under the active stage of approval. 
 
4.4.8 The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Labour and Employment through 
its reply that the National Database on workers to facilitate the registration of the workers including 
migrant workers will be launched soon by the Ministry of Labour and Employment. This database 
will help the State Governments, migrant labourers, other workers and stakeholders including 
Government authorities to know the movement of workers from their native states to the destination 
states and back. Moreover, it will help the authorities to plan welfare schemes and measures for 
them. 
 
4..4.9 In its meeting held on 27 th August, 2020, one of the Members sought to know about the last 
survey done by the NSSO on the migrant workers. To this, the Representative, NSSO, replied that- 
 
"Regarding the question on migration, one thing I would like to bring to the notice 
of the Committee that in PLFS, the Labour Force Data Collection, there was no 
provision for migration data.  And, because of the COVI-19, we have additional 
information on migration which we started collecting from July this year.  We have 
started collecting data on migration specifically keeping in mind that there was a 
huge migration during that period of lockdown on this.  So, we have some 
additional data and on the advice of the Working Group, we have started collecting 
it.  So, that analysis will also be there when we come with the Report".     
 
Recommendations 
 
4.4.10  The Committee observes that the migrant workers are the backbone of the 
industrial sector but the COVID-19 Pandemic has exposed certain problems in the existing 
public policy framework. 
Due to the lockdown, the migrant workers lost their jobs. The 
uncertainty involved with the Pandemic and inadequate social security, access to affordable 
housing, health benefits and other basic amenities led to their migration to their home States. 
The lack of these benefits points to the in-effective implementation of the Inter-State M igrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979. The task of 
identifying
 the location and disbursing relief measures to the migrant workers became very 
difficult as the Central Government did not have any data of the migrant workers and had  to 
seek it from the States.  

37 
 
4.4.11  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government to extend 
various relief measures to the vulnerable sections of the society. However, in the absence of a 
comprehensive National Database, it is difficult to extend the relief measures by the 
Government to the intended beneficiaries.  
 
4.4.12  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should en sure a 
decent minimum wage, food security and safe living conditions to all the workers employed in 
both the formal and informal sector by including them in health services, cash transfer and 
other social programmes. Further, the Committee strongly recommends that the National 
Database on migrant workers should be launched at the earliest as it will help in th e 
identification of migrant workers and also in delivering ration and other benefits to them. The 
database may also include the records of returning migrant labourers including details about 
their source and destination, earlier employment details and the nature of their skills w hich 
will help in skill development and planning for the transit of migrant workers in emergency 
situations such as the outbreak of Pandemic, etc.
  
4.4.13  The Committee further recommends that the Government should revisit the 
Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 
1979 and other Labour Laws to strengthen and implement them in letter and spirit. 
The 
Committee also recommends that the Government should use different platforms to pr ovide 
information about the various government schemes and other avenues of employment.  
4.5 Impact of COVID-19 on Education 
4.5.1 The COVID -19 Pandemic and the subsequent lockdown have adversely affected the 
education sector globally as well as in India as students are attending online classes and thereb y 
being deprived of availing- on-campus resources, direct coaching/mentoring of teachers, peer group 
learning and interaction, etc.  However, the Pandemic has also worked as an opportunity for 
educational institutions to grow and opt for new platforms and techniques.  
4.5.2 On being asked about the measures taken to minimize the impact of COVID-19 on the 
education system/academic calendar in the country, the Department of Higher Education stated that 
at the beginning of Pandemic, on 18 th  March, 2020, a letter was issued by the Secretary/ Higher 
Education and School Education & Literacy to University Grants Commission, All India Council of 
Technical Education, National Council for Technical Education, Central Board of Secondary 
Education, National Testing Agency, National Institute of Open Schooling, all autonomous 
organizations under the Ministry of Education and all States/UTs regarding the precautions to be 
taken in the light of COVID-19.  Moreover, all educational institutes and examination boards were 
requested to maintain regular communication with the students and teachers through e-means and 
notify helpline numbers/ emails to address their queries. In March, 2020, UGC too issued an 
advisory to all universities to take suitable precautions including hygiene.  
4.5.3 As the country began to unlock, the Standing Committee of IIT Council (SCIC) constituted 
a Committee to manage the closure of session 2019-20 and commencement of the next session 
2020-21. That Committee has been meeting periodically since June 2020. In the 12 th meeting of the 
Standing Committee of IIT held on 16 th July 2020, the measures taken/ are being taken by IITs to 
minimize the impact of COVID-19 were discussed.  The Committee expressed its satisfaction with 
the measures contemplated by IITs.  AICTE launched a digital helpline for students to support 
stranded students and re-connect them to their family, schools, colleges and meet their urgent 
personal needs including psychological support. Admissions at UG level in IITs, have already been 
completed in November 2020 and online classes have started in November. So far as new 

38 
 
admission to PG programmes in IITs is concerned, the examination through JAM was already 
conducted and the provisional admissions have been given subject to clearing of final year UG 
programme. The provisionally admitted students will be undergoing classes through an online 
programme. Online classes are being conducted for existing students in IITs.
 
 
4.5.4 Department of School Education also apprised the Committee about the measures taken to 
minimize the impact of COVID-19 on the education system/academic calendar in the country, some 
of which are as under:  
  
(i) DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing), a national online platform for 
school education is available for all states and the central government for grades 1 to 12. 
(ii) Access through TV channels- Swayam Prabha TV Channels to support and reach those who 
do not have access to the internet;  
(iii)Extensive use of Radio, Community Radio and Podcasts for children in remote areas who 
are not online;  
(iv) A digitally Accessible Information System (DAISY) has been developed for visually and 
hearing impaired students, study material and a sign language; both are available on the 
NIOS website/ YouTube; 
(v) The e-textbooks accessible through an e-Pathshala web portal and mobile app (Android, 
iOS, Windows);  
(vi) National Repository of Open Educational Resources (NROER), an open storehouse of e-
content has been formed for students, teachers, teacher educators and parents;  
(vii) 
An initiative  named MANODARPAN has been started  by the Ministry to provide 
psychosocial support to students, teachers and families for mental health and emotional 
wellbeing during the COVID outbreak and beyond; 
(viii) Mid-Day Meal  has been changed to dry food, rations, DBT, etc.; 
(ix) For Capacity Building, the initiatives include up-Skilling of teachers towards the usage of e-
learning resources, online modules under NISHTHA (National Initiative for School 
Heads' and Teachers' Holistic Advancement), etc.  
(x) 
An initiative by NCERT named "PRAGYATA" which highlights important measures to be 
followed while using digital platforms.  
4.5.6 The Committee notes the digital divide between rural and urban areas, as it can be inferred 
from the National Statistical Office in its NSS 75 th round Report mentioned that the access to 
computer and internet in India2 is as below: 
 
i. Nearly 4 percent of rural households and 23 percent of urban households possessed 
computer. [Statement 7.1]   
 
                                                           
2   National Statistical Office in its NSS 75th round Report, on "Household Social C onsumption on Education in India", 
published by Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation, Government of India 
http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/Report_585_75th_round_Education_final_1507_0.p
df Page 17 
 

39 
 
ii. Nearly 24 percent of the households in the country had internet access in the survey year 
2017-18. The proportions were 15 percent among rural households and 42 among urban 
households. [Statement 7.1] 
 
iii.  Among persons age 15-29 years, nearly 24 percent in rural areas and 56 percent in 
urban areas were able to operate a computer. [Statement 7.4]  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.5.7 The Committee appreciates the various digital initiatives taken by the Government for 
conducting online classes. However, social inequalities exist in the society relating to the 
availability of resources to access these online classes and other digital initiatives taken by the 
Government.  
4.5.8 The Committee, strongly recommends that a scheme may be worked out to provid e 
financial assistance as well as low- cost subsidized devices like tablets, smartphones and 
computers to students with sufficient data to access these facilities, especially for the students 
belonging to weaker sections of the  society. The Committee further recommends that to 
enable the students to get the benefit of online classes and also to bridge the digital divid e, the 
Government should prioritize the strengthening of the IT infrastructure to provide 
uninterrupted internet connection throughout the country especially, in the rural areas.  
Meanwhile, big screens may be placed in the community centres particularly in rural are as so 
that the poor children who do not have smartphones/ internet connection can continu e their 
studies from these community centres. The lockdown imposed has brought a paradigm shift  
from classroom teaching to online teaching. Schools, Colleges and other higher educat ional 
institutions are quickly adapting themselves to this shift and conducting online classes so that 
studies do not suffer. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that training may be 
imparted to teachers to conduct online classes as it is different from teach ing in a classroom 
and would be regular phenomenon in times of COVID-19. 
4.6 Reopening of schools/ colleges 
4.6.1 The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry of Education has worked out any plan 
for the gradual reopening of educational institutions countrywide for commencing the new 
academic year. The Department of Higher Education in its response dated 4 th December, 2020 
stated that the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs ( dated 15 th October, 2020, 
guidelines for re-opening)  has allowed the opening of State Universities, Private Universities for 
research Scholars (Ph.D.) and Post Graduate students in science and technology stream requiring 
laboratory/experimental works. Further, each State has to decide about the opening of the 
educational institute and each educational institute will decide about the opening of the institutions 
depending on local condition. The Ph.D. and PG students who are needed to do practical work in 
the lab are allowed to visit the campus. Further, IITs/IIMs/IISERs/ NITs have already started online 
classes for the existing students promoted to next semester. The examinations of the final year were 
already concluded by IITs, as per the decision of the respective State. NITs/IISERs/IIMs too have 
completed their final year examination. The intervening period of closure during the academic Year 
2019-20 was managed through online classes. 
4.6.2 Moreover, the IITs/IISERs/NITs/ IIMs have already planned their norms for the classroom, 
social distancing in classes, mess and outside the campus. Detailed planning has been done for each 
institution and it has been decided to adopt as per local situation and as per the instructions of 

40 
 
district/state authorities. The university Grants Commission (UGC) has also issued guidelines on 
examination and academic calendar for the universities in view of COVID-19 Pandemic. 
4.6.3 The Department of School Education stated that the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development a discussion with all the States/ UTs on reopening of schools. The responses of them 
are as follows- 
 
Feedback from States and UTs regarding Reopening of Schools- 
 
i. 07 States / UTs desire to reopen schools as per MHA guidelines (Assam, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, Lakshadweep) 
ii. 08 States / UTs would like to consider reopening schools in September, 2020 if possible 
(Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Ladakh, Manipur, Nagaland, 
Odisha). 
iii. 14 States / UTs yet to decide (ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS, 
CHHATTISGARH, DND – DNH, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal). 
 
The Department of School Education and Literacy in its reply dated 7 th August, 2020, to a 
Questionnaire stated about the feedback of Parents regarding reopening of schools– 
 
i. Most Parents from all over India want Schools to open once the number of cases of 
COVID-19 is reduced. Primary Schools may be opened only after the availability of the 
COVID-19 vaccine. Secondary and Higher Secondary schools may be opened September 
onwards. Schools to work in Shifts or Children to attend School on Alternate Days   
ii. Reduction of Curriculum for the year. 
iii. Cancellation of non-essential Classes/ Subjects. No Assembly, No Games 
iv. Presence of proper Medic in School 
v. Reduction of School fees 
vi. Proper supervision of online learning Platforms like DIKSHA, Youtube and Whatsapp 
Groups 
4.6.4 The Committee also sought to know that how the Ministry is planning to ensure the safety 
of the students once the institutions reopen, how practical is to follow social distancing and hygiene 
norms in a classroom, how would the school transportation operate and whether the Ministry is 
preparing any guidelines to monitor the norms to be followed in the institutions. The Department of 
Higher Education and Department of School Education in reply dated 6 th and 7 th August, 2020 
respectively, stated that the guidelines of MoHFW containing the precautionary measures to be 
taken in the light of COVID-19 were circulated to all the institutions. YUKTI portal 
(https://yukti.mic.gov.in) has been developed to deal with the efforts and initiatives of the Ministry 
of Education during these difficult times caused by the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19). The 
primary aim of this portal is to keep the academic community healthy and to enable a conti nuous 
high-quality learning environment for learners. 
4.6.5 Apart from the above measures, detailed SOPs have been issued by the Ministry of 
Education for ensuring continuous maintenance and monitoring of cleanliness and hygienic 
conditions in and around premises, maintaining at least 6 feet distance between students in the 
seating plan, maintaining social distancing in the staff rooms, office area, and other places of public 

41 
 
interaction, sanitization of transportation regularly at least twice a day. These guidelines will be 
issued to States/UTs once MHA decides on the dates for the reopening of schools.    
4.6.6
 It was further informed by the Department of School Education & Literacy that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs in its guidelines for re-opening (dated 15 th October, 2020) has allowed State/UT 
Governments to decide in respect of re-opening of schools and coaching institutions in graded 
manner and SOPs for the same will be issued by M/O Education and concerned State/UT 
Government. After the issuance of MHA guidelines for unlock-5, on 5 th October, 2020, the 
Department of School Education & Literacy has issued detailed SOP/ guidelines regarding health 
and safety precautions for reopening of schools. The guidelines refer to the health and safety aspects 
of reopening schools. These are based on the prevailing instructions of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Education about health and  safety 
protocols, and are to be implemented by adopting/adapting in accordance with the local situation in 
all states/UTs. The Guidelines also emphasizes on learning with physical/social distancing and the 
academic aspects that are to be taken care of with regard to the delivery of education, such as, 
curriculum transactions, instructional load, timetables, assessment, etc. after schools reopen. 
Recommendation 
4.6.7 The Committee notes that the schools and other educational institutions have remained 
closed since March, 2020 due to the Pandemic. Standard Operating Procedures (SOP s) have 
been issued by the Ministry of Education along with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare in consultation with respective State Governments. The Committee recomm ends that 
special emphasis should be given on physical distancing, masks, hand washing, classr oom 
spaces and sanitization of the classrooms. Moreover, mix mode of learning i.e. both online and 
offline classes should be encouraged and classroom studies may begin in a phased mann er 
with staggered timings for different classes/ sections. The Committee further observes that the 
primary and pre-primary students should not be called to the classrooms, and m ay continue 
to be taught via. online modes till vaccines are made available or the situation comes under 
total control. 
4.7 Psychological impact of COVID-19  
4.7.1 The Committee, while discussing the social impact of the Pandemic on the education of the 
children, observed that psychological issues have emerged among the children and parents due to 
prolonged screen time/ online classes and non-availability of school education due to the Pandemic. 
The Committee further observed that the important measures to counter the COVID-19 Pandemic 
such as social distancing norms ha ve also disrupted the social lives of people. The lockdown 
brought the country to a standstill resulting in home confinement, risk of getting infected, loss of 
business leading to loss of employment, food scarcity, fear of non-completion of the academic year, 
etc. Thus, the Pandemic has a psychological effect on almost all sections of society that needed to  
be addressed.  
4.7.2 
In the Committee meeting held on 19th August, 2020, Director, AIIMS, New Delhi informed 
the Committee that for addressing psychological stress and mental health issues, not only for the 
patients, but also even for the healthcare
 workers, the NIMHANS, Bangalore, and the Psychiatry 
Department of the AIIMS, New Delhi had set up a special website to try and address these issues 
where healthcare workers and patients can interact and discuss the issues related to mental health.  
He further informed that a lot more needs to be done because there are psychological issues that 
could be related to the disease, and reduced social interaction leading to loneliness and, therefore, 
there is a need to focus more on physical distancing, rather than social distancing.   

42 
 
4.7.3 The Ministry of Education while replying to the questionnaire informed the Committee that 
it has come up with an initiative called "Manodarpan" for parents, teachers and students to mitigate 
the psychological impact of the lockdown and the Pandemic. 
4.7.4 The Committee notes that the National Mental Health Survey 2015-16 by the National 
Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences (NIMHANS) and supported by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. According to this survey, nearly 150 million Indians needed ac tive 
mental health care interventions while fewer than 30 million are seeking this support.  
4.7.5 In the meeting held on 19 th August, 2020, the Committee showed its concern regarding the 
psychological impact of the prolonged online classes on children and stated that- 
"There is a severe psychological impact upon the entire society, in general, and, on 
our future generation, in particular, especially the children of our country. They are 
destined to remain fixed in front of internet devices or other devices, to educate 
themselves, for about eight to nine hours. So, they are arguing with their parents 
saying, "You have enjoyed your childhood, but, we have been deprived of enjoying 
our childhood.  What is our fault? In the evening, they suffer from headaches, their 
eye-sight is being affected. So, I would request all of you who have appeared here 
today to please look after our future generation so that they can come out of this 
psychological trauma because you have become the household name of our society 
nowadays. Otherwise, it will severely affect our future generations. They are already 
under the impact of such kind of psychological trauma. I think you should better 
direct every school to fix the learning hours for their pupils. We are committing the 
crime to our future generation." 
4.7.6 On the issue, the Secretary, Department of Health Research informed the Committee that the 
Department has issued some guidelines regarding online classes of school children, and will further 
modify the guidelines to address the issues being faced by children due to prolonged exposure to 
the laptops/ phones and hectic online classes.  
Recommendation 
 
4.7.7 The current COVID-19 Pandemic has already brought mental health problems to the 
fore as people are facing anxiety and stress due to varied reasons. It is likely that more p eople 
will need mental health care interventions post COVID-19. The Committee notes the efforts of 
the Government in providing teleconsultations and developing websites to address this issu e. 
The Committee observes that in the changing scenario, people require special care arising due 
to isolation caused by social distancing, unemployment, financial hardship leading to rising 
debt, alcohol abuse and domestic violence, etc. There is also a need to educate  and sensitize 
people to remove the stigma of mental health problems being a sign of either weakness or 
embarrassment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the health care centr es across 
rural and urban areas must have mental healthcare professionals to counsel people to figh t 
against the fear, worries and anxieties arising out of the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic.  
4.7.8 The Committee opines that the children are also facing physical and mental health-
related issues including strain on eyes and ears, obesity, sleeplessness, anxiety, etc., due to  
online classes and their associated lifestyle. The Committee also observes that children h ave 
faced mental and emotional imbalances leading to suicide in some cases. The Committee 
appreciates the Central government to come up with an initiative called "Manodarpan" for 
parents, teachers, and students to mitigate the psychological impact of the lockdown and the 

43 
 
Pandemic. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of recreatin g school with six 
to seven hours of content, the focus should be on making shorter, high-quality engage ments 
including breaks/exercises and revised guidelines may be issued for the same. Further,  
webinars may be organized by educational institutions from time to time to discuss me ntal 
health problems faced by the students. The Committee firmly believes that a concerted  effort 
from parents, teachers and Government is necessary to help children cope up with the crisis 
and thrive in the post-COVID-19 world. 
4.8 Stigma relating to COVID-19 Pandemic 
4.8.1 Public health emergencies during the outbreak of communicable diseases may cause fear 
and anxiety leading to prejudices against people and communities, social isolation and stigma. Such 
behavior may culminate in increased hostility, chaos and unnecessary social disruptions. Cases have 
been reported that people affected with COVID-19 as well as healthcare workers, sanitary workers 
and police, who are in the frontline for management of the outbreak, facing discrimination on 
account of heightened fear and misinformation about infection. Even those who have recovere d 
from COVID-19 face such discrimination3.  
 
4.8.2 In its meeting held on 19 th August, 2020, the Chairman of the Committee raised concerns 
regarding the stigma that has emerged in the society due to the Pandemic, and stated that- 
"How are we sensitizing the society through the Ministry of Health or ICMR, your 
portals are there, your websites are there so that there is no stigma attached to the 
families or the patients?  Initially, even there were cases and very unfortunate cases 
where doctors and healthcare workers, where they were residing, the societies were 
not welcoming back and there was a reaction.  It was out of fear, but that is what 
was noticed throughout the country". 
 
Recommendations 
 
4.8.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has made 
available a guide to address the stigma associated with COVID-19, on their website. The 
Committee observes that due to the Pandemic there is a conflict between science an d stigma, 
facts and fears. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that adequate ste ps should 
be taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs and other concerned Ministries to fight the social 
stigma through robust media campaigning for generating adequate public awareness.  
Further, the Government should also utilize the services of Media and other platforms and 
NGOs registered with the Government to educate and sensitize society and bring the truth 
before the people in case of any rumour-mongering and misleading news/informat ion on the 
issue. 
 
4.9 Agriculture, Food Distribution and related issues during COVID-19 
 
4.9.1 The Committee sought to know vide a Questionnaire, the views of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
on the resilience of agriculture during COVID-19. In a reply dated 12 th August, 2020 , he informed 
the Committee that Indian agriculture is very resilient largely because of the variety of crops,  
                                                          
 
3 https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/AddressingSocialStigmaAssociatedwithCOVID19.pdf 
 
 

44 
 
climate, farming systems and rich bio-diversity. Agriculture in the country is very varied ranging 
from the Himalayas to the Indian Ocean, enabling farmers to produce a variety of agricultural and 
horticultural crops throughout the year thereby providing stability to both production and income 
under varied conditions. 
4.9.2 He further replied that, for increasing incomes of farmers, there are considerable 
possibilities for preparing value-added products from every part of the plant, as demonstrated in the 
Rice Bio Park in Myanmar. Value addition led to the success of the dairy sector needs to be 
emulated. 
4.9.3 PDS has been a major source of stability both for farmers and consumers. PDS should be 
enlarged by increasing the number of crops included in it, like the inclusion of ragi and minor 
millets in the PDS in Karnataka. Minor millets are not only climate-resilient but are also rich in 
micro and macro-nutrients. PDS has also been more effective when Panchayat Raj Institutions and 
local self-governing bodies are included. 
4.9.4 For nutrition security, there is a need to bring greater interaction between agriculture, 
nutrition and health. Nutrition rich plants need to be grown in every space available and nutritional 
ingredients are integrated into the design of the farming system for nutrition (FSN) 
4.9.5 In a reply to the questionnaire, Prof. Nitya Rao informed the Committee that the major crops 
like paddy and wheat had high yields and arrangements were to procure them at MSP. At the time 
of COVID-19 induced lockdown, farmers had already harvested rabi crops and sown the third crop 
in irrigated areas. Due to good climatic conditions, the yields were good. Lockdown concessions for 
farmers addressed the issue of labour availability.   
4.9.6 But the farmers of fruits, vegetables and flowers in southern and western India who took up 
these crops after paddy harvest in January-February, had a different story and experience. D espite 
good yields, traders told them not to harvest as there is no demand due to the closure of hotels, 
restaurants and educational institutions and religious places. They suffered the immense loss of 
incomes and livelihoods and were pushed into indebtedness. 
4.9.7 While PDS has been successful in meeting the calorie needs, nutrition has been badly 
affected. As per available rural surveys, there is a decline in income and purchasing power for at 
least 46 percent of the rural population and over 70 percent decline in consumption. Fruits, 
vegetables, eggs and meat have been unaffordable due to loss of incomes and purchasing power and 
rise in prices due to a reduction in supply. In rural areas, schools and Anaganwadis are a major 
source of at least one nutritious meal per day for a majority of children which have remained closed  
due to the closing of schools.  
4.9.8 To ensure nutritional security, Prof. Nitya Rao suggested that rural Anganwadi centre 
should be re-opened, hot cooked meals are provided at the primary and secondary schools in rural 
areas, PDS should continue to provide dal and oil and potentially, egg, fish or meat as per local 
conditions, cash transfers be continued and hands of frontline workers like Anganwadi workers and 
ASHAs be strengthened to provide appropriate nutrition information.  
4.9.9 Indian agriculture is more resilient, given the ecological diversity and small scale and hence, 
adverse impacts are often localized. For long term resilience, small, marginal and women farmers 
need to be supported. 
4.9.10  As over sixty percent of agricultural work is done by women, they need to be recognized as 
farmers and provided equal entitlements to material and financial resources, technology and skill 

45 
 
development opportunities. The Government has announced an expansion of Kisan Credit Cards 
but only 2 to 4 percent of women farmers have those cards. 
4.9.11   To ensure the long term resilience of farming, there is a need for system thinking, 
where production caters to household's food and nutritional needs and also enables surplus to be 
sold in the market to earn an income. Farming systems should include diverse crops, trees, 
livestock, fish and poultry and are responsive to local ecological, climatic and socio-cultural 
conditions. Mixed farming practices need to be encouraged as sources of nutritional security and 
income, rather than a focus on specialization and commercialization. 
4.9.12  To meet such challenges in the future, Panchayati Raj Institutions should be 
strengthened for channeling information and technology, maintaining storage facilities, monitoring 
the food and nutrition security, supporting the public health system and ensuring precautions by the 
people while institutions reopen with community support, etc.    
4.9.13  Prof. Siraj Hussain, in a reply to the questionnaire, informed the Committee that the earliest 
impact of COVID-19 was on poultry producers and fruits and vegetable growers. The milk 
producers have also suffered due to the destruction of demand in the hotel, restaurants and catering 
sectors (Horeca). In the long term, it seems that COVID-19 may not have any serious adverse 
impact as people seem to be spending only on necessities of life. Despite the destruction o f demand 
in the Horeca sector, the food items continue to show robust demand and several food items have 
shown high inflation since January 2020. 
4.9.14  He also highlighted that India's agriculture sector has demonstrated its resilience 
during this crisis. The main challenge before the farmers in not production even though there is a 
definite need to provide better seeds, bring more area under irrigation, conserve water and modify 
cropping patterns in water-stressed areas. The immediate challenge is to realize a fair p rice for the 
crop. Indian agriculture is projected to meet the domestic demand of most food items but we will 
continue to have a shortfall in pulses and edible oils. 
4.9.15  To provide food grains to the people without ration cards, he stated that the 
Government should provide free rice under an open market sale scheme to NGOs, registered with 
NITI Aayog, for 1 crore migrants stuck in cities. For this, only about 75,000 tonnes of rice were 
required. The NGOs were to use donations for edible oil, vegetables and pulses. The other expenses 
on cooking and serving could have been borne by them. The Government did issue instructions 
allowing NGOs to take wheat or rice from FCI warehouses but they were to pay Rs 2,100 per 
quintal for wheat and Rs 2,200 per quintal for rice. 
4.9.16  At present 81.3 crore people are provided food grains under NFSA. State-wise total 
Ration Cards and beneficiaries are as per Annexure-VII. India's population in 2020 is projected to 
be 137.2 crore. Thus, the present coverage is 59 percent of the population which is lower than 67 
percent mandated under NFSA. It is possible that in several states a large number of deserving 
households have been left out.  Therefore, the only way to help the poor in this Pandemic is through 
direct cash transfer. Identifying them quickly, however, is not easy. The Government must ask NITI 
Aayog to consult experts and suggest a road map for correct identification of the most deserving 
who can then be provided cash assistance. 
4.9.17  The Government did provide Rs 500 per month to 20.39 crore women account 
holders of Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY). But it is not clear if they were most 
deserving of assistance as their eligibility was not determined when their accounts were opened. 

46 
 
4.9.18  The Department of Food and Public Distribution  in its detailed note apprised the 
Committee that t he department facilitated unhindered running of Sugar Mills during the lockdown 
period by coordinating with various departments of Central Government and State Governments, 
particularly with the state of Rajasthan to continue mining and supply of lime which is an essential 
raw material for running of sugar mills. The sufficient availability of Sugar at a reasonable price 
was ensured throughout the country by the mechanism of controlled and adequate monthly release 
of Sugar. A Whatsapp Group, comprising industry and various Government authorities, was also 
created for fast and immediate resolution of the issues faced by the industry and sugar traders due to 
the restrictions imposed during the lockdown. Keeping in view the negligible amount of capacity o f 
sanitizer production in the country and the role of sanitizer in the fight against COVID-19 the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution, issued directions to States/UTs to take appropriate 
measures for making Ethyl Alcohol/ Extra Neutral Alcohol (ENA)/ Ethanol available for the 
sanitizer industries due to sudden increase in demand. 
  
4.10 Government interventions 
 
4.10.1  Several measures were taken by the Government of India to provide food grains to 
the poor and vulnerable sections of the country during the subsequent phases of lockdown/ 
unlocking. The details of the schemes are Annexed as given below- 
  
(i)  Relief package under Pradhan Mantri Garib KalyanYojana (PMGKY) as per           
Annexure-VIII 
(ii) Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PM-GKAY) as per Annexure  IX 
(iii)Atma Nirbhar Bharat Scheme (ANBS) as per Annexure X 
(iv) One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) as per Annexure XI 
 
4.10.2  While hearing the views of the Department of Food and Public Distribution in the meeting 
held on 27 th August, 2020, the Chairman of the Committee raised his concerns regarding the 
distribution of food grains as given below-  
"There is no national database which has been created. The data of labourers who were 
trapped in this varies from 10 crore to 14 crore. Similar is the case of the urban poor. They 
are deprived because of systemic flaws. Besides meeting the staple food requirement, like 
rice and wheat, the concern is ensuring the nutritional security of citizens especially the 
poor and the most vulnerable ones when their incomes are lost. In this context, the 
Committee likes to know the extent of relief that reached the needy under the PDS to meet 
both calorie and nutrient requirements including the constraints faced and how they are 
being overcome. Many of these migrants have their ration cards in their village.  They were 
not getting access to the rations where they were working like the construction labourers, 
the factory workers.  That is important.  That issue in principle has been addressed.  How is 
it addressed on the ground?"  
4.10.3  In its reply, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution informed that  since 
they do not maintain the data of urban poor under the National Food Security Act, the coverage 
sealing which is for the urban areas is 50 percent and for the rural areas it is 75 percent and the  total 
coverage is 67 percent of the population of India. 
4.10.4  When asked about the monitoring mechanism in place to check diversion and timely 
delivery of food grains to the poor, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution 
informed the Committee that electronic-Point of Sales (ePoS) is used anywhere, or through the 
Annavitran portal.  UP has made it 100 percent ePoS based even during the Pandemic. They used  

47 
 
sanitizers and did not suspend the use of ePoS.  So, the flow of information and the actual person 
using the ration card is getting captured.   
4.10.5  Regarding the creation of National Database of migrant workers, the Secretary, Department 
of Food and Public Distribution apprised that the Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Urban 
Affairs have already started work on the creation of a National Database of migrant workers and 
then it will be matched with the Central data of the Department of Food and Public Distribution to 
check whether every targeted beneficiary is covered or not. 
4.10.6  On implementation status of One-Nation One-Ration Card scheme, the Secretary, 
Department of Food and Public Distribution informed that it is already operational in twenty-four 
States and two more States were added from 1 st September 2020.  Besides, using this portability, 
three kinds of transactions can be done i.e. movement within the district from one place to another, 
movement within the State from one district to another and movement from one State to another.  
As of now, crores of transactions are happening, which means that people are taking advantage of 
the portability.   
4.10.7  As schools are closed since March 2020, The Committee sought to know about the 
continuation of the mid-day meal Scheme during the Pandemic and how the children have e nsured 
food and nutritional security.  In its reply, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution stated that Section 8 of the Act provides that if States are not able to give food grains, 
they can give grains, they can give food allowance and accordingly, some States are de livering the 
dry rations at doorstep, some are giving money and some are giving both. 
Recommendation 
 
4.10.8  The Committee appreciates the work done by the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution in un-interrupted movement and distribution of food grains up to the 
remotest part of our country during the pandemic period, particularly during lockdowns .  
The Committee understands that the Department has worked day and night without taking  a 
break while doing service to the nation at the time of the unprecedented crisis. 
 
 4.10.9  The Committee recommends that Aadhaar linked National Database of the vulnerable 
sections of the society that includes migrant labourers, urban poor, workers engaged in 
unorganized Sector, be prepared on priority so that in case of such a crisis in future, the 
Government can reach out to them and provide rations and other facilities. The Committee 
also hopes that effective and timely implementation of the program will be ensured  and 
progress will be monitored from time to time as the success of the program dep ends upon 
benefits reaching the beneficiaries in time. 
4.10.10  The Committee is aware that the country has the largest PDS network in the 
world, which is instrumental in meeting the objective of the National Food Security Act, 2013 
in normal circumstances. However, the COVID-19 Pandemic has affected in a very harsh 
way, the lives of the poor and the vulnerable sections of the society, both in the rural areas 
and in the urban areas. The Committee observes that during the lockdown period, due to lack 
of inter-operability of PDS across states, migrant workers were not able to take food gr ains 
from PDS shops inspite of having ration cards. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that 
until One-Nation One ration card (ONOR) is implemented in all the States/UTs, interstate  
operability of ration cards should be allowed so that the migrant workers can take food grains 
from PDS shops in any State/UT. 

48 
 
4.10.11 The Committee notes the efforts of the Government of India for providing a n 
additional allocation of food grains for distribution under PDS to meet the challenge. But in  
the absence of tracking and monitoring mechanisms, it is challenging for both Central an d 
States/UTs Governments to track the intra-State and inter-State movement of the m igrant 
workers and distribute adequate quantities of food grains from PDS shops on time. Therefore, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should coordinate with the  
concerned Central Ministries and the Governments of States/UTs and create a trackin g and 
monitoring mechanism linking all the States/ UTs so that the movement of migrant workers 
can be tracked on a real-time basis and States can off take the required rations/ supplies from 
the Central Board, FCI godowns accordingly, without any delay. 
4.10.12 The Committee is of the view that Mid-Day Meal Scheme is an essential scheme 
that motivates the poorest children to go to school and pursue studies. But due to th e 
Pandemic and closure of schools, they are deprived of Mid-Day Meals. The Committee note s 
that 
only some of the States have continued the Mid-Day Meal scheme during the Pandemic 
by delivering the dry rations at doorstep/ giving allowances or both. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs along with the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution may take up the matter with the State Governments to ensure 
that the local administrations are delivering the rations/ allowances in time and this should be 
continued until the schools reopen.
 
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER V 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
 
5.1 Introduction 
 
5.1.1 The COVID-19 Pandemic has led to temporary job loss, uncertainties in informal sectors 
and closure of some Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. The imposition of complete lockdown 
throughout the country to manage the COVID-19 Pandemic also led to the slowdown of economic 
activities. The Committee, therefore, enquired from the Ministry of Home
 Affairs about the 
assessment of economic impact under different phases of lockdown from time to time. In their 
reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that:- 
 
(i) In March, 2020, the Indian economy had begun to regain momentum with clear signs of 
an uptick in consumption and investment towards the end of the third quarter of 2019-20. 
Index of Industrial Production (IIP), Index of Core Industries (ICI) and merchandise exports 
rebounded with positive growth in February 2020 along with signs of revival in consumer 
sentiment.
 However, with the imposition of lockdown from 25 th March, 2020, the financial 
year 2019-20 closed with a seven days period of economic inactivity. Exports and imports 
witnessed sharp negative growth in March 2020. Besides trade, negative growth in IIP and 
ICI indices and particularly the decline in electricity generation in March 2020, reflected the 
economic adversity of the lockdown.  
 
(ii) With lockdown continuing in April 2020, manufacturing and services activity came to a 
standstill resulting in supply-side disruptions and demand falling that led into a sharp 
decline in Purchasing Managers Index (PMI). Railways freight traffic declined indi cating
 
the economic inactivity across regions and sectors. Agriculture and allied activities, 
however, showed continued resilience on the back of all-time production highs and huge 
buffer stocks of rice and wheat. The above-normal rains predicted for 2020-21 also boded 
well for agricultural production. Amid severe COVID-19 induced supply chain disruptions, 
harvesting and procurement operations gathered momentum with an active FCI and 
supportive railways increasing volumes of transferred food grains. 
 
(iii) With easing of restrictions in May 2020 and unlocking in June 2020, readings of high-
frequency indicators showed improvement and emergence of green shoots. These include 
IIP, PMI, power generation, production of steel and cement, railway freight, traffic at major 
ports, air cargo and passenger traffic, e-way bill generation capturing the inter-state 
movement of goods, consumption of petroleum products and motor vehicle registration 
among others. Agriculture remained the brightest spot with Kharif sowing higher than 
previous year levels and Rabi procurement in full flow. Within two months, India, starting 
from scratch, has become the world's second-largest manufacturer of Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE). Inflation eased in June relative to the previous two months indicating 
weak demand pressures and food supply chain recoveries. Volatility in most of the essential 
commodity prices stabilized reflecting their uninterrupted availability. GST collections also 
improved with Year over Year (YoY) contraction falling from 38.2 percent in May 2020 to 
14 percent in July 2020. On the external front, India continued to attract robust Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI). Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) inflows also rebounded to a 15-
month high in June, 2020. This reflected the unshaken belief of foreign investors in India's 
macroeconomic fundamentals. Since the onset of the Pandemic in India, a stronger recovery 
of exports ensured that India registered a trade surplus of USD 0.8 billion in June 2020 

50 
 
despite the rise in crude and gold prices. This followed a current account surplus in the 
January-March quarter of 2020-2021, for the first time in more than a decade. On the back 
of buoyant FDI, the resurgence of FPI flows and current account surplus, foreign exchange 
reserves crossed half a trillion mark in June 2020. Finally, India's persistently low external 
debt continues to add resilience to the external sector, a necessary safeguard in times of 
COVID-19. 
 
5.1.2 The Committee also enquired from the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) 
regarding the overall impact of the Pandemic on the economy of the country with estimates of the 
extent of contraction so far and for 2019-20 and 2020-21. The CMIE in its response informed the 
Committee that the economic forecasts are hazardous during these times because this was an 
unprecedented situation. Nevertheless, projections made by CMIE in June 2020 show that real GDP 
is likely to contract by 5.5 percent in 2020-21. It is projected to recover by 6.7 percent in 2021-22. 
Then, it is projected to grow at a slower 4.5 percent per annum. 
 
5.1.3 The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in its reply dated 13th August, 2020 to the 
questionnaire informed the Committee that as per the initial assessment, the Pandemic impacted the 
economy in three phases. The first impact was due to import disturbances on major sectors that 
included Pharmaceutical APIs, mobile and computer electronics, auto components and synthetic 
textiles. The second and related impact was on sectors that were affected due to the sudden slump in 
export demand like Gems & jewellery, agricultural exports, capital goods exports, etc. The final and 
most significant impact was on the entire manufacturing sector that had come to a grinding halt and 
included the transport & logistics sector, due to restrictions imposed on the movement of goods. 
With people's movement banned, the tourism & hospitality sector suddenly had no business. The 
mining sector also stopped, along with all construction activities. 
 
5.1.4 Confederation of Indian Industry ( CII) also informed the Committee that the financial & 
professional services were only partially operational due to 'work from home' restrictions imposed 
on the populace. Even the public administration was working only partially. Essential services were 
exempted from the lockdown. As a result, agricultural activity, utility services like electricity, wa ter 
& gas were operational. Food production & grocery and medical production & sales were expected  
to remain operational but faced hurdles at local and regional administration levels which impacted 
the supply chains. Overall, the economy was utilizing only about 40 percent of the total capacity 
under lockdown. 
 
5.2 Measures taken by the Department of Financial Services and RBI 
 
Department of Financial Services
 
 
5.2.1 
The Government and its institutions announced various measures to revive the economy by 
encouraging investment and boosting business sentiment through increased liquidity and other 
sector-specific steps.  The Committee, therefore, called for the background note from the 
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance and also heard the views of the Secretary , 
Department of Financial Services to have an account of the relief measures announced by the 
Government.  
 
5.2.2 The Department of Financial Services in their background note informed the Committee that 
the COVID-19 has affected the income streams in almost all sectors of the economy. It has also 
affected the revenue streams of banks on account of firm-level stress and delay in repayme nts, 
collections and recoveries. To mitigate the burden of debt servicing brought about by disruptions on 

51 
 
account of the COVID-19 Pandemic and to ensure continuity of businesses, Government, on 24 th 
March, 2020, announced certain relief measures after COVID-19 outbreak and followed it up on 
12th May, 2020 with Atma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan stimulus package. This package was a post 
Pandemic economy plan that aimed at helping the economy recover from the impact of COVID-19 
and was announced in five daily tranches. RBI too announced relief regulatory packages for 
COVID-19 on 27 th March, 2020 and 23 rd May, 2020. As part of these COVID-19 packages, 
comprehensive measures were undertaken to support and boost the economy, that include, inter-
alia, the following: 
 
Promoting Lending support by enabling ease of credit 
 
 
(i) Concessionary credit to PM-KISAN beneficiaries through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC); 
(ii) Additional refinance support by NABARD for farmers; 
(iii) Special credit facility to PM SVANidhi beneficiaries also enabling easy access to 
working capital by street vendors; 
(iv) Emergency credit line under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS); 
(v) Extension of One-time Restructuring of MSME accounts; 
(vi) Extending the credit-linked subsidy scheme for housing for middle-income group till 
March 2021; 
 
5.2.3 During the Committee meetings held on 19 th August, 2020 and 27 th August 2020, concerns 
were raised on the actual working of some of these relief measures at the ground level.  One issue 
related to the KCC loan where the banks were not disbursing loans to the farmers. The loan 
applications were either not being processed or being rejected without assigning any r easons. 
Moreover, the attitude of the Branch Officers was also not pro-farmers. During the Committee 
meeting held on 27 th August 2020, Shishu Loan and MUDRA Loan were deliberated upon. It was 
pointed out that though, the Lead District Manager (LDM) is conducting meetings regularly with 
the Deputy Commissioner, but even then, satisfactory results are not coming out. 
 
Supporting existing debtors across the economy and enhancing regulatory relief to the banks
 
 
(i) Grant of a moratorium of six months on payment of all term loan installments falling 
due between 01 st March, 2020 and 31 st August, 2020, without asset classification 
downgrade; 
(ii) Deferment of recovery of interest on working capital during the moratorium period and 
allowing repayment of accumulated interest as funded interest term loan till March 
2021; 
(iii) Exclusion of the moratorium period for purposes of classifying an overdue loan account 
as a non-performing asset (NPA); 
 
5.2.4 In the Meeting held on 27 th August, 2020, the Committee deliberated on the issue of 
extension of the moratorium. Another related issue was whether the interest component for terms 
loan borrowers who have availed the moratorium facility would be waived or charged for the 
deferment period or when the moratorium period ends, it has to be paid back along with the interest 
on interest. Secretary, Department of Financial Services informed the Committee that the matter is 
also before the Supreme Court and the final view is yet to emerge.  
 
 
 
 

52 
 
Atma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan 
Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme (PCGS) 2.0 for NBFCs/ HFCs/ MFIs: 
 
5.2.5 The existing Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme has been extended on 20 th May 2020 to cover 
portfolio guarantee of up to 20 percent of first loss for purchase by PSBs of Bonds or Commercial 
Papers (CPs) with a rating of AA and below (including unrated paper with original/ initial maturity 
of up to one year) issued by NBFCs/ HFCs/Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs).  
 
Special Liquidity Scheme (SLS) for NBFCs/HFCs  
 
5.2.6 The Special Liquidity Scheme for Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) and 
Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) to improve their liquidity position.  
 
Collateral free Loans for Business including MSME - Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
(ECLGS) 
 
5.2.7 The Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) is to support eligible MSMEs and 
business enterprises in meeting their operational liabilities and restarting their businesses in the 
context of the disruption caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic.  
 
Agriculture related measures 
 
5.2.8 Significant Agriculture-related measures were announced as part of the Atma Nirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan package: Additional Emergency Working Capital facility through NABARD to 
enable RRBs and Cooperative Banks to extend farm loans for Rabi post-harvest and Kharif 
expenses.  
 
5.3 Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package (PMGKP) 
  
5.3.1 The Committee takes note of the facilities extended by the Government to health care 
workers under PMGKY that included-  
 
(i) The New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) launched an insurance 
scheme on 30 th March 2020 for the health workers fighting COVID-19 under Pradhan 
Mantri Garib Kalyan Package (PMGKP). 
 
(ii) Under this scheme, Rs. 50 lakh insurance cover has been provided to 22.12 lakh 
public healthcare providers without any age limit on the loss of life due to COVID-19, and 
accidental death on account of COVID-19 related duty. The policy covers public healthcare  
providers including community health workers, who may have to be in direct contact and 
care of COVID-19 patients and who may be at risk of being impacted by this. Private 
hospital staff and retired/volunteer/local urban bodies/contracted/daily-wage/ad-
hoc/outsourced staff requisitioned by States/Central hospitals/ autonomous hospitals of 
Central/States/UTs, AIIMS and INIs/hospital of Central Ministries can also be drafted for 
COVID-19 related responsibilities. Initially, the policy was available for 90 days, starting 
from 30 th March, 2020 which was extended for 90 more days in June till 25 th September, 
2020. The Scheme has been further extended for 180 more days i.e. 6 months. The 
benefit/claim under this policy is available in addition to the amount payable under any 
other policies. 
 

53 
 
(iii) The Department of Financial Services in its background note dated 25 th August, 
2020 informed that 147 intimations have been received till August, 2020. Claim documents 
have been submitted for 87, out of which 15 were paid, 4 approved for payment while 13 are 
under examination. Further, a total of 55 claims have been found ineligible out of which 35 
claims fall outside the scope of the cover like police personnel, municipal workers not 
related to the hospital, people from education, revenue department, etc., while 20 claims 
submitted have the cause of death other than COVID-19 like cardiac arrest, etc. 
 
5.4 Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY) 
 
  Under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY), women holding  Pradhan Mantri 
Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) were provided immediate relief during COVID-19 at the rate of Rs.500 
per month directly to their bank account and other social benefits for a period of three months from 
April to June, 2020 which was later extended for another five months up to November, 2020. The 
Government may further extend both cash and in-kind benefits like food grains up to March, 2021 
(status as of 10th December, 2020). 
 
5.5      Monetary and Liquidity Measures taken by RBI 
 
5.5.1 Since 6 th February, 2020 the Reserve Bank has undertaken several monetary and liquidity 
augmenting measures to manage the fallout of the COVID-19 Pandemic on economic activity an d 
restore financial stability, financial market activity and confidence in the wake of Pandemic-related 
dislocations. These include: 
 
(i) Reducing the policy repo rate; 
  
(ii) Continuing with the accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive growth 
and mitigate the impact of COVID-19; 
 
(iii) Cut in Reverse Repo Rate to encourage banks for deployment of funds for on-
lending to productive sectors of the economy; 
  
(iv) To ensure that financial markets and institutions can function normally in the face of 
COVID-19 related dislocations, to facilitate and incentivize bank credit flows and support 
monetary transmission and to ease financial stress, the Reserve Bank took measures, 
including those targeted at specific sectors and markets to increase systemic liquidity. 
 
(v) Extension of banks finance to NBFCs/HFCs for on-lending to Agriculture, Micro 
and Small Enterprises and Housing Sectors under PSL by one year. 
 
(vi) SIDBI was allowing for direct landing to the MSMEs engaged in the manufacturing 
of medical products (PPEs, Infrared thermometers) and provides medical services to combat 
COVID-19. 
  
(vii) Extension of Interest Subvention (IS) and Prompt Repayment Incentive (PRI) for 
Short-term Loans for Agriculture including Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries.  
 
 
 
 

54 
 
Observation 
 
5.5.2 The Committee takes note of the number of Schemes/ interventions extended by the 
Government of India to bring the economy back on track. However, the Committe e observes 
that few of these schemes need effective implementation at the ground level. The prob lems 
being faced by farmers, non-corporate and non-farm small/micro enterpr ises in getting loans 
need to be addressed.  
 
5.6 Banking Operations during Pandemic  
 
5.6.1 RBI informed the Committee that all possible steps were taken to ensure business continuity 
and staff welfare as per guidelines issued by the Government. 
 
5.6.2 The Committee was informed by the RBI in the meeting held on 27 th August 2020 that there 
have been uninterrupted and seamless banking facilities during COVID-19 and in Public Sector 
Bank - 86,751 branches were opened and functioning out of 87,678 (99%), in Private Banks - 
33,350 branches were opened and functioning out of 34,019 (98%). There was even Loss of life 
during service in the COVID-19 Pandemic.   
 
Observation 
 
5.6.3 The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts and pain taken by the ban king sector 
for providing uninterrupted and seamless banking facilities during the COVID-19 outbreak 
and consequent lockdown. In their sincere efforts to provide continuous service, many of the 
bank officials also lost their valuable life. The Committee, therefore, places on record the good 
work done by the banking sector right from the beginning of the COVID-19 Pandemic an d 
observes that they are also recognized as COVID-19
 warriors.  
 
5.7 Recovery of Economy 
 
5.7.1 Regarding the expected time frame for the economy to recover, the CII stated that the 
economy is expected to contract in the financial year 2020-21 though the extent of the contraction is 
uncertain. The economy is expected to function at around 85 percent capacity for the next 12-18 
months. As such, GDP growth may not swing into positive territory before the first quarter of 2021-
22. 
 
5.7.2 The CII had also given suggestions to the Government for recovering the economy which 
included cash transfer through Jan-Dhan-Aadhar-Mobile (JAM), Wage support by way of loans 
from banks at subsidized interest rates to be spent on helping enterprises in meeting their wage 
payment requirement for three months, Credit to  MSME sector, Support to stressed sectors; Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for investing in corporate bonds; public works programme; Discom bailout; 
Bank recapitalization; serious implementation of national infra pipeline to improve quality of 
transport and logistics; stepping up the availability of long term funds by strengthening institutions 
like IIFCL and NIIF; ease of doing business and Taxation and Labour related reforms and 
accordingly actions have been taken by the Government. 
 
5.7.3 The CII also stated that the measures announced under the 'Atma Nirbhar Bharat' package 
are comprehensive, with a focus on ensuring the livelihood of the most vulnerable sections and a 
major thrust on small businesses and agriculture. For smaller businesses, the revised definition of 
MSMEs and the credit guarantee scheme is proving to be a big win for the smaller businesses. At 

55 
 
the same time reforms in the agricultural sector coupled with measures to boost the agricultural 
infrastructure have been done to bring efficiency, keeping in mind the medium to long term revival 
of the sector. 
 
5.7.4 The CII further stated that there are some concerns that large industries are facing a lot of 
stress, particularly in certain sectors such as tourism, automotive and aviation. At the same time, the 
economy is facing subdued demand as spending has reduced. Consumer demand has been hit with 
people losing jobs and livelihoods. Higher spending by the Government is required to stimulate 
demand. This may be done through a large public works program.  
 
5.7.5 The Committee also enquired from the MHA about the time frame to roll back the social 
and economic impacts of the Pandemic. The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that it is not possible 
to assess the same at the present stage. But the unlock phase has shown that most of the economic 
activities have reopened outside the containment zone, while people are taking necessary 
precautions to prevent the spread of the virus. 
The Central Government has been gradually opening 
economic activity in a calibrated manner to provide the required impetus for the resumption of 
economic activities.
 
 
5.7.6 The MHA further informed that with phased-unlocking, the worst seems to be over as high-
frequency indicators show an improvement from the unprecedented low the economy had hit in 
April 2020. With the forecast of a normal monsoon at 102 percent of the long-period average 
(LPA), agriculture, which contributes about 15 percent of total gross value added, is set to cushion 
the shock of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Indian economy in 2020-21.  
 
5.7.7 Regarding Sector-wise details of impact and timeliness for recovery, the CMIE stated that 
they expect private final consumption expenditure to fall by 7.4 percent in 2020-21 and recover by 
9 percent in 2021-22; gross fixed capital formation to decline by 21.9 percent in 2020-21 and 
recover by 15.4 percent in 2021-22. They have no projections on when is the economy likely to 
return to normal. 
  
5.7.8 The Committee sought to know from the CMIE if they have any other 
inputs/views/suggestions regarding the economic impact of the Pandemic and for ensuring the 
resilience of the economy of the country. The CMIE in its response stated that they believe that the 
Government of India and also state governments must strengthen their ability to measure the state 
of the economy. The governments do not have adequate means to quickly assess the state of the 
economy through robust statistical methods. The country's statistical machinery has received 
inadequate attention. Further, if health of the economy is not measured appropriately, it will be 
tough to take the correct remedial actions. 
 
5.7.9 In the Committee meeting held on 27 th August, 2020, CII informed the Committee that 
MSMEs may be encouraged to use technology and digitization to have access to the world market 
by developing an e-commerce platform. CII also informed that stressed sectors need to be 
supported, on the lines of what has been done globally, which will save jobs and livelihoods in 
addition to reducing the risk of NPAs for banks. A scrappage policy, which could take 8 lakh 
vehicles off the road and GST reductions, could boost demand in the auto sector. In the healthcare 
sector, many smaller nursing homes have closed down due to a lack of working capital. Supporting 
them will bring back the jobs lost and also augment healthcare capacity to fight COVID-19. 
 
5.7.10 The Committee noted the economy outlook projected by RBI in its Annual Report (dated 
25th August, 2020 for the year 1 st July, 2019 to 30 th June, 2020)  wherein it is stated that "Going 

56 
 
forward, government consumption is expected to continue pandemic-proofing of demand, and 
private consumption is expected to lead the recovery when it takes hold, with non-discretionary 
spending leading the way until a durable increase in disposable incomes enables discretionary 
spending to catch up. An assessment of aggregate demand during the year so far suggests that the 
shock to consumption is severe, and it will take quite some time to mend and regain the pre-
COVID-19 momentum. Private consumption has lost its discretionary elements across the board, 
particularly transport services, hospitality, recreation and cultural activities. Behavioural restraints 
may prevent the normalization of demand for these activities. The Reserve Bank's survey for July 
indicates that consumer confidence fell to an all-time low, with a majority of respondents reporting 
pessimism relating to the general economic situation, employment, inflation and income; however, 
respondents indicated expectations of recovery for the year ahead. Urban consumption demand has 
suffered a bigger blow - passenger vehicle sales and supply of consumer durables in Q1: 2020-21 
have dropped to a fifth and one third, respectively, of their level a year ago; air passenger traffic  has 
ground to a halt. Rural demand, by contrast, has fared better. The decline in production of consumer 
non-durables turned positive in June. A fuller recovery in rural demand is, however, being held 
back by muted wage growth which is still hostage to the migrant crisis and associated employment 
losses. Initiative under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Rojgar Abhiyaan is likely to generate 
employment in rural areas. Along with increased wages under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), they should provide a fillip to rural incomes." 
 
5.7.11 Further, the Committee also noted the NSO's estimates of GDP for  Q1 of 2020-21 which 
states that the GDP at Constant (2011-12) Prices is estimated at 26.90 lakh crore as against 35.35 
lakh crore in Q1 of 2019-20, showing a contraction of 23.9% as compared to 5.2% growth in Q1 of 
2019-20. However, for Q2 of 2020-21, the NSO's estimates of GDP states that the GDP at Constant 
(2011-12) Prices is estimated at 33.14 lakh crore as against 35.84 lakh crore in Q2 of 2019-20, 
showing a contraction of 7.5% as compared to 4.4% growth in Q2 of 2019-20. 
 
5.7.12  RBI's Monthly bulletin for  November, 2020 stated that the September round of Reserve 
Bank's consumer confidence survey shows that the households are more confident for the year 
ahead, with general expectations of improvement in the general economic situation, employment 
conditions and income scenario during the coming year.  
 
5.7.13 This positive sentiment is also boosted by a brightening employment scenario. According to 
the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE), the unemployment rate has receded almost 
continuously from a high of 23.5 percent in April 2020 to 7 percent in October, with 7.2 persons in 
every 100 remaining unemployed in urban areas, down from 25 in every 100 unemployed in April. 
In the rural sector, employment demanded by households under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) expanded by 91.3 percent in October, indicating that 
people are quickly restoring lost livelihood.  
 
Observation 
 
5.7.14 The Committee observes that shock to consumption is severe due to COVID-19 
induced lockdowns which resulted in huge loss of jobs, daily wages and daily inc ome in both 
organized and unorganized sectors. The impact, however, has been more severe in the 
unorganized sector. Therefore, it will take quite some time to mend and regain the p re-
COVID-19 momentum. The GDP after having a contraction of 23.9% in Q1 (2020-21) has 
shown signs of recovery in Q2 (2020-21). This is due to growth in private consumption during 
the festive season, rise in investment demand and Government intervention through 

57 
 
MNREGA, etc. But, more interventions and schemes are required by the Governme nt to 
support the recovery and to sustain this economic revival in the following quarters. 
 
5.8 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
 
5.8.1 MSME sector is among the worst-hit sector due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. The hospitality 
industry, hotels, stand-alone restaurants & other eateries have also suffered a loss of business. The 
MSME sector contributes significantly to the Indian economy, industrial production and exports. 
Therefore, any sharp decline in this sector has an overall impact on the Indian economy and there is 
a loss of jobs involved.  
The Committee to understand the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on 
the 633.88 lakh MSMEs that contributes approximately 30 percent of India's GDP called the 
Ministry of MSME to hear its views. 
 
5.8.2 In the Committee meeting held on 19 th August, 2020, the Ministry of MSME informed the 
Committee that there are a total of 633. 88 lakhs MSMEs out of which Micro Enterprises are 630.52 
lakhs (99.47%), Small Enterprises are 3.31 lakhs (0.52%) and Medium Enterprises are 0.05 lakhs 
(0.01
%). The contribution of MSME is around 30% of India's GDP. The all India export value of 
MSMEs crossed 11 lakh crore during 2019-20 with a share of 49.75% and it dipped to 32.89% 
during April, 2020 which indicates the impact of the Pandemic.  However, all India export value of 
MSMEs has increased to 46.98% during April-October, 2020. 
 
5.9 The provisions in place before the Pandemic for supporting the MSMEs 
 
5.9.1 For sustainable and robust growth of the MSME Sector, M/o MSME has several schemes 
which include the following: 
Credit and Financial Assistance to MSMEs
 
 
(i) Prime Minister's Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) 
(ii) Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation (CLCSS) 
(iii) Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) 
(iv) 2% Interest Subvention Scheme 
 
Skill Development and Training to MSMEs
 
i.  
ii. Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme (ESDP) 
 
Infrastructure Support to MSMEs
 
 
(i) Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI) 
(ii) MSE Cluster Development Programme (MSE-CDP) 
 
Technology Upgradation and Competitiveness Scheme for MSMEs
 
 
(i) Design Clinic Scheme 
(ii) Lean Manufacturing Competitiveness Scheme (LMCS) 
(iii) Digital MSME Scheme 
(iv) Financial Support to MSMEs in ZED Certification 
(v) Scheme Support for Entrepreneurial and Managerial Development of MSMEs 
through Incubators 

58 
 
(vi) Building Awareness on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) 
(vii) Tool Rooms & MSME Technology Centers 
 
 
Procurement and Marketing Support to MSMEs
 
 
i. Procurement and Marketing Support (PMS) 
ii. Public Procurement Policy for the Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) 
 
5.9.2 
The Committee was informed by the MSME about the impact of COVID-19 on the industry 
as high, medium and low exposure. Based on exposure, recovery takes 3 to 9 months for those with 
low exposure, 9-18 months with moderate exposure and more than 18 months for those with high 
exposure. The details are tabulated as under:- 
 
Covid Industry Impact
Moderate 
Exposure
High 
Exposure
Low 
Exposure
 Defense
 Real Estate Rentals
 T echnical T extiles
 T echnology Hardware
 IT & ITES
 Food Retail
 Poultry
 T elecommunication
 Waste Management
 Agriculture and Dairy
 BFSI
 Chemicals
 Manufacturing
 Construction/Materials
 Metals and Mining
 Renewable Energy
 Oil & Gas/Oilfield Services
 Real Estate Developers
 Transportation
 Capital Goods
 Media & Entertainment 
(Conventional)
 Apparel
 Automotive Manufacturers
 Automotive Suppliers
 Consumer Durables
 Gems and Jewelry 
 Lodging/T ourism 
 Passenger Airlines
 Retail (Non-Food)
 Global Shipping
 Steel
Potential Positive Impact
Internet Service Companies, Retail (Online), Medical Devices, Healthcare Good and Services (including 
T elemedicine), OTT Entertainment, Packaging, Digital Media/Streaming, Pharmaceuticals
Source: Invest India Analysis
 Recovery Period for 
Industry, basis exposure
 Low : 3 - 9 Months
 Moderate : 9-18 Months
 High  : >18 Months
 
 
5.9.3 A comparison chart of the growth rate of exports (April to October, 2020) with the same 
period of 2019 depicts that 
gems and jewelry and petroleum products have the highest negative 
growth percentage in exports. The details are tabulated as under:- 
 

59 
 
 
 
5.9.4 
To keep the MSME running during the COVID-19 Pandemic, Government announced 
various measures for the benefits of the MSME sector. The organizations under the Ministry of 
MSME have also undertaken various activities during the COVID-19 Pandemic. These measures 
and activities are as below:- 
  
Announcements under Atma Nirbhar Bharat For The MSMEs
 
 
(i)  Rs 20,000 crore Subordinate Debt scheme for stressed MSMEs;   
 
(ii) Rs.50,000 crore equity infusion through Fund of Funds with a Corpus of Rs.10,000 
crore; 
  
(iii) Collateral free Loans for Business including MSME - Emergency Credit Line 
Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS); 
  
(iv)       New definition for MSMEs; and 
 
(v) A new portal has been created for Udyam registration. 
 
RBI Announcements to reduce financial stress of MSMEs 
 
5.9.5 Measures announced on 27th March, 2020 are as follows- 
 
(i) Moratorium on term loans outstanding as of 1 st March 2020 and working capital for  
three months, i.e. up to 31st May 2020 
(ii) Deferment of interest on working capital loan facilities and easing of working capital 
financing. 
(iii) Reduction in Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) from 4 to 3 percent thereby injecting 
additional liquidity of Rs.1,37,000 crore in the economy. 
 
5.9.6 Measures was announced on 17th April, 2020 are as follows- 
 

60 
 
(i) Special Refinance facilities to SIDBI amounting to Rs.15,000 crore on lending to MSMEs.  
(ii) Further measures to enhance liquidity in the system.  
(iii)No change in asset classification from 1st March to 31st May, 2020 thereby relaxing the asset 
classification norms for classification of NPAs.  
(iv) Extension of resolution timeline for stressed assets. 
 
5.9.7 Measures announced are as follows- 
 
(i) Rollover (for another 90 days) of the Special Refinance Facility of Rs. 15,000 crore of 
SIDBI was announced in April 2020.  
(ii) Lending institutions are permitted to restore the limit of working capital to their original 
level and reassessment of the working capital cycle by 31st March, 2021.  
(iii)Permit lending institutions to convert the accumulated interest on working capital facilities 
for 6 months (1 st March to 31 st August) into a funded interest term loan, fully repayable 
by 31st March 2021. Moreover, all the other measures announced on 27 th March and 17th 
April till 31st August, 2020 has been extended.  
 
 
5.9.8 Measures announced on 6th August, 2020 are as follows- 
 
(i) Setting up an Expert Committee (under K V Kamath) to suggest financial parameters 
for the resolution of stress assets (due to COVID situation). 
(ii) One time restructuring of stressed loans of MSMEs till 31st March, 2021.  
 
5.9.9 
In the Committee meeting held on 19 th August, 2020 the Ministry of MSME was inquired 
about the wage support for the MSMEs.The Ministry informed the Committee that it does not have 
any dedicated scheme for wage support but ECLGS can be counted as a wage support scheme. In 
the Committee meeting held on 27 th 
August, 2020, Secretary, Department of Financial Services 
informed the Committee that during their interaction with various trade bodies and associations, the 
one thing that came across all associations is that working capital should immediately come into 
their hands.  Instead of assessing each unit as to what is their entitlement to working capital, a 
decision was taken to give twenty percent of the working capital and also to ensure that the 
maximum number of units get it.  Further, the turnover cap which was earlier pegged at Rs. 100 
crore and the overall borrowing limit to Rs. 5 crore has been enhanced from Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 
250 crore.  The limit of Rs. 25 crore which were limiting it to Rs. 10 crore has been enhanced to Rs. 
50 crore which means twenty percent of that will get as working capital, up to the maximum.  
Moreover, a lot of loans have been taken by the individuals that are being used for businesses, for 
example, the truck operators, the cab operators and then even the professionals who are running the 
pathological laboratory.  Now, individual loans for businesses are entitled to this working capital. 
The strategy was to put more money into the hands of people and give them what they wanted.  
Therefore, the other issues were not reinforced during the various ways of compensating for wages, 
etc. 
  
5.9.10  In the Committee meeting held on 19 th August 2020, a representative from Laghu 
Udyog Bharati, a nationwide organisation for Micro and Small-scale industries, informed the 
Committee that some private banks were not following the RBI guidelines and charging higher 
interest under Emergency Credit Link Guarantee Scheme. It was also informed that NBFCs and Co-
operative banks working in rural areas have not been included under the ECLG scheme. 
  

61 
 
5.9.11 The Committee was further informed that as announced by RBI, ECLGS is only for the 
MSMEs who already have loans or cash and CC limits. But, most MSMEs do not avail of any loan 
facilities and manage their work with 5 to 7 to 10 workers. Such small industries should also be 
extended the benefits of ECLGS and working capital facilities may also be given to them.
 Similarly, 
representatives from the Indian SME forum raised the issue of women entrepreneurs being 
completely excluded from this entire economic package or any kind of measures altogether be cause 
they do not have term loans or working limits. 
  
5.9.12  The Committee took note of the other initiatives taken by the Ministry of MSME to 
use e-marketing platforms during the COVID-19 pandemic that inter-alia includes e-market linkage 
for MSMEs, establishing connect with E-commerce companies for providing concessional 
membership to MSME, organising India Global Joint Venture Shows and  
Training programmes on 
the packaging of Handicraft and Handloom under Procurement  and marketing Support, launch of a 
web-based i.e. Creation and Harmonious Application of Modern Processes for Increasing the 
Output and National Strength (CHAMPIONS) Portal for helping and promoting the MSMEs of the 
country. 
Further, the Technology Centres (TCs)  at Guwahati, Ramnagar, Bhiwadi, Ahmedabad 
have developed, various components/products including some parts of PPE Kit, Corona Testing Kit, 
automatic sanitizer machines/ full body Sanitizer tunnels, etc. Besides, the Development Institutes 
(DI) of the Ministry at Nagpur has manufactured 15,000 PPE kits at the garment Common Facility 
Centre (CFC), Apart from all these, the MSMEs have been exempted from paying on-boarding 
charges on Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) till 31st March, 2021. 
 
Government e-Marketplace (GeM) 
 
5.9.13  The Ministry of MSME is already making every attempt to encourage the MSMEs to 
get themselves onboarded on the GeM Portal. Bulk emails have been sent to all Udyog Aadhaar 
Memorandum (UAM) holders for on boarding on the GeM portal. The GeM has been provided 
access to the UAM Database for provisional and automatic onboarding of all the MSMEs on the 
GeM.  
 
Observation 
 
5.9.14  The Committee appreciates the launch of Creation and Harmonious 
Application of Modern Processes for Increasing the Output and National Strength 
(CHAMPIONS) Portal, a unified, empowered, robust and technology-driven platform for 
helping and promoting the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by providin g 
them and other related stakeholders facilities to voice their issues and grievances and seeks 
resolution. The Committee takes note of the effort of the Ministry of MSME in encouraging 
the MSMEs to get themselves on board on the GeM Portal by sending bulk emails to all 
Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM) holders and by providing GeM access to the UAM 
database for provisional and automatic onboarding of all the MSMEs on the GeM.  
 
5.10 National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) Survey of MSMEs-Post COVID-19. 
 
5.10.1 The Ministry of MSME in its presentation to the Committee informed the following- 
 
(i) The latest survey was done from 09 th to 14th August, 2020 regarding ‗Online Surveys' of 
'Google Form'.  
(ii) 5774 MSMEs were contacted in this survey (Same MSMEs who responded in June'20 
survey). 

62 
 
(iii) Out of 5774 MSMEs, 3923 responded (68 percent) responded in July'20 survey & 3183 
MSMEs responded (55 percent) in August'20 survey. 
(iv) As of 1st June, 2020 and 1st July, 2020, 13 percent units were closed down while it was 9 
percent on August 1st, 2020.  
 
 
 
 
 
5.10.2  The Ministry of MSME in its presentation to the Committee in the meeting held on 
27th August, 2020, further stated that the MSMEs are regaining their footing with only 9 percent of 
the units closed as of 1 st August instead of the 13 percent in June and July, 2020 as per the survey 
conducted by the National Small Industries Corporation to assess the impact of the Pandemic. 
Capacity utilisation also slowly started improving for these units with one-fourth of them utilizing 
more than 50 percent of their installed capacity as against one-fifth of the units utilising more than 
half of their capacity in July. The survey showed that liquidity remained a major problem despite 
measures taken by the government, such as the Rs. 3 lakh crore government-guaranteed loans to 
these firms. The other major issues were lack of fresh orders, logistics problems and availability of 
raw material and labour. 
 

63 
 
5.10.3  In the Committee meeting held on 27 th August 2020, it was informed by the 
Department of Financial Services and the RBI that working capital loan is given at 7 ½ percent by 
public sector banks, the lowest ever. The Interest rate has been pegged at 9.25 percent for private 
banks and 14.25 percent for NBFCs. On being asked about the reason for a different rate of interests 
for public sector banks, private sector banks and NBFCs, it was informed that interest rate has been 
deregulated by the RBI, therefore, banks are following their own policy.  The reason private sec tor 
bank is charging more than the public sector bank is because of the cost of funds as they have to 
pay the interest to their depositors also who have kept their deposit there. 
 
5.10.4  RBI in its Annual Report (dated 25 th August, 2020 for the year 1 st July, 2019 to 30 th 
June, 2020), stated that "the MSME sector has the potential to become the engine of growth, but it 
has been underperforming for too long owing to various structural reasons. This sector has been 
constrained by the high cost of credit due to lack of adequate information, lack of modern 
technology, no research and innovations, insufficient training and skill development, and complex 
labour laws. Key reforms relating to MSMEs, viz., removal of definitional difference between 
manufacturing and service-based MSMEs, increased threshold limit to define an enterprise as an 
MSME, and adding turnover as another criteria to define MSMEs, besides investment scale, could 
turn out to be harbingers of far-reaching changes that can transform manufacturing in India". 
 
Observation 
 
5.10.5  The Committee observes that the 633.88 lakh MSMEs that contributes 
approximately 30 percent of India's GDP has been one of the sectors most adverse ly affected 
by the Pandemic and consequent lockdowns. Despite easing of the nationwide lockdown, 
intermittent lockdown by the States has also impacted the restarting of many manufacturing 
units. These units do not have access to low-cost institutional finance and thus there is a lack 
of cash flows, demand, manpower, technology-based production a ctivities, experience to use 
bank finance or engage in product promotion to ensu re adequate returns and stuck 
working capital has further lead to stress on employment.  The Committee therefore, observes 
that there is a need to support the stressed sectors like MSMEs which are in dire nee d of 
working capital to sustain the impact of COVID-19. 
 
5.10.6  The Committee further observes that the MSMEs may also seek new avenues 
and possibilities for expansion by customizing products with quality and innovations that will 
help them in meeting the evolving customer needs and by placing them as a part of the 
solution that is needed in the new normal. 
 
5.10.7  
The Committee observes that the hospitality sector and related services employ 
around five crore people. Due to lockdowns and large number of people getting infecte d, even 
after the opening of this sector during phased-unlocking, fear is lurking in the mind of the 
people, therefore, they are not undertaking any travel, leading to huge loss of employment 
and income in these sectors. Further, many eateries/restaurants have either shut down or are 
currently not operating. Therefore, necessary fiscal stimulus, interventions and supp ort will 
help in the revival of the hospitality sector and related services.
 

64 
 
CHAPTER VI 
REVISITING THE LEGISLATION AND KEY LESSONS LEARNT 
 
6.1 Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-
State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 
1979 
 
6.1.1 The Committee, sought to know from the Ministry of Home Affairs that whether the 
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 and the Disaster Management Act, 2005 are adequate to tackle such 
pandemics, to which the Ministry of Home Affairs replied that The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 
has provisions empowering State Governments to take special measures and prescribe regulations 
for managing the dangerous epidemic disease. It provides temporary regulations to  be  observed  
by  the  public  that is  necessary  to  prevent  the  outbreak  of  such  disease  or the  spread  thereof. 
It provides for screening, quarantining to prevent the importation of disease into the country.  The 
Act also empowers the Central Government to undertake steps for inspection and detention of ships, 
etc. at the ports of entry to prevent the spread of any dangerous epidemic/diseases. Provisions of the 
said Act were invoked in the wake of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the Ministry of Home Affairs 
also mentioned that a
 review of the same Act is underway. 
 
6.1.2 
The Committee was further informed by the MHA that the Disaster Management Act, 2005 
is comprehensive. However, while implementing it, certain issues came to notice, which the 
Government would streamline further. The Government has already constituted a Committee for the 
review of the said Act and based on the report of the Committee, necessary changes would be 
brought out. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs was specifically enquired by the Committee that 
whether the Ministry is planning to prepare/enable National Plan, State Plan and District Plan to 
fight COVID-19, as mentioned in the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The Ministry in its response 
to the questionnaire stated that the said Act provides for the preparation of the National Disaster 
Management Plan (NDMP). The NDMA had already prepared the NDMP in May, 2016 as per the 
provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The NDMP prepared in May, 2016 has also been 
revised in November, 2019. The plans contain a chapter on biological disasters and public health 
emergencies, based on which a specific plan for any specific biological disaster has to be 
formulated by the concerned ministry. The Plan, inter-alia mentions that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare is the nodal Ministry for dealing with biological emergencies.
 
 
6.1.3 The NDMA, to create preparedness about any contingent biological disaster, has also 
framed the "National Disaster Management Guidelines -Management of Biological Disasters". The 
said Guidelines specifically contain clear and direct references to "social distancing", "quarantine 
measures", masks and PPE kits, etc. The broad aspects which the same Guidelines entail amongst 
others are as under: 
 
(i) Guidelines for Prevention of Biological Disasters. 
(ii) Preparedness and Capacity Development. 
(iii)  Medical Preparedness. 
(iv) Emergency Medical and Public Health Response. 
(v) Management of Pandemics. 
(vi) International Cooperation. 
(vii) Guidelines for Safety and Security of Microbial Agents. 
(viii) Biological Containment. 
(ix)  Classification of Microorganisms. 

65 
 
(x) Biologics and Laboratory Biosafety. 
(xi) Microorganism Handling Instructions  
(xii) Countering Bio risks. 
(xiii)  Implementation of the Guidelines. 
(xiv)  Financial Arrangements for Implementation Model. 
 
 
6.1.4 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has already supported States in terms of Clust er 
Containment Plan and Large Outbreak Containment plan. All States and UTs have also been 
advised to prepare a district-level COVID-19 management plan. 
 
Recommendation 
 
6.1.5 The Committee observes that the COVID-19 Pandemic may stay with us for a longer 
period. The response to this Pandemic has been conceived and is being guided b y the 
provisions of the Disaster Management Act (NDMA), 2005 and also the Epidemic Diseases 
Act, 1897. The Committee opines that the Pandemic/ epidemic fundamentally differ s from 
disaster. Disasters happen periodically every year which includes floods, cyclones, train 
accidents, etc. whereas pandemic/ epidemic occurs in decades and even once a century. The 
last declared Pandemic of this magnitude with huge social and economic fallouts was the 
Spanish flu of 1918. Although the provision of NDMA helped in timely interventions and 
response during the COVID-19 Pandemic, it is not meant for handling the pandemic / 
epidemic, if it happens in future.
   
 
6.1.6 The Committee observes that the provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, have 
helped in managing the COVID-19, but this Act is outdated as it was framed in the colonial-
era which was even well before the Spanish flu of 1918. Therefore, the Committ ee 
recommends that the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 should be revisited, updated and amen ded 
so that it is fully equipped to respond to the challenges posed by the unanticipated onset of  the 
Pandemic/ epidemic in the future. 
 
6.1.7 The Committee observes that it is difficult to predict the characteristic of the new 
agents that may cause future Pandemics of this size or even worse than before.  The 
Committee notes that the review of the provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 is in 
the process as submitted by the Home Ministry.   The Committee notes that while the 
guidelines issued by the Central Government allowed the States/UTs to make their 
regulations more stringent but without diluting the Government of India guidelines, it i s 
important to ensure that the conditions imposed by a State/UT do not prohibit movement of  
essential commodities and of person who is engaged in the manufacture, transport and related 
activity.   
 
6.1.8 The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Services) Act, 1979 which is key legislation to regulate the condition of service of inter-state 
labourers should also be revised since some deficiencies and lapses came to notice du ring the 
lockdown when migrant workers had faced immense problems.   
 
6.1.9 The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation mentioned at Para 4.4.10 of  
the Report and strongly recommends to revisit the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 and other relevant Labour Laws. 

66 
 
6.2 Key Lessons Learnt   
 
6.2.1  The Committee sought to know from the MHA that how the Government proposes to handle 
the next pandemic or epidemic based on present experience. The Ministry of Home Affairs state d 
that the Government of India will continue to work on the core capacities required for managing 
public health emergencies like plans/ policies & procedures, inter- sectoral coordination, disease 
surveillance at points of entry & in communities, laboratory support, preparedness and response, 
human resource & capacity building, logistics, risk communication and research & development.  
 
6.2.2 The MHA also mentioned that lessons learned and best practices witnessed during the present 
Pandemic will be documented and incorporated in the plans/policies and procedures. To document 
the experiences of challenges faced and the strategies followed and the outcomes thereof in respect 
of the management of the COVID-19 Pandemic for evolving a comprehensive manual with detailed 
SOPs for reference and use in the future for quick responses, the Ministry of Home Affairs is 
preparing a knowledge management framework in collaboration with NIC to document and create a 
digital archive to the management of COVID-19. The Government has also initiated action for 
documentation of "collective response" to COVID-19 in a comprehensive manner. NDMA has been 
tasked at the National level to undertake the same with respective Ministries, Departments and 
States. 
 
6.2.3 To the Committee's query that whether our country is now better prepared to confront such 
adversity in the future, the MHA stated that  India has demonstrated remarkable strength and ability  
to respond to such public health emergencies of National and International concern. In terms of core 
capacities required for managing such Pandemics, India has shown remarkable achievements.  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
6.2.4 COVID-19 Pandemic is an unprecedented crisis that has challenged all the countr ies 
and societies. This pandemic has all of a sudden created a situation for which no one  was 
prepared, neither the Government nor the civil society.  Many persons were infected  and 
valuable lives were lost. (Number of total deaths due to COVID-19 was 141, 772 as of 10 th 
December, 2020, Source-MoH&FW website ). It has been a learning process for everyone 
inter-alia including the political leadership, bureaucracy and the frontline essential service 
providers - our Corona Warriors. All of them have made an enormous contribution to tackle 
this crisis. Some migrant workers lost their lives while walking back to their native places. 
The country also mourned the demise of many brave-hearted skilled essential servic e 
providers who helped others to live by making supreme sacrifice of their lives. 
 
6.2.5 The Committee undertook wider consultations with the nodal Ministry, i.e. the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, and other important stakeholders/experts and on that basis, 
summarizes the following key lessons learnt: 
 
(i) The Central and State/ UT Governments, Panchayats and Civil Society including 
public, private and civil organizations/NGOs should participate proactively to 
ensure a strong leadership, focused, coordinated and sustained response in case of 
Pandemic, 
(ii) To build strategic resilience to tackle such public health emergencies, decentrali zed 
planning right from the grass-root level to the top is needed keeping in view the 
requirements of  both short and long term; 
(iii) Detailed SOPs may be prepared for international passengers coming to India 

67 
 
including proper screening and testing, quarantine, etc., for timely detection and 
medication/treatment in case of such Pandemic in the future; 
(iv) The National Database of migrant workers may be launched at the earliest as it will 
help in the identification, movement of migrant workers and to provide them food, 
shelter and other benefits in case of a Pandemic like COVID-19; 
(v) An Increase in investments is needed urgently to strengthen  health infrastructure 
and rapid scaling of health services in a time-bound manner and to strengthe n of 
the public health infrastructure, particularly laboratory network at all levels; 
(vi) The Patient's feedback regarding their treatment should be made essential in all 
the public and private hospitals to have an understanding of the issues faced by the 
hospitalized patients that will further help in the management of a Pandemic; 
(vii) There should be stronger coordination between Centre and States to give due 
publicity to the information related to the Government approved/ authorized 
testing labs to stop people from panicking and rushing to private labs in case of a 
public health emergency   of this proportion. Special guidelines on clinical 
governance should also be developed to maintain quality and safety; 
(viii) The Ministry of AYUSH has shown potential in preventive and curative healthcare 
during Pandemic for immunity boosting. Therefore, there is a need for more 
investment and research in Ayurveda/ traditional systems and its promotion  to 
supplement the allopathic treatment during such Pandemics in the future; 
(ix) It is imperative to make investments in health systems, biomedical 
sciences/research, surveillance and disease control, pharmaceutical and the vaccine 
industry that are critical for India's health security in long run. 
(x) The IRDAI should promptly extend the insurance coverage and promote cashless 
transactions in case of such a Pandemic in future so as to avoid any hardship to 
them.  
(xi) The health care centres across urban and rural areas should provide mental 
healthcare professionals to counsel people to fight against the fear, worries and 
anxieties among people which gets magnified during in such a Pandemic. 
(xii) The Development and promotion of the state of the art technologies is needed to 
minimize human/personal contact during the Pandemic. The Government should 
also prioritize strengthening IT infrastructure particularly in rural and remote 
areas to extend the services like online education, tele-medicine, e-commerce, etc.; 
(xiii) It is essential to engage with the community by the successful use of all public 
communication channels in regional/ local languages to counter fear, panic and 
rumors for managing  a pandemic; and 
(xiv) Effective implementation of the existing Acts/ rules governing the workers 
employed in both the formal and informal sector should be done so that they can 
withstand the major torment in the event of such a Pandemic in the future. 
 
***** 

68 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
INDIA'S PREPAREDNESS TO TACKLE THE PANDEMIC 
 
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
 The Committee observes that several steps were taken much ahead of what many other 
countries took subsequently for the screening of travelers and passengers coming from 
abroad into India.  All international flights were also prohibited in a graded manner.  While 
doing so, the Central Government was conscious of the need to bring back stranded Ind ian 
citizens abroad to the safety of their homes. The Committee, however, observ es tha t 
incoming international passengers including those who en tered throughout March, 2020 
were screened only for high temperature and there w as no testing facility established at the 
airports. Thus, asymptomatic patients as also those who travelled after taking medicines for 
controlling temperature could not be diagnosed at a t ime when they could practically be the 
only source of infections of COVID-19 in the country. 
(Para 2.6.9) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government for the managem ent 
of COVID-19 Pandemic and understands that the primary effect of nationwide lockdown was 
to have a uniform set of regulations, to delay peak infections and provide time to the he alth 
system to mop up adequate health care infrastructure, personnel and equipmen ts. The 
lockdown gave the country time to ramp up its public health infrastructure, build the 
capacity of hospitals and health care workers. The Committee also understands that  one of 
the key elements of the pandemic control strategies across the globe has been to shut down 
economic and social activities, and to impose social distancing with varying degrees of 
stringency. 
(Para 2.6.10) 
 
 
 The Committee notes that necessary measures were taken by the Government to  
minimize the severe impact of the lockdown. The Government ensured the availability of all  
essential commodities. The Government announced Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana 
(PMGKY), wherein targeted relief was for the most vulnerable sections of the society. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs also allowed flexibility in the State Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF) 
guidelines  to cater to the requirement of setting up relief camps for migrant workers an d 
other needy persons.  Since the crisis was unprecedented, the overall plan for  its management 
was coordinated through meetings of the Prime Minister with Chief Ministers/ 
Administrators and other high-level meetings involving Senior Officers of Centre and States.  
These meetings contributed towards effective coordination between the Central Government 
and all the States/ Union Territories to ensure efficacious implementation of the decision  
taken for mitigation of distress and distribution of relief by the civil administration at district 
and sub-divisional level. The steps were taken to ensure that the poor people in both ur ban 
and rural areas are not deprived of any benefit of social security, food and shelter  as 
announced by the Government.  
(Para 2.6.11) 
 
 The Committee, however, observes that the sudden imposition of lockdown 
necessitated by the challenging situation and the fear of the rapid spread of the virus di d 

69 
 
result in unprecedented disruption. The lockdown led to the stoppage of Intra-State and 
Inter-State movement of people, goods, shutdown of factories, hotels, eateries, tourism, etc ., 
and other economic activities that led to unprecedented disruption and severe social and 
economic fallouts. The migrant labourers, factory workers, daily wage earners were  the worst 
affected. The civil administration in the States and the districts prepared to respond  to the 
challenge and establish shelters and quarantine facilities. As there was no timely
 
dissemination of the information in the district areas about the arrangements being mad e for 
food, shelter and other facilities, anxiety and uncertainty gripped the migrant labourers and 
workers and led to their movement in large number to their home States. This stopped onl y 
when effective mitigating measures were taken by Central and the State Governments.    
(Para 2.6.12) 
 
 From the benefit of the experience gained while addressing these challenges, the 
Committee recommends that the Government should draw up a national plan and guidelines 
under NDMA, 2005 and Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. An e ffective functional institutional 
mechanism is needed for co-ordination between the Ce ntre, states and Union Territories for 
quick response to such a crisis in future. This would ensu re efficacious implementation of all 
decisions to contain pandemics and equitable/timely dist ribution of relief at district and sub-
divisional levels to the intended beneficiaries in urban an d rural areas.  
(Para   2.6.13) 
 
 
AUGMENTATION OF HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Testing for COVID-19 
 
 The Committee notes that the testing capacity has been expanded significantly since 
the imposition of the first lockdown in late March, 2020. The Committee appreciates that in 
the management of the crisis, India demonstrated its capacity to scale up the responses as the 
situation evolved. The number of testing laboratories was only 1 in the month of January, 
2020 which was increased to 151 on 1 st April, 2020 and as of 10 th December, 2020, the total 
number of labs approved for COVID-19 testing has increased to 2229. The number of 
isolation beds, ICU beds and PPE kits have also been increased from approximately 1.74 lakh, 
22 thousand and 3.87 lakh in mid-April, 2020 to more than 15 lakh, 80 thousand and 6 crore 
respectively, as on 10 th December, 2020. There has also been a robust response from the 
Government in increasing the testing capacity per day from 30 thousand on 1 st April to 10 
lakh as of 10th December, 2020. 
 
(Para 3.2.7) 
 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
 
 The Committee notes with appreciation that the public health care system and 
Government hospitals rose to the occasion in bearing the unprecedented burden. Th e 
Committee is of the considered view that the Government responded to the challengi ng 
situation promptly and appreciates its quick adaptation to the emerging evidence about this 
highly contagious disease, though the country during the initial phase suffered from a 
shortage in medical supplies, availability of beds in hospitals, low level of testing and serious 
impact on other non-COVID health services. There has been a response to the situation by  

70 
 
both Central and State Governments along with district administration in identifying the 
cases and reserving the required number of beds for COVID-19 patients as and where  there 
was a need. 
(Para   3.10.5) 
 
 The Committee observes that t he pandemic has pushed both Central and State 
Governments to incur heavy expenditure on COVID-19 treatment and related services. Th e 
Committee is of the view that the public sector healthcare delivery system needs to be fu rther 
strengthened in all the States/ UTs and a uniform healthcare system should be establish ed 
across the country to deal with the Pandemic on a sustained basis in future. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends that in the long term, there should be more investments in health 
infrastructure for the rapid scaling up of public health services. A strong and eff ective public 
health infrastructure is necessary to respond to such a Pandemic due to which thousands o f 
COVID-19 patients are getting admitted to hospitals in addition to the non-COVID-19 
patients.  
(Para   3.10.6) 
 
The Committee opines that the threat of COVID-19 has highlighted the huge disparity 
of infrastructure and services in public and private hospitals.   There has to be sufficient 
capacity of beds available both in public/government and private hospitals. The Committee 
also observes the disproportionate availability of ICU beds in private and public sector 
hospitals. After the onset of the Pandemic, the largest share of the burden of extend ing 
comprehensive healthcare has been borne by the Government hospitals as private hospitals  
are either inaccessible or not affordable for everyone. Therefore, more allocat ion should be 
made for public hospitals to strengthen the Public Health Infrastructure so that they can 
equip themselves appropriately to handle such Pandemics in the future. 
(Para 3.10.7) 
 
 The Committee notes that  in the initial phase of spread of the virus, Central and  State 
Government along with the civil administration and health care workers co-ordinate d the 
relief work and responded by creating bed facilities, opening laboratories, open ing of railway 
coaches and health care centre for COVID-19 patients with a large number of beds to h andle 
the Pandemic. However,  it is vital to build up massive health care infrastructure, special 
protocols, etc. for the care of patients in these dedicated hospitals to manage the Pandemic 
like COVID-19 in the future. 
(Para 3.10.8) 
 
 The Committee opines that a precise study on test rate, recovery and fatality rate is 
important to discern the pattern.  There is also a need to identify the States where the testing 
facilities need to be expanded as the testing facility is not the same across the States and Union 
Territories. Even within States also, districts should be identified and adequate h ealth 
infrastructure should be made available there. 
(Para 3.10.9) 
 
 
 The Committee, further, recommends that relevant data should be made available for 
the research community duly following data anonymization, security and privacy laws which  
can provide required input for COVID-19 management and access, analyze and provide r eal-
time context-specific solutions to control the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
(Para 3.10.10) 

71 
 
 The Committee appreciates the commendable work that has been done by the AIIMS  
in helping the other institutions in the States, particularly, about the treatment protocols.  
(Para 3.10.19) 
 The Committee also appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and health workers who rose to the occasion in tackling this unprecedented health 
crisis and also expresses deep gratitude towards the frontline health workers and the Corona  
Warriors who have lost their lives on duty. 
(Para 3.10.20) 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends that there is a need for a comprehen sive public 
health Act, preferably at the national level with suitable legal provisions to support the 
Government in keeping checks and controls over the private hospitals as there have bee n 
reports about the selling of hospital beds by them. Learning from the experience of this 
Pandemic, the Government should seriously examine it. The Act should also keep a c heck on 
the black marketing of medicines and product standardization. The Committee further 
recommends that the people should be made aware through awareness campaigns regardin g 
cheaper and effective repurposed medicines to prevent them from panicking and spending a 
huge amount of money on expensive drugs. The Committee recommends that good quality 
and affordable medicines should be provided to everyone, especially at a cheaper /subsidized 
rate to the marginalized sections of the society specially at the time of Pandemic like COVID-
19.  
(Para 3.10.21) 
 
 The Committee recommends that a holistic approach should be adopted to tre at the 
patients who are already admitted to hospitals due to COVID-19. The Committee is of 
considered view that in the absence of certified vaccine/ medicines, the Ministry of Ayurveda, 
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) has huge potential in 
preventive and providing curative healthcare of this Pandemic. For immunity- boosting of 
both the patients and common people, kadha/ herbs/ spices as part of diet and Yoga may be 
suggested and promoted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in coordination  with 
the Ministry of AYUSH and AIIMS. As an alternate source of medicine to treat COVID-19, 
Ayurveda/traditional systems should be researched and awareness should be raised regard ing 
their efficacy in the treatment of COVID-19. 
(Para   3.10.22) 
 
The Committee observes that there is a need for sustained and focused efforts for 
managing the crisis as also creating awareness in the communities, ensuring testing 
infrastructure and upgrading health infrastructure particularly in remote and rural are as. 
The availability of pulse oximeter in the villages, remote and inaccessible areas as a cheap and 
effective way to detect silent hypoxia is important. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends 
that the remote rural areas should be specifically monitored by the States under the ove rall 
technical guidance from the Centre. 
(Para 3.10.23) 
Status of development of Indigenous vaccines 
 
 The Committee observes that there is a global recognition of the Indian scientists who 
are engaged in producing vaccines and respect for India's institutional potential and  capacity 
developed over the decade that has made India the largest drug manufacturer in the world.  
(Para 3.12.14) 
 

72 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by ICMR in handling the COVID-19 
Pandemic. The Committee recommends that while undertaking vaccine trials all  necessary 
and mandatory requirements must be duly fulfilled and all phases must be com pleted. Trials 
on small animals, human trials should be mandatorily undertaken on a sufficient sample size 
population. The Committee notes that no emergency use authorization has been given in  the 
past by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO). Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that if at all emergency authorization would be given, it should  be 
given by Government with proper consideration and caution and this provision should be 
used in rarest of the rare cases. 
(Para   3.12.15) 
 
 The Committee opines that periodic press conferences should be held to kee p people 
informed about the progress made in vaccine development and the expected time of 
availability of a vaccine. The Committee also recommends, establishing a network fo r 
collecting samples of different patients from different places at different points of time  for 
future study. The Committee is of the considered view that once vaccination begins, it will 
restore the confidence among people and help in sustained revival of economic activitie s and 
creation of jobs. 
(Para 3.12.16) 
 
 
Partnership building- involvement of the private sector, corporate, NGOs and other 
stakeholders 
 
        The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA) in combating the Corona Virus Pandemic as they have swiftly responded by building 
synergy between the Centre and States over handling the Pandemic through Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs), guidelines, awareness generation and most importantly, actin g 
as a nodal centre for funding manpower deployment to meet exigencies. The Committe e 
understands that this Pandemic is unprecedented even for the NDMA which is a dedicated 
body for Disaster Management. Therefore, the Committee recommends that a separat e wing 
may be formed in NDMA that will specialize in handling /managing the Pandemics like  
COVID-19 in the future. This wing may take a leading role in building a partnership of 
Government with the public sector, corporates, NGOs and other stakeholders.  
(Para   3.13.3) 
 
 The Committee observes that there is a need to establish more inclusive governance for 
building up a strong community resilience system and the ability to co-exist with COVID-19. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that there should be an open a nd 
transparent data sharing mechanism between scientists, public health professionals and the 
public at large as this will strengthen Pandemic control measures build consensus and evolve 
an ecosystem of engagement, faith, and trust.   
(Para   3.13.7) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that the measures should continuously be taken 
to avoid social stigma and fear of isolation and quarantine, by making people aware and 
treating them with respect and empathy. An interdisciplinary team of public health 
specialists, grassroots political and social leaderships and volunteers can also raise awareness 
about modes of transmission and methods of prevention of COVID-19 in the community 

73 
 
which can be done by adopting emergency risk communication methods and broad-base d 
community engagement strategies. 
(Para   3.13.8) 
 
Health Insurance Coverage 
 
 
The Committee observes that in the initial phase of Pandemic, insurance coverage was 
not given to many people who suffered from COVID-19. The private hospitals were chargin g 
exorbitantly high rates for the treatment of COVID patients who had to suffer a lot due to 
lack of any insurance coverage. The Committee  appreciates the efforts made by the IRDAI to 
create standard health insurance products and recommends that the healthcare systems need 
to be well prepared with well-defined medical protocols to handle any health contingencies in 
future. Expanding the healthcare infrastructure to tier 2, 3 and 4 cities and rural areas n eeds 
focus. The Committee further recommends that transparency and accountability need to be 
increased to provide quality healthcare and to promote fair practices. There is a need  to have 
regulatory oversight on all hospitals working in the country to prevent refusal to accept 
insurance claims. The Committee strongly recommends that the target should be to make 
COVID-19 treatment cashless for all people that are having insurance coverage. 
(Para   3.14.5) 
 
COVID-19 situation in Delhi 
 
 The Committee appreciates the effort made by the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
Government of NCT of Delhi in building India's biggest COVID-19 care centre consisting of 
10,000 beds and also the timely interventions made to control the spread of the virus in the 
national capital. The Committee
 observes that the district-specific or the area-wise total 
number of cases are not being maintained and reported by the Delhi Government. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Delhi Government should maintain and release 
district-wise data of the positive cases, recovered cases and the testing status. This will bring 
more transparency and will make people aware of the situation in their localities. The 
Committee further recommends that the balance should be maintained between RT-P CR and 
RAT and issuing of Medical Certification of Cause of Death (MCCD) should be made 
compulsory for all hospitals to get the exact number of COVID-19 deaths in Delhi. 
(Para 3.15.6) 
 
 
The Committee expresses concern over the recent spike in the incidence of the COVID-
19 cases in Delhi due to the combined effect of series of festive events, increase in air pollution 
and advent of the winter season. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Min istry of 
Home Affairs to review the situation in Delhi and co-ordinate with the Government of NCT of 
Delhi to adopt a robust strategy for containment and mitigation of the recent surge in cases  
and take necessary measures to prevent the subsequent waves of infections in Delhi. 
(Para 3.15.7) 
 
SOCIAL IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
Measures taken for the return of migrant workers to their places of domicile 
 
 The Committee observes that the migrant workers are the backbone of the industrial 
sector but the COVID-19 Pandemic has exposed certain problems in the existing public  policy 

74 
 
framework. Due to the lockdown, the migrant workers lost their jobs. The uncertainty 
involved with the Pandemic and inadequate social security, access to affordable housing, 
health benefits and other basic amenities led to their migration to their home States. The lack 
of these benefits points to the in-effective implementation of the Inter-State Migrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979. The task of 
identifying
 the location and disbursing relief measures to the migrant workers became very 
difficult as the Central Government did not have any data of the migrant workers and had  to 
seek it from the States.  
(Para   4.4.10) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government to extend various 
relief measures to the vulnerable sections of the society. However, in the absence of a 
comprehensive National Database, it is difficult to extend the relief measures by the 
Government to the intended beneficiaries.  
(Para 4.4.11) 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should ensure a decent 
minimum wage, food security and safe living conditions to all the workers employed in both 
the formal and informal sector by including them in health services, cash transfer and  other 
social programmes. Further, the Committee strongly recommends that the National Database 
on migrant workers should be launched at the earliest as it will help in the identi fication of 
migrant workers and also in delivering ration and other benefits to them. The datab ase may 
also include the records of returning migrant labourers including details about their source 
and destination, earlier employment details and the nature of their skills which will h elp in 
skill development and planning for the transit of migrant workers in emergency situations  
such as the outbreak of Pandemic, etc.
  
(Para 4.4.12) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that the Government should revisit the Inter -
State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
and other Labour Laws to strengthen and implement them in letter and s pirit. 
The 
Committee also recommends that the Government should use different platforms to pr ovide 
information about the various government schemes and other avenues of employment.  
(Para 4.4.13) 
Impact of COVID-19 on Education 
 The Committee appreciates the various digital initiatives taken by the Government for 
conducting online classes. However, social inequalities exist in the society relating to the 
availability of resources to access these online classes and other digital initiatives taken by the 
Government.  
(Para 4.5.7) 
 
 The Committee, strongly recommends that a scheme may be worked out to provid e 
financial assistance as well as low-cost subsidized devices like tablets, smartphones and 
computers to students with sufficient data to access these facilities, especially for the students 
belonging to weaker sections of the  society. The Committee further recommends that to 
enable the students to get the benefit of online classes and also to bridge the digital divid e, the 
Government should prioritize the strengthening of the IT infrastructure to provide 

75 
 
uninterrupted internet connection throughout the country especially, in the rural areas.  
Meanwhile, big screens may be placed in the community centres particularly in rural areas so 
that the poor children who do not have smartphones/ internet connection can continue  their 
studies from these community centres. The lockdown imposed has brought a paradigm shift 
from classroom teaching to online teaching. Schools, Colleges and other higher educat ional 
institutions are quickly adapting themselves to this shift and conducting online classes so that 
studies do not suffer. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that training may be 
imparted to teachers to conduct online classes as it is different from teach ing in a classroom 
and would be regular phenomenon in times of COVID-19. 
(Para 4.5.8) 
Reopening of schools/ colleges 
 The Committee notes that the schools and other educational institutions have remained 
closed since March, 2020 due to the Pandemic. Standard Operating Procedures (SOP s) have 
been issued by the Ministry of Education along with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare in consultation with respective State Governments. The Committee recomme nds that 
special emphasis should be given on physical distancing, masks, hand washing, classroom 
spaces and sanitization of the classrooms. Moreover, mix mode of learning i.e. both online and 
offline classes should be encouraged and classroom studies may begin in a phased mann er 
with staggered timings for different classes/ sections. The Committee further observes that the 
primary and pre-primary students should not be called to the classrooms, and m ay continue 
to be taught via. online modes till vaccines are made available or the situation comes under 
total control. 
(Para 4.6.7) 
 
Psychological impact of COVID-19  
 
 The current COVID-19 Pandemic has already brought mental health problems to the 
fore as people are facing anxiety and stress due to varied reasons. It is likely that more pe ople 
will need mental health care interventions post COVID-19. The Committee notes the efforts of 
the Government in providing teleconsultations and developing websites to address this issue . 
The Committee observes that in the changing scenario, people require special care arising due 
to isolation caused by social distancing, unemployment, financial hardship leading to rising 
debt, alcohol abuse and domestic violence, etc. There is also a need to educate  and sensitize 
people to remove the stigma of mental health problems being a sign of either weakness or 
embarrassment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the health care centr es across 
rural and urban areas must have mental healthcare professionals to counsel people to figh t 
against the fear, worries and anxieties arising out of the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic.  
(Para   4.7.7) 
 
 The Committee opines that the children are also facing physical and mental health-
related issues including strain on eyes and ears, obesity, sleeplessness, anxiety, etc., due to  
online classes and their associated lifestyle. The Committee also observes that children have  
faced mental and emotional imbalances leading to suicide in some cases. The Committee 
appreciates the Central government to come up with an initiative called "Manodarpan" for 
parents, teachers, and students to mitigate the psychological impact of the lockdown and the 
Pandemic. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of recreatin g school with six 

76 
 
to seven hours of content, the focus should be on making shorter, high-quality engagem ents 
including breaks/exercises and revised guidelines may be issued for the same. Further,  
webinars may be organized by educational institutions from time to time to discuss me ntal 
health problems faced by the students. The Committee firmly believes that a concerted e ffort 
from parents, teachers and Government is necessary to help children cope up with the crisis 
and thrive in the post-COVID-19 world. 
(Para 4.7.8) 
 
Stigma relating to COVID-19 Pandemic 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has made 
available a guide to address the stigma associated with COVID-19, on their website. The 
Committee observes that due to the Pandemic there is a conflict between science an d stigma, 
facts and fears. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that adequate steps should 
be taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs and other concerned Ministries to fight the social 
stigma through robust media campaigning for generating adequate public awareness.  
Further, the Government should also utilize the services of Media and other platform s and 
NGOs registered with the Government to educate and sensitize society and bring the truth 
before the people in case of any rumour-mongering and misleading news/informat ion on the 
issue. 
(Para 4.8.3) 
 
Government interventions 
 
 The Committee appreciates the work done by the Department of Food and Public  
Distribution in un-interrupted movement and distribution of food grains up to the remot est 
part of our country during the pandemic period, particularly during lockdowns.  The 
Committee understands that the Department has worked day and night without taking a 
break while doing service to the nation at the time of the unprecedented crisis. 
(Para 4.10.8) 
 
  The Committee recommends that Aadhaar linked National Database of the vulnerable 
sections of the society that includes migrant labourers, urban poor, workers engaged in 
unorganized Sector, be prepared on priority so that in case of such a crisis in future, the 
Government can reach out to them and provide rations and other facilities. Th e Committee 
also hopes that effective and timely implementation of the program will be ensured and 
progress will be monitored from time to time as the success of the program dep ends upon 
benefits reaching the beneficiaries in time. 
(Para 4.10.9) 
 
  The Committee is aware that the country has the largest PDS network in the world, 
which is instrumental in meeting the objective of the National Food Security Act, 2013 in 
normal circumstances. However, the COVID-19 Pandemic has affected in a very harsh way , 
the lives of the poor and the vulnerable sections of the society, both in the rural areas and in 
the urban areas. The Committee observes that during the lockdown period, due to lack  of 
inter-operability of PDS across states, migrant workers were not able to take food grains from 
PDS shops inspite of having ration cards. The Committee, therefore, recommends that until 
One-Nation One ration card (ONOR) is implemented in all the States/UTs, interstate 

77 
 
operability of ration cards should be allowed so that the migrant workers can take food grains 
from PDS shops in any State/UT. 
(Para   4.10.10) 
 The Committee notes the efforts of the Government of India for providing an 
additional allocation of food grains for distribution under PDS to meet the challenge. But i n 
the absence of tracking and monitoring mechanisms, it is challenging for both Central an d 
States/UTs Governments to track the intra-State and inter-State movement of the migrant 
workers and distribute adequate quantities of food grains from PDS shops on time. Therefore, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should coordinate with the 
concerned Central Ministries and the Governments of States/UTs and create a trackin g and 
monitoring mechanism linking all the States/ UTs so that the movement of migrant workers 
can be tracked on a real-time basis and States can off take the required rations/ supplies from 
the Central Board, FCI godowns accordingly, without any delay. 
(Para   4.10.11) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that Mid-Day Meal Scheme is an essential scheme that 
motivates the poorest children to go to school and pursue studies. But due to the Pandemi c 
and closure of schools, they are deprived of Mid-Day Meals. The Committee notes that 
only 
some of the States have continued the Mid-Day Meal scheme during the Pandemic by 
delivering the dry rations at doorstep/ giving allowances or both. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs along with the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution may take up the matter with the State Governments to ensure that 
the local administrations are delivering the rations/ allowances in time and this should be 
continued until the schools reopen. 
(Para 4.10.12) 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
 
Monetary and Liquidity Measures taken by RBI 
 
 The Committee takes note of the number of Schemes/ interventions extended by the 
Government of India to bring the economy back on track. However, the Committe e observes 
that few of these schemes need effective implementation at the ground level. The prob lems 
being faced by farmers, non-corporate and non-farm small/micro enterpr ises in getting loans 
need to be addressed.  
(Para   5.5.2) 
 
Banking Operations during Pandemic 
 
 The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts and pain taken by the ban king sector 
for providing uninterrupted and seamless banking facilities during the COVID-19 outbreak 
and consequent lockdown. In their sincere efforts to provide continuous service, many of the 
bank officials also lost their valuable life. The Committee, therefore, places on record the good 
work done by the banking sector right from the beginning of the COVID-19 Pandemic an d 
observes that they are also recognized as COVID-19
 warriors.  
(Para 5.6.3) 
 
 

78 
 
Recovery of Economy 
 
 The Committee observes that shock to consumption is severe due to COVID-19 
induced lockdowns which resulted in huge loss of jobs, daily wages and daily inc ome in both 
organized and unorganized sectors. The impact, however, has been more severe in the 
unorganized sector. Therefore, it will take quite some time to mend and regain the pre-
COVID-19 momentum. The GDP after having a contraction of 23.9% in Q1 (2020-21) has 
shown signs of recovery in Q2 (2020-21). This is due to growth in private consumption during 
the festive season, rise in investment demand and Government intervention through 
MNREGA, etc. But, more interventions and schemes are required by the Governme nt to 
support the recovery and to sustain this economic revival in the following quarters. 
 (Para   5.7.14) 
 
 
The provisions in place before the Pandemic for supporting the MSMEs 
 
 The Committee appreciates the launch of Creation and Harmonious Application of 
Modern Processes for Increasing the Output and National Strength (CHAMPIONS) Portal, a 
unified, empowered, robust and technology-driven platform for helping and promot ing the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by providing them and other relate d 
stakeholders facilities to voice their issues and grievances and seeks resolution.  The 
Committee takes note of the effort of the Ministry of MSME in encouraging the MSMEs to 
get themselves on board on the GeM Portal by sending bulk emails to all Udyog Aadhaar 
Memorandum (UAM) holders and by providing GeM access to the UAM database for 
provisional and automatic onboarding of all the MSMEs on the GeM.  
(Para   5.9.14) 
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) Survey of MSMEs-Post COVID-19. 
 
 The Committee observes that the 633.88 lakh MSMEs that contributes approximately 
30 percent of India's GDP has been one of the sectors most adversely affected by the 
Pandemic and consequent lockdowns. Despite easing of the nationwide lockdown, intermittent 
lockdown by the States has also impacted the restarting of many manufacturing units. These 
units do not have access to low-cost institutional finance and thus there is a lack of cash flow s, 
demand, manpower, technology-based production activities , experience to use bank finance 
or engage in product promotion to ensure adequate r eturns and stuck working capital has 
further lead to stress on employment.  The Committee therefore, observes that ther e is a need 
to support the stressed sectors like MSMEs which are in dire need of working c apital to 
sustain the impact of COVID-19. 
(Para   5.10.5) 
 
 
 The Committee further observes that the MSMEs may also seek new avenues and 
possibilities for expansion by customizing products with quality and innovations that will help 
them in meeting the evolving customer needs and by placing them as a part of the solution 
that is needed in the new normal. 
(Para 5.10.6) 
 
 
The Committee observes that the hospitality sector and related services employ around 
five crore people. Due to lockdowns and large number of people getting infected, even afte r 

79 
 
the opening of this sector during phased-unlocking, fear is lurking in the mind of the pe ople, 
therefore, they are not undertaking any travel, leading to huge loss of employment and 
income in these sectors. Further, many eateries/restaurants have either shut down or are 
currently not operating. Therefore, necessary fiscal stimulus, interventions and su pport will 
help in the revival of the hospitality sector and related services. 
(Para 5.10.7) 
 
 
REVISITING THE LEGISLATION AND KEY LESSONS LEARNT 
 
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
 
 The Committee observes that the COVID-19 Pandemic may stay with us for a longer 
period. The response to this Pandemic has been conceived and is being guided b y the 
provisions of the Disaster Management Act (NDMA), 2005 and also the Epidemic Diseases 
Act, 1897. The Committee opines that the Pandemic/ epidemic fundamentally differs from 
disaster. Disasters happen periodically every year which includes floods, cyclones, trai n 
accidents, etc. whereas pandemic/ epidemic occurs in decades and even onc e a century. The 
last declared Pandemic of this magnitude with huge social and economic fallouts was the 
Spanish flu of 1918. Although the provision of NDMA helped in timely interventions and 
response during the COVID-19 Pandemic, it is not meant for handling the pandemic / 
epidemic, if it happens in future.
   
(Para 6.1.5) 
 
 The Committee observes that the provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, have 
helped in managing the COVID-19, but this Act is outdated as it was framed in the colonial-
era which was even well before the Spanish flu of 1918. Therefore, the Committ ee 
recommends that the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 should be revisited, updated and amen ded 
so that it is fully equipped to respond to the challenges posed by the unanticipated onset of  the 
Pandemic/ epidemic in the future. 
(Para   6.1.6) 
 
 The Committee observes that it is difficult to predict the characteristic of the new 
agents that may cause future Pandemics of this size or even worse than before.  Th e 
Committee notes that the review of the provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 is in 
the process as submitted by the Home Ministry.   The Committee notes that while the 
guidelines issued by the Central Government allowed the States/UTs to make their 
regulations more stringent but without diluting the Government of India guidelines, it i s 
important to ensure that the conditions imposed by a State/UT do not prohibit movement of  
essential commodities and of person who is engaged in the manufacture, transport and related 
activity.  
(Para 6.1.7) 
 
  The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Services) Act, 1979 which is key legislation to regulate the condition of service of inter-state 
labourers should also be revised since some deficiencies and lapses came to notice dur ing the 
lockdown when migrant workers had faced immense problems.  
(Para 6.1.8) 
  

80 
 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation mentioned at Para 4.4.10 of  
the Report and strongly recommends to revisit the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 and other relevant Labour Laws. 
(Para 6.1.9) 
Key Lessons Learnt  
 
 COVID-19 Pandemic is an unprecedented crisis that has challenged all the countr ies 
and societies. This pandemic has all of a sudden created a situation for which no one  was 
prepared, neither the Government nor the civil society.  Many persons were infected  and 
valuable lives were lost. (Number of total deaths due to COVID-19 was 141, 772 as of 10 th 
December, 2020, Source-MoH&FW website ). It has been a learning process for everyone 
inter-alia including the political leadership, bureaucracy and the frontline essential service 
providers - our Corona Warriors. All of them have made an enormous contribution to tackle 
this crisis. Some migrant workers lost their lives while walking back to their native places. 
The country also mourned the demise of many brave-hearted skilled essential service 
providers who helped others to live by making supreme sacrifice of their lives. 
(Para 6.2.4) 
 
 The Committee undertook wider consultations with the nodal Ministry, i.e. the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, and other important stakeholders/experts and on that basis, 
summarizes the following key lessons learnt: 
 
(i) The Central and State/ UT Governments, Panchayats and Civil Society including 
public, private and civil organizations/NGOs should participate proactively to 
ensure a strong leadership, focused, coordinated and sustained response in case of  
Pandemic, 
(ii) To build strategic resilience to tackle such public health emergencies, decentrali zed 
planning right from the grass-root level to the top is needed keeping in view the 
requirements of  both short and long term; 
(iii) Detailed SOPs may be prepared for international passengers coming to India 
including proper screening and testing, quarantine, etc., for timely detection and 
medication/treatment in case of such Pandemic in the future; 
(iv) The National Database of migrant workers may be launched at the earliest as it will 
help in the identification, movement of migrant workers and to provide them food, 
shelter and other benefits in case of a Pandemic like COVID-19; 
(v) An Increase in investments is needed urgently to strengthen  health infrastructure 
and rapid scaling of health services in a time-bound manner and to strengthe n of 
the public health infrastructure, particularly laboratory network at all levels; 
(vi) The Patient's feedback regarding their treatment should be made essential in all 
the public and private hospitals to have an understanding of the issues faced by the 
hospitalized patients that will further help in the management of a Pandemic; 
(vii) There should be stronger coordination between Centre and States to give due 
publicity to the information related to the Government approved/ authorized 
testing labs to stop people from panicking and rushing to private labs in case of a 
public health emergency  of this proportion. Special guidelines on clinical 
governance should also be developed to maintain quality and safety; 
(viii) The Ministry of AYUSH has shown potential in preventive and curative healthcare 
during Pandemic for immunity boosting. Therefore, there is a need for more 
investment and research in Ayurveda/ traditional systems and its promotion  to 
supplement the allopathic treatment during such Pandemics in the future; 
(ix) It is imperative to make investments in health systems, biomedical 

81 
 
sciences/research, surveillance and disease control, pharmaceutical and the vaccine 
industry that are critical for India's health security in long run. 
(x) The IRDAI should promptly extend the insurance coverage and promote cashless 
transactions in case of such a Pandemic in future so as to avoid any hardship to 
them.  
(xi) The health care centres across urban and rural areas should provide mental 
healthcare professionals to counsel people to fight against the fear, worries and 
anxieties among people which gets magnified during in such a Pandemic. 
(xii) The Development and promotion of the state of the art technologies is needed to 
minimize human/personal contact during the Pandemic. The Government should 
also prioritize strengthening IT infrastructure particularly in rural and remote 
areas to extend the services like online education, tele-medicine, e-commerce, etc.; 
(xiii) It is essential to engage with the community by the successful use of all public 
communication channels in regional/ local languages to counter fear, panic and 
rumors for managing  a pandemic; and 
(xiv) Effective implementation of the existing Acts/ rules governing the workers 
employed in both the formal and informal sector should be done so that they can 
withstand the major torment in the event of such a Pandemic in the future. 
(Para 6.2.5) 
***** 

82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
XIV 
 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 15 th July, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma  -Chairman 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Anil Jain  
3. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sanjay Bhatia  
7. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
8. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
9. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
10. Shri Ravneet Singh 
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri A.A. Rao, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs:
 
 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary 
2. Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary (UT) 
3. Ms. Punya Salila Srivastava, Joint Secretary (IS-I) 
4. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jindal, Joint Secretary (DM) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare:
 
 
Shri Lav Agrawal, Joint Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Railways:
 
 
1. Shri Madhukar Reddy, Principal Executive Director 
2. Shri Neeraj Sharma, Executive Director 

84 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the first meeting of 
the Committee after the lockdown and intimated them about the agenda of the day i.e., to discuss 
―Management of COVID -19 Pandemic and the various issues related thereto‖. He stated that 
COVID-19 Pandemic has created an unprecedented global crisis and the Government of India is 
treating the same as National Disaster.  He informed that senior officers of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, headed by Home Secretary  of India have been called to this meeting a s all the 
responsibility of management of this unprecedented crisis has been on the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, including the phase wise lockdown, unlocking and coordination with the States.  
 
3. The Chairman also observed that this pandemic has all of a sudden created a situation for 
which no one was prepared, neither the Government nor the administration and not even the 
doctors. It has been a learning process for everyone as nobody had seen anything like that in their 
lifetime. This would be a unique opportunity for the Committee to listen to everyone, to deliberate, 
to learn from the experiences of managing this unprecedented crisis. The Committee by using its 
collective wisdom and having access to the experts' knowledge, information and experiences of 
those who have been coordinating with States as well as the Members of Parliament would make 
useful recommendations/suggestions in its report which would serve as a reference book on 
managing such type of unparalleled crisis in future. The Chairman of the Committee also expressed 
his gratitude to the Members who attended the meeting despite the challenge thrown by state 
specific protocols on quarantine upon their return. He said that some more Members could have 
joined but could not do so due to the same challenge. 
 
4.     Thereafter, Chairman of the Committee made a declaration about Rule 294(1) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States. He assured that necessary measures 
had to be followed in the prevailing situation like social distancing and sanitization of the Meeting 
Hall premises, etc.  
(On arrival of witnesses) 
 
5. The Chairman welcomed Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary of India, and other 
senior officers to the meeting of the Committee. He informed about the agenda of the meeting to the 
Committee i.e. discussion on Management of COVID-19 Pandemic, lock down, phased un-locking, 
resumption of the economic activities, inter-State movement of people and goods, state of 
preparedness and coordination with the State Governments.  
 
6.      The Chairman stated that the pandemic has been a challenge to all the countries and societies 
and India is no exception. It is an unprecedented crisis and has also been a painful learning 
experience for everyone. The Chairman also acknowledged the enormous contribution made by 
officials who are in administration of the Central Government or the State Governments, the 
officials at the District-level and Sub-Divisional levels and, the frontline leaders and workers, 
doctors, paramedical staff as well as the security forces, towards tackling this crisis. The Chairman, 
on behalf of the Committee, expressed heartfelt condolences to those brave hearts who have had to 
sacrifice their lives in this pandemic.  
 
7. The Chairman, before giving the floor to Home Secretary and his team to make their 
presentation, shared various issues/concerns relating to the pandemic. He, however, stated that the 
intention of the Committee is to engage constructively on the issue and not to look at the faults. The 
various issues raised by the Chairman of the Committee inter-alia included:- 
 

85 
 
(i) Experiences of the Government on legal framework of the Disaster Management Act of 
2005 and Epidemic Diseases Act and whether there was a need to revisit them;  
(ii) Assessment of the situation that formed the basis for imposition of nation-wide lockdown at 
a short notice, anticipation of the problems/ issues likely to emerge from such a decision and the 
planning to handle them like in the case of large number of migrant workers; 
(iii) Assessment from time to time of the gains from different phases of lockdown;  
(iv)   The coordination with State Governments, the institutional framework of support and capacity 
to handle the situation;  
(v)       The scale of augmentation of the resources of the States; 
(vi)   The institutional mechanisms for regular consultations with all the stakeholders for effectively 
responding to the situation;  
(vii) Assessment of the social and economic fallout of the pandemic and the strategies to 
minimize the same; 
(viii) Assessment of the adequacy of preparedness; 
(viii) Time frame involved in bringing this situation within a reasonable control;  
(ix)  Lessons learnt from managing the pandemic so far. 
 
8. The Home Secretary, thereafter, made a presentation before the Committee on management 
of COVID-19 Pandemic. To start with, he apprised the Committee that cases per million population 
and the fatality rate in India is much better than the world average. The Committee was informed 
that the national lockdown was imposed w.e.f. the 25 th March, 2020 as large scale restrictions 
imposed by various States had no uniformity in implementation.  
 
9. The Home Secretary apprised the Committee that the guideline issued during the first 
lockdown brought uniformity by stopping all inter-state movement except permissible activities 
covered under essential services. Later on, certain relaxations were also added in these guidelines.   
When the lockdown was extended, new guidelines were issued opening up more activities in the 
rural economy. Many commercial activities which were essential and would provide employment 
opportunities to people who have suddenly lost their employment opportunities were allowed. In 
these guidelines, the concept of national directives was brought out. Few of the important points of 
these national directives were wearing of masks, maintaining social distance, avoiding spitting in 
public, prohibition of liquor consumption in public, working from home, etc., as there were found 
to be effective means to check the spread of infection. In the third phase of lockdown, the concept 
of negative list was introduced.  There was a negative list of activities, which were prohibited.   All 
other activities were permissible except in containment zones and red zones.  
 
10. The Home Secretary also informed about the Unlock 1.0 and 2.0 where most of the 
activities were relaxed in a graded manner except restrictions in certain zones.  The Home Secretary 
informed the Committee that the activities were relaxed in a very calibrated and well-thought out 
manner during the different phases of lockdown and unlock to manage the crisis. 
 
11. On the concerns raised by the Chairman pertaining to migrant workers, the Home Secretary 
informed the Committee that the Government allowed the use of State Disaster Relief Fund as a 
first step for setting up relief camps and providing food to migrant workers. Funds of Rs.11,000 
crore were also released from the SDRF to the States. Many camps and shelters for migrant workers 
were set up in the country along with food camps.  Besides this, many workers stayed with their 
employers or industry campuses where they were being provided shelter and food.  Pradhan Mantri 
Garib Kalyan Yojana was brought in which had a lot of relief measures for the poor people. On 29 th  
April, 2020 migrant workers, pilgrims, tourists and students stranded at different places were 
allowed to move by buses  followed by 1 st May order where movement by trains was also allowed, 

86 
 
which became Shramik  trains subsequently.  More than 60 lakh people were moved by Shramik 
trains.   
 
12. The Home Secretary also informed the Committee that Guidelines were also issued to bring 
back the Indian nationals stranded abroad. More than six or seven lakh Indians who were stranded 
abroad have been brought back by different arrangements.  
 
13. While emphasizing that concerted efforts made by the Central Government and the State 
Governments yielded results, the Home Secretary also highlighted certain gains of lockdown like 
creation of a huge health infrastructure, enhancing capacities of hospitals, increased testing 
capacities, massive increase in supplies of equipment and oxygen. 
 
14. On the co-ordination front, the Home Secretary apprised the Committee that the 
Government had set up a high-level Group of Ministers under the Union Health Minister which 
held regular meetings on various issues. Then there was the Committee of Secretaries under the 
Cabinet Secretary where regular meetings with different Secretaries were held.  Prime Minister and 
Home Minister also interacted with the Chief Ministers on various issues. 
  
 15. The Committee was also updated about the two Acts- Epidemic Act, 1897  and Disaster 
Management Act (DMA),2005 and while implementing DMA, certain functions and issues came to 
the notice of the Government which would be streamlined further.  
 
16. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare then briefed the Comm ittee 
about Covid-19 stating that it is a pandemic of different scale where the whole country got affected 
in terms of taking the threat or managing the threat. He stated that unless and until the concept of 
social distancing, respiratory hygiene, environment hygiene, as well as the required sanitation is 
followed, it is not possible to manage the situation.  He informed that two things important are the 
number of active cases that are being dealt today, and how many lives have been saved by having 
pre-emptive and proactive approach. He further added that through lockdown as well as by 
preparing community work, the growth rate of infections has come down from 31% to 3.24% as of 
now; there is sufficient logistics availability in terms of PPE kits, N95 masks and ventilators; 
protective equipments, treatment related material and logistics are available now at the State level; 
hospital infrastructure has been upgraded and the focus primarily has been not only on the 
estimations but also to track how the cases are happening. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare also informed the Committee that there was  one testing lab in the month of 
January, 2020 but, at present there are around 1,400-plus locations  carrying out 3,00,000-plus tests 
every day.   
 
17. After presentation by the Home Minister and Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family  
Welfare, Chairman raised few more queries that inter-alia included the nature of lockdown imposed 
in 700 districts, as informed by the Home Secretary; the SOPs that were put in place for the 
coordination; pre-emption of large movement of migrant workers by the Ministry; utilization of 
State Disaster Management funds that were released; State-wise data of the quarantine centres that 
they created for  labourers and workers; system put in place at the State level for the migrant 
labourers and workers to have access to ration that has  been announced; steps taken for a national 
database of migrant workers and labourers which will help in tracking and also in delivering ration 
and other benefits which the Government announces; process for making a National Plan, State 
Plans and District Plans and health insurance covering Covid cases. 
 

87 
 
18. Several queries were also raised by the Members of the Committee that inter-alia included 
the status of vaccine development in the country; black marketing of  medicines like Remdesivir 
which is effective in the the treatment of Covid; inclusion of other cost effective and easily 
available medicines in the advisory of Health Minsitry; steps to curb rumour-mongering; promotion 
of Ayush medicines; percentage of migrant workers who lost employment; percentage of migrant 
workers who did not get their salary; number of MSMEs closed down; number of deaths of migrant 
workers on-the-way going home; the number of deaths of corona warriors like health and police 
personnel in the country; number of cases of black-marketing of ration in the country; action against 
selling of beds by private hospitals; details of various kinds of central assistance provided to states 
and their utilization; details of the production of ventilators in the country and supplied to various 
states; plasma bank ;
 clarity regarding rent, school fee, payment of wages, details of demand from 
states for special trains for migrant workers, etc. 
 
19. Suggestions were also given by the Committee which inter-alia included highlighting only 
active cases instead of total number of cases thereby people would not get panicked;  revisiting the  
definition of ‗disaster‘ under the Disaster Management Act, 2005;  examining the overlapping  
between the Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act and the merger of two for 
effective guidance; examining the word ‗lockdown‘, that has no legal sanctity for future reference; 
check on spreading of rumors; enhancement of capacity building keeping in view the management 
of pandemic in future; online treatment through Skype or telephone; inclusion of initiatives taken at 
various levels  in the Internal Security Contingency Plan booklet; r
eplication of Delhi model in 
Mumbai and Chennai, etc. 
 
20.  Some of the queries raised were replied by the Home Secretary and the Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written 
replies to the Secretariat within 10 days. 
 
21. A verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
 
22. The Committee, then, adjourned at 02:08 p.m. 
 
 

88 
 
XV 
 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19 th August, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma  -Chairman 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. Anil Jain  
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
Lok Sabha  
 
7.  Shri Sanjay Bhatia  
8.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhary 
9.  Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
10.  Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
11.  Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
12. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
13. Shri Ravneet Singh 
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri A.A. Rao, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
4. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare:
 
 
1.Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, Department of Health 
2. Shri Randeep Guleria, Director, AIIMS, New Delhi 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium  Enterprises
 
 
1. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma, Secretary 
2. Shri Devendra Kumar Singh, Additional Secretary & Development    
         Commissioner 
 
 

89 
 
Representatives of Indian SME Forum 
 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar, President 
2. Ms. Sushma Morthania, Director General 
 
Representatives of Laghu Udyog Bharti:
 
 
1. Shri Rakesh Garg, All India Joint General Secretary 
2. Shri Naresh Chand Pareek, All India Executive Member 
3.  
Representatives of Federation of Indian SME: 
 
Shri Animesh Saxena, President 
 
 
2. At the outset, The Chairman welcomed the Members and recalled  that in the last meeting 
held  on 15 th of July, the Committee had a briefing from the Home Secretary of India, and also  the 
Ministry of Health & Family welfare on the management of various issues related to the COVID-19 
Pandemic.  The Committee was briefed about the coordination with the States, the measures for the 
lockdown, and the phased unlocking.   
 
3. The Chairman intimated the Members about agenda of the meeting for today i.e. to hear the 
views of Department of Health Research, AIIMS, Delhi and Ministry of Micro Small and Medium 
enterprises to continue the examination of the Management of COVID-19 pandemic and related 
issues. 
 
4. The Chairman observed that the public health system are playing a critical role in this 
Pandemic and therefore, it is important to know about what infrastructural upgradation has taken 
place along with the response mechanisms.  He further stated that the Ministry of Health has been 
involved in taking necessary actions to control the spread of COVID-19, also in expanding testing 
facilities, laboratories, and in setting up the Core Group for COVID-19 vaccine candidates. The 
MSMEs are one of the worst hit sectors of the economy.  They employ the largest number of 
people.  More than forty per cent of our total industrial production and forty- five per cent of India‘s 
exports come from the MSMEs. Therefore, it was important to hear Secretary (MSME).   
 
 5. The Chairman also informed the Members that questionnaires on various aspects related to 
the pandemic have been sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare,  Ministry of MSMEs, Department of Higher Education, Department of School Education, 
Ministry of Labour, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, and Insurance Regulatory Authority of  India. 
Questions have  also been sent  to subject experts i.e. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan and Prof. Nitya Rao 
for their suggestions on agriculture and food security-related issues and also to the Industry 
associations, the CII, FICCI, etc.,  
  
6. The Committee by using its collective wisdom and having access to the experts' knowledge, 
information and experiences of those who have been coordinating with States as well as the 
Members of Parliament would make useful recommendations/suggestions in its report which would 
serve as a reference book on managing such type of unparalleled crisis in future. The Chairman of 
the Committee also expressed his gratitude to the Members who attended the meeting despite the 
challenge thrown by state specific protocols on quarantine upon their return. He said that some 
more Members could have joined but could not do so due to the same challenge. 

90 
 
 
On arrival of Witnesses (11 am) 
 
7. The Chairman  welcomed Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, Department of Health 
Research, Director General of the ICMR, Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Delhi, and their colleagues to the meeting of the Committee.  
 
8. The Chairman stated that the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, and the ICMR have been in the forefront in handling the COVID-19 Pande mic, in 
putting together scientific and medical knowledge from time to time on various aspects including 
surveillance, clinical management, infection prevention and control, sample collections, upgrading 
and expanding our testing capacities, transporting and discharging of the suspected or confirmed 
cases, issuing the treatment protocols and keeping the country informed about the progress that has 
been made in India and also in coordination with the other countries' experiences.   He also 
appreciated  the commendable contribution that has been made by the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Delhi on explaining the seriousness of the situation via various projections,  raising 
awareness and necessary action needed to control the spread of Covid-19.  
 
9. Before giving the floor to the Secretary, Department of Health Research, the Chairman 
raised some issues that inter-alia included expected time of the peak of this pandemic and the 
flattening of the curve; suggestions on health insurance policies as the pandemic was not covered 
under any health insurance policy before; status of the development and availability of vacc ine; 
vaccine procurement and universal vaccinisation plans; lessons learnt from the pandemic and the 
efforts made by the Department so far. 
 
10. The Secretary, Department of Health Research made a brief presentation before the 
Committee on India‘s fight  against COVID-19. He stated that this is once in a century sort of an 
epidemic that we are facing but there has been a very calibrated response from the Ministry of 
Health and the Department of Research and ICMR Within the limited resources, the Ministry has   
worked hard and for the first five month‘s and the ICMR and 26 Institutes have worked 24x7.  He 
also informed the Committee about the National Taskforce to handle COVID-19, clinical trials of 
vaccines namely, Cadila Healthcare and Covaxin (Bharat Biotech Research Ltd.). He also informed  
that the phase III trials of Oxford-Astrazeneca‘s vaccine (partnered with Serum Institute of India) in 
India would commence this week. He further added that around nine lakhs tests are being conducted 
everyday (as on 19 th August) and case fatality rate has now come down to 1.9% that is one of the 
lowest in the world. 
11. Thereafter, the Director, AIIMS, Delhi informed the Committee about the efforts made by 
AIIMS to handle COVID-19. He briefly outlined the steps taken in development of infrastructure & 
capacity building including equipments, distribution of testing kits, mix modes of testing, human 
resource management, etc. He added that 13,262 health personnel were trained on infection related 
practices for COVID-19. AIIMS has also provided teleconsultaion facilities to 1,26,280 people on 
various issues related COVID-19. When asked about Ayurveda and its efficacy in treating COVID-
19, he informed that AIIMS, Delhi has a dedicated unit that is working on the utility and  
effectiveness of ayurveda medicines, spices and herbs, etc.  
 
12. After the presentation, the Chairman, on behalf of the Committee  appreciated the 
commendable work that has been done by AIIMS and helping the other institutions in the States, 
particularly, about the treatment protocols. He also appreciated the efforts of Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and health workers in tackling this unprecedented health crisis. He also ex pressed 

91 
 
deep gratitude towards the frontline health workers and the Corona warriors who have lost their 
lives on duty. 
 
 13. After the presentation of Secretary, Department of health and Director, AIIMS, Delhi, the 
Chairman raised few queries that inter-alia included the percentage asymptomatic patients of the 
virus in the country, projections on  herd immunity; steps taken to address the psychological and 
mental health-related issues faced by children in particular due to lack of schooling for around six 
months; sensitization of the society towards the stigma attached to the families or to the patients 
including infected doctors and healthcare workers. Regarding development of vaccine, testing and 
available medicines he sought to know about the current trial status of Oxford,  AstraZeneca 
vaccine in India and by when this vaccine wi ll get the necessary approvals; Government‘s 
procurement plans and universalization of vaccination in the country;   efficacy of repurposed 
medicines and progress made on repurposed medicines or drugs available by ICMR and CSIR for 
the treatment/ prophylactic /innate immunity purposes; number of tests and types of tests available.  
Coordination with States to publicize the available Government testing labs in districts and cities to 
stop people from panicking and rushing to private labs which charge exorbitantly; and the medical 
protocols/treatment regimes that are available now for the treatment of COVID-19. 
 
14. Several queries were raised by the Members of the Committee that inter-alia included the 
psychological reaction generated specially among children due to the pandemic and lockdown ; 
black-marketing and overpricing  of  some medicines i.e. Remdesivir and Tocilizumab that is 
effective in the treatment of the virus; per capita spending on the hospitalized patients of COVID-
19; efforts made to arrange pulse oxymeter in villages, remote and inaccessible areas as it is a cheap 
and effective way to detect and treat silent hypoxia, whether all the hospitals in our country are well 
equipped for providing the death certificate under MCCD (Medical Certificate for Causing Death) 
to get accurate data on number of deaths due to Covid-19; efficacy of Rapid Antigen Tests ; 
information on new strain of COVID recently emerged in Malaysia; break-up of TR-PCR, Rapid 
Antigen Tests and Truenat tests all across country; Number of cases of re-infection; infection rate  
among children below 18 years;  number of frontline health workers that have lost their life on duty 
due to COVID-19; effectiveness of  plasma therapy in saving the lives of COVID-19 critical 
patients  and  number of patients that were saved/cured by it; status on the development and 
availability of vaccine; etc. 
 
15. Some suggestions were also given by the Committee that inter-alia included awareness 
campaigns regarding cheaper and effective repurposed medicines to prevent people from panicking 
and spending huge amount of money on popular drugs;  periodic press conference to keep people 
informed about the progress made in vaccine development on expected time of availability of a 
vaccine; Patient‘s feedback in all private and public hospitals to have an understanding of the issues 
faced by the hospitalized patients; special guidelines on clinical governance to maintan quality and 
safety of care during the pandemic, etc. 
 
16. Some of the queries raised were replied by the Secretary, Department of health Research 
and Director, AIIMS, Delhi. On other queries, the Ministry and AIIMs, Delhi were asked to furnish 
written replies to the Secretariat within ten days. 
 
On arrival of witnesses (12.30 pm)
 
 
17. The chairman welcom ed Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma, Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises, and representatives of Indian SME Forum, Laghu Udyog Bharti and 
Federation of Indian SME. The Chairman stated that the MSME sector is among the worst hit sector 

92 
 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic and measures are needed for its restructuring and revival.  More 
than 40% of the production comes from MSMEs, which employ a sizeable part of the Indian 
workforce. About 45% of the exports also comes from the MSME sector.  Therefore, any sharp 
decline in this sector has an overall impact on the Indian economy and there is loss of jobs involved.   
 
18. He stated that the Committee would like to know, from the Secretary, Ministry of MSME 
steps taken about the loss of employment in MSMEs due to the Pandemic; shortage of the 
workforce in the sector due to the mass exodus of the migrant labour, number of migrant that have 
been persuaded to come back to their work destination in different States. Further, the Committee 
would also like to be apprised about the liquidity infusion to boost the MSMEs post lockdown and 
GST collections from the various MSMEs in the first two quarters of this year, improvement in 
consumption post lockdown and the measures taken to boost employment in the sector,  insolvency 
resolution framework, including credit guarantees, debt restructuring and loan waivers for MSMEs 
during COVID-19, proposals for giving interest free loans to the MSMEs to provide to pay the 
wages of the employees, etc. 
 
19. The Secretary, MSME informed the Committee that around 55% of MSMEs are facing 
liquidity crisis amidst the pandemic. Around 8% of the units are working at full capacity, 32% of 
the units are working at around 50% capacity and 14% are operating at below 15% capacity. He 
also added that as of now,  the MSMEs are not facing shortage of manpower due to mass exodus of 
migrants to their home States.  Regarding fiscal stimulus given by Government, he apprised that 3 
lakh crore has been given for MSMEs under Atmanirnhara Bharat Package, 20 thousand crore as 
Subordinate Debt that will benefit 2 lakh units. Moreover, CRR requirement has been reduced to 
3% from existing 4% for all the banks that will pump  around 1.27 lakh crore liquidity in the market 
in the  crore about the share of MSMEs in country‘s GDP that more than 1,000 Prime Minister 
Employment Guarantee Programme (PMEGP) units have benefitted against that target of 1300.  
 
20.  Regarding wage support and interest waiver, the Committee was informed that there is no 
stimulas under Atmanirbhar Bharat  package to provide wages and ECLGS is being used as a wage 
support scheme in the MSMEs. A moratorium has been given on payment of interest rates on the 
outstanding loans from March to September, 2020 which may be reviewed and extended. When 
asked about creation of national database of migrants, the Secretary, MSME informed that the 
Ministry of Labour has been asked to create a database of migrant workforce that can be shared 
with any Ministry/ stakeholder.  
 
21. The representative of Laghu Udyog Bharati apprised the Committee that under Emergency 
Credit Link Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS), public sector banks  are doing well but, private banks are 
charging high interest rates.  He added that guidelines have been issued by RBI but is not being 
followed by some private banks. Therefore, a strong monitoring mechanism is needed from RBI to 
ensure that its guidelines are strictly adhered to. To extend more relief to the stressed MSME he 
suggested that the penalty/ late filing of GST return shall not be charged from micro and small 
industries till Disaster Act is operative. Regarding wage support to the MSMEs, he informed that 
the absence of the employees due to the Covid-19 lockdown period may be considered as me dical 
absence and medical leave and salary should be paid to all employees who are insured persons 
under Employee State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) until the production gets started. He also 
highlighted a soaring demand from the enterprises that instead of taking fixed power charges, 
charges based on units consumed should be taken for the period of lockdown i.e. April and May as 
there was no production and income during that period. 
 

93 
 
22. The representative of the Federation of Indian  SME apprised the Committee about the 
percentage of entrepreneurs/ enterprises that have fully reopened, partially reopened or intending  to 
open or have shutdown in past few months.  Besides, about 18,974 units have stayed fully 
operational across the country, out of which 6,279 units have catered  to India's demand for Covid 
supplies for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), masks, sanitizers, etc. Creation and Harmonious 
Application of Modern Processes for Increasing the Output and National Strength (CHAMPIONS) 
portal has been created for solving grieveances, encouraging, supporting and handhelding MSMEs. 
SMEs is also striving to set up enterprises for the migrants in their home States that will create 
employment in the rural area and that will lead to rural industrialisation in long term. Regarding 
women entrepreneurs, it was informed that there is no special provison for them in the economic 
package. It was also suggested that some credit cards on the lines of Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) 
may be arranged for women entrepreneurs to revive their businesses. 
 
23. Lastly, the representative of Federation of Indian SME informed the Committee that the 
micro units are facing financial crunch as they are mostly privately financed   due to lack of  a ccess 
to the institutional finances because of their inherent working nature.  The Government schemes are 
catering to the people that already have the access to the institutional finance.  But, the mi cro units 
are largely dependent on Non Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) or private lenders. The 
private lenders are charging around 48% annual interest if they are financing to these micro units. 
He suggested that current schemes of the Government of India should be extended to these micro 
units where the people that don't have any existing Cash Credit (CC) limit should also be covered in 
that, especially on PMEGP Scheme. Emphasizing the role of NBFCs in financing the micro units he 
suggested inclusion of NBFC‘s in Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS), specially in 
areas with lack of banking facilities. He also highlighted the challenges faced by small and medium  
enterprises due to regulatory and administrative measures taken by Government to control COVID-
19. 
 
24. After the presentation of Secretary, MSME and representatives of allied organisations, the 
Chairman raised few queries that inter-alia included the interest rates charged by  NBFCs for 
MSMEs, steps taken to increase capacity and manpower shortage, if any, faced by MSMEs, 
proposals for waiving Equated Monthly Installment (EMI) on outstanding loans in the sector 
instead of  giving moratorium, performance of  CHAMPIONS portal so far and staps taken to 
provide wage support to the workers in MSMEs that have not been covered under any 
Government‘s scheme. 
 
25. Several queries were raised by the Members of the Committee that inter-alia included the 
measures taken to address demand and supply constraint that has been created due to the Pandemic 
and lockdown; need for identification and targeting of MSME to extend benefits, industry wise 
vulnerability assessment mechanism ; the short/medium/long term impact of the ban on imports of 
products from China on  industries; interest rates charged by NBFCs for MSMEs; Regional 
variations observed in implementation of SFOORTI Scheme; details of industry wise allocations 
made in the MSMEs under the financial stimulas announced by the Government ; Number of 
industries closed/running with low capacity and under what conditions; lessons learnt from the 
pandemic so far and time frame for the bringing the MSME sector to its normal growth rate.   
 
26. The Committee made few suggestions to the Ministry of MSME that inter-alia inclusion of 
NBFCs and cooperative banks in RBI‘s guidelines as NBFC‘s plays an important role in financing 
MSMEs specially in rural areas that does not have adequate banking facilities; earmarking a section 
within the bank to deal with the MSME sector; creation of a self-help bank exclusively for MSME 
sector during the pandemic period to combat the shortcomings of the public/ private banks; an 

94 
 
institutional mechanism for faster redressal of grievances pertaining to this sector; waiver of the 
EMIs for the MSME sector during the moratorium period, given the sharp decline and the inability 
of a large number of MSMEs to pay back. 
 
27. Some of the queries raised were replied by the Secretary, MSME and representatives of 
allied organisations. On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replies to the 
Secretariat within ten days. 
 
 

95 
 
XVI 
 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27 th August, 2020 in R oom No. ‗63‘, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma  - Chairman 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. Anil Jain  
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA  
7.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhary 
8.  Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9.        Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
10. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
12. Shri Ravneet Singh  
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
Shri A.A. Rao, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
At 11.00 A.M. 
 
 
Representatives of Department of Financial Services:
 
 
1. Shri Debasish Panda, Secretary 
2. Shri Anand Madhukar, OSD 
3. Dr. Madnesh Kumar Mishra, JS 
  
 
 
Representatives of Reserve Bank of India
 
 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar, Regional Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Prakash, General Manager 

96 
 
At 12.00 Noon 
 
Representatives of Department of Food and Public Distribution
 
 
3. Shri Sudhanshu Pandey, Secretary 
4. Shri Edwin Kulbhushan Majhi, AS (policy & FCI) 
5. Shri Subodh Kumar Singh, JS (Sugar & Admin.) 
 
At 01.00 P.M.
 
 
Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industries:
 
 
1. Shri Sameer Gupta, Immediate Past Chairman, Northern Region 
2. Ms. Soma Banerjee, Executive Director 
 
Representatives of National Sample Survey Office:
 
 
Shri A.K. Sadhu, Director-General 
 
Representatives of Indian Statistical Institute
 
 
1. Prof. Samir K. Neogy, Professor and Head, Delhi Centre 
2. Prof. Mudit Kapoor, Associate Professor, Delhi Centre 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
 
1. Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary (UT) 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jindal, JS (DM) 
 
Representatives of Government of NCT of Delhi
 
 
1. Shri Vijay Kumar Dev, Chief Secretary 
2. Ms. Padmi Singla, Secretary (H &FW) 
3. Shri Vikram dev Dutt, Principal Secretary (H&FW) 
4. Shri Bhupinder S. Bhalla, Principal Secretary (Home) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and recalled  that in the last two 
meetings, the Committee has interacted with some key stakeholders i.e. the Home Secretary, Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Secretary, Department of Health Research and 
Secretary, Ministry of MSME.  They have briefed the Committee about the steps that they have 
taken responding to this Corona crisis.  Thereafter, he intimated the Members about the agenda of 
the meeting for the day i.e. to hear the views of  the Secretary, Department of Financial Services 
and Representatives of Reserve Bank of India, Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, Representatives of CII, NSSO and I SI  and Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home 
Affairs along with Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi to continue with the examination 
of the various aspects of the Management of COVID-19 Pandemic and related issues. 
  
(At this stage witnesses from Department of Financial Services and    Reserve Bank of were 
called in.) 
 

97 
 
3. The Chairman  welcomed the Secretary, Department of Financial Services and 
Representatives of Reserve Bank of India to the meeting of the Committee.  
 
4. The Chairman informed that the Pandemic hit the country with devastating effect when the 
economy was already sliding. Reviving the economy is crucial for restoring the jobs lost by the 
millions, both in the organized and informal sectors. The Committee would like to know from the 
Department of Financial Services and Reserve Bank of India about the extent of the impact of the 
measures announced by both the central government and the RBI so far and the road ahead given 
the uncertainty over the duration of the Pandemic. It was also informed that quantification of the 
financial support extended to different sectors and the extent of beneficiaries would help the 
Committee appreciate the outcomes of the ongoing efforts. 
 
5. The Secretary, Department of Financial Services apprised the Committee about the steps 
taken by the Department during the Pandemic towards the banking and insurance sector to increase 
the lending power of banks, expanding health insurance to COVID-19 patients, etc.; the way the 
banking sector has responded for the quick revival of the economy; interest subvention schemes; 
sector-wise fiscal stimulus under Atmanirbhar Bharat Package; etc. 
 
6. Thereafter, the representatives of the Reserve Bank of India, briefed the Committee on steps 
taken by them to restore financial stability, restore market activities and restore confidence in 
markets in the wake of Pandemic-related dislocation. He also informed the Committee about the 
changes made in Cash Reserve Ratio and Long Term Repo Operations and deferment of  Net Stable 
Funding Ratio and  Counter-cyclical Capital Buffer for another one year, etc. 
 
 7. After the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Financial services and representatives 
of Reserve Bank of India, the Chairman and Members raised few queries that inter-alia included 
the steps taken for inclusion of NBFCs and cooperative banks in RBI‘s guidelines as NBFCs plays 
an important role in financing MSMEs; monitoring mechanism created by RBI to ensure that its 
guidelines are strictly adhered by the Banks and other financial institutions, extension of 
moratorium period  of the EMIs for the MSME sector and proposals, if any, for the complete waiver 
of the EMIs; extension of health insurance cover to COVID-19 patients, interest subvention 
schemes, filing of Goods and Services Tax returns; interest rates charged for working capital loan 
for various sectors; performance of different category of MUDRA loans; provisions of loans for 
professionals like lawyers, etc. under Emergency Credit Live Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS); 
difference in interest rates charged by public sector banks; private sector banks and NBFCs, etc. 
8. Some suggestions were also given by the Committee that inter-alia included providing 
interest free loan for payment of wages of workers; rationalization of GST rates due to slowdown in 
manufacturing sector; complete waiver of EMI on outstanding loans for the moratorium period; etc. 
 
9. Some of the queries raised were replied by the Secretary, Department of Financial Services 
and representatives of the Reserve Bank of India. On other queries, they were asked to furnish 
written replies to the Secretariat within ten days. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew and another witnesses from Department of Food and Public 
Distribution were called in.) 
 
10. The chairman welcomed Shri Sudhanshu Pandey, Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  and his team of affairs to 
the meeting of the Committee. 
 

98 
 
11. The Chairman informed that the Committee is aware of the response of the Government of 
India in the form of additional allocation of food grains for distribution under PDS to meet the 
challenge. But, the Committee is concerned about certain structural and systemic issue that raises 
concerns about the efficacy of Public Distribution System (PDS) in meeting the food and nutrition 
requirements of every needy person in the present adverse scenario. In this context, the Committee 
would like to know from Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution about  the extent of 
relief reached to the needy under PDS to meet both calorie and nutrient requirements including the 
constraints faced and how they are being overcome. We also like to know the status of 
implementation of One Nation - One Ration Card Scheme‘ and the acti on plan for the future to 
meet the food and nutrient requirements of the people, given the uncertainty over the period of the 
Pandemic. 
 
12. The Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution apprised the Committee about 
the number of States that have joined One Nation - One Ration Card Scheme, food grains allocated 
under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY),  coverage of rural and urban population  
under National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013, electronic-point of sale (e-pos) machines and its 
monitoring through Annavitran Portal, progress made under creation of National database of 
migrant workers, continuation of Mid-Day Meal Scheme (MMS) during lockdowns, manufacturing 
of ethanol/  sanitizers in sugar/ other factories from leftover food stocks, etc. 
 
13. After the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution, the 
Chairman and Members raised few queries that inter-alia included steps taken to ensure the 
nutritional security of people, particularly the poor and the most vulnerable when their incomes and 
livelihoods were lost due to Pandemic; estimated time for including remaining States in One Nation 
- One Ration Card Scheme; monitoring mechanism of food distribution by States; coverage of rural 
and urban population; inter-State and intra-State PDS and people benefitted thereon, during 
lockdowns, how Mid-Day Meal Scheme (MMS) was continued as schools were closed due to 
lockdown; financial condition of Food Corporation of India, etc. 
14. The Committee made few suggestions to the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
that inter-alia included the creation of coordination/ linkage mechanism between Central and State 
Government to track movement of workers and arrange stocks of food grains accordingly; delivery 
of dry ration including cooking costs at doorsteps of the residence of the children under Mid-Day 
Meal Scheme; etc. 
 
15. Some of the queries raised were replied by the Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution. On other queries, they were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within 
ten days. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew and another witnesses from CII, NSSO and ISI were called in.) 
 
16. The chairman welcomed Shri Sameer Gupta, Immediate Past Chairman, Northern Region 
and other representatives of Confederation of Indian Industries, Shri A.K. Sadhu, Director-General, 
National Sample Survey Office, Prof. Samir K. Neogy, Professor and Head, Delhi Centre, India n 
Statistical Institute and their teams to the meeting of the Committee. 
 
17. The Chairman stated that Committee would like to know from the CII about their 
assessment of the nature and scale of impact of the Pandemic on the economy of the country and 
employment since the outbreak of  Coronavirus, protection of the interests of the employees, 
particularly, the low paid and the contractual workforce and the expectations about economic 
recovery. 

99 
 
 
18. The Committee also would like to know from NSO and ISI, the statistical information 
relevant to the planning for handling the Pandemic challenge with focus on employment scenario, 
the loss of jobs and incomes and their impact on consumption of food and other basic necessities of 
life, the changes over the last few months and projections for future and vital gaps in the availability 
of crucial statistical  data which is necessary for evidence based planning during the times of 
adversity, reasons for the same and measures to be taken for addressing such gaps. 
 
19. The Representative of CII briefed the Committee about the negative impact of Pandemic 
and lockdowns on some key sectors like tourism , hospitality, aviation, automobiles, gems and 
jewellery, etc. He also highlighted the disruptions in production and distribution caused due to 
partial and frequent lockdowns. He also apprised that agriculture and allied sector has performed 
fairly well and has stayed resilient during lockdowns. 
20. He also made some suggestions for revival of some sectors that inter-alia included the 
interest free loans to enterprises for paying wages to their workers; scrappage policy for reviving  
demand in automobile sector; rationalisation of GST in light of the low production in 
manufacturing sector; promotion of e-commerce; enablers for ease of doing business. 
 
21.  After the presentation of CII, the Chairman and Members raised few queries that inter-alia 
included the steps taken  for payment of wages of  workers particularly in MSME sector;  fiscal 
stimulus provided under Atmanirbhar Bharata Package specially for micro-enterprises, impact on 
ban on Chinese imports in various industries; etc. 
22. Thereafter, the Representative of NSSO, apprised the Committee about the kind of surveys 
NSSO undertakes and methodology used thereon. He also briefed the Committee about their work 
done during the Pandemic including multi-indicator survey, periodic labour force survey, price 
collection survey, price data for whole sale price index and consumer price index, etc. Besides, it is 
for the first time that the migrant data information has been collected for the periodic labour force 
survey that commenced in July, 2020. He also apprised the Committee about the problems faced in 
collecting data and adoption of alternate mode of collection during the lockdown period. 
 
23. The Representative of ISI informed the Committee that the Institute has compiled the micro-
evidence that is based on telephonic survey that depicts impact of the Pandemic and lockdown on 
labour force primarily in urban areas. He also apprised the Committee about the methodology and 
sample size used for their study. Besides, a group of experts from the Institute are working on 
collecting COVID-19 related data on various issues and its findings are available on their websit e.  
However, the Committee expressed its dissatisfaction over the small sample size used for their 
survey and observed that the conclusion based on that could be misleading. 
 
24. Some of the queries raised were replied by the representatives of CII, NSSO and ISI. On 
other queries, they were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within ten days. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew and another witnesses from Ministry of Home Affairs and 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi were called in.) 
 
25. The chairman welcomed Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary (UT), MHA, Shri Vijay 
Kumar Dev, Chief Secretary, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and their teams to the meeting of the 
Committee. 
 
26. The Chairman stated that the Committee would like to know from the Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs about the road ahead as the next phase of unlock is to begin from the First 

100 
 
of Septe mber, Government‘s preparedness for ensuring reach of vaccine to all in our country, 
States/areas of concern at this stage in respect of Testing, Tracing and Treatment, case load, c ase 
fatalities etc. and latest on the economic and job recovery.  
 
27. The Additional Secretary (UT), MHA informed the Committee that Home Minister has 
reviewed the situation of Delhi in a high-level meeting with the  Lieutenant Governor, the Chief 
Minister and all senior Ministers in mid-June. He also informed about the 4-T strategy i.e. tracing, 
tracking, testing and treatment; number of tests conducted so far, case fatality rate and deaths per 
million in Delhi and other States.  
  
28.  The Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi, apprised the Committee about the 
status of COVID-19 cases in Delhi vis-à-vis India; health infrastructure and clinical interventions in 
Delhi; other institutional interventions and welfare measures that have undertaken in terms of the 
entire COVID management in Delhi; specific arrangements for international passengers in Delhi, 
etc. 
 
29. After the presentation of Ministry of Home Affairs and Government of NCT of Delhi, 
several queries were raised by the the Chairman and Members of the Committee that inter-alia 
included the cases of Re-infection in Delhi; Internal Death Audit Committee; number of hospitals 
giving Medical Certification of Cause of Death (MCCD) so that exact number of COVID-19 deaths 
may be estimated; herd immunity in Delhi; data on National Sero-Survey for India; counselling 
system in place for students that are facing anxiety; depression and other mental health issues due to 
the online classes and lack of schooling; number of migrant quarantine centres that were set up in 
Delhi; number and duration of people that stayed there and details of food and other amenities 
provided to them; steps taken to provide relief/ wage support to the retrenched workers in Delhi; 
number of frontline health workers that have lost their life on duty due to COVID-19; effectiveness 
of  plasma therapy in saving the lives of COVID-19 critical patients  and  number of patients that 
were saved/cured by it; etc. 
 
30. The Committee made few suggestions to the Ministry of Home Affairs  and Government of 
NCT of Delhi that inter-alia putting big screens in community centres for providing online 
education to the students particularly in rural areas where students does not have smart phones/ 
laptops and proper network connectivity; issuing of Medical Certification of Cause of Death 
(MCCD) should be made compulsory for all hospitals in Delhi to get exact number of COVID-19 
deaths in Delhi; use of Plasma Therapy in all of the States for critical patients of COVID-19. 
 
31. Some of the queries raised were replied by the Ministry of Home Affairs  and Government 
of NCT of Delhi. On other queries, the Ministry and Government of NCT of Delhi were asked to 
furnish written replies to the Secretariat within ten days. 
 
(The witnesses withdrew) 
 
32. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
 
33. The Committee, then, adjourned at 03:45 p.m. 
 
 

101 
 
VII 
 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 18 th December, 2020 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
       
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan 
4. Dr. Anil Jain 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
6. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
8. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of 
the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt 229 th Report on Management of Covid-19 Pandemic and 
Related Issues. 
 
2. The Chairman recalled that the Committee in its meeting held on 11 th September, 2020 
considered and adopted-  
 
(i) xxx   xxx    xxx, 
  
(ii) xxx   xxx    xxx, 
 
(iii) xxx   xxx    xxx.  
 
3. The Chairman further informed the Committee that the draft 229 th Report on the subject 
―Management of COVID-19 Pandemic and Related Issues‖ could not be adopted and was deferred 
due to some changes suggested by some of the Members. 
 
 xxx   Relates to other matters. 
 

102 
 
4. He further stated that the Committee had deliberated on this subject in its three meetings 
held on 15 th July, 19 th August and 27 th August, 2020. The two meetings of the Committee held on 
19th August, 2020 for 4 hours 12 minutes and on 27 th August, 2020 for 4 hours 45 minutes had set 
records for holding deliberations for such a long time without a break. The subject being a 
contemporary issue, the Committee had devoted a lot of time and effort. Accordingly, the draft 
Report was revised and updated incorporating the suggestions of the Members given in its last 
deliberations for the purpose. The Chairman also apprised the Members that he had also thoroughly 
seen the Report and suggested suitable changes. 
 
5. The Committee then took up the draft 229 th Report for consideration and adoption. The 
Report was adopted unanimously without any change.  
 
6. He also appreciated the meticulous work done by the officials of the Secretariat as they have 
worked for long hours to prepare the Reports despite the constraints. 
 
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if 
necessary and also decided to present four Reports which included two Action Taken Reports 
(ATR) on Demands For Grants (2020-21), Action Taken Report (ATR) on the ‗Management of 
Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi ‘, and Report on ‗Management of COVID -19 Pandemic and 
Related Issues‘  to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on Tuesday, the *22nd December, 2020 
subject to his availability and convenience, so that further necessary action can be initiated on the 
said Reports.  
 
8. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
 
9. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.46 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*   However, as per the convenience of Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, the Repor t was presented to him on 21 st 
December, 2020. 

103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

129 
 
Annexure-II 
 

130 
 
Annexure III 
Details of logistic supplies to States (As on 31st July, 2020) 
S. 
No. 
State / UT / Central 
Government Institutions 
N95 masks 
distributed 
(in lakh) 
PPE kits 
distributed 
(in lakh) 
HCQ 
tablets 
distributed 
(in lakh) 
Ventilators 
Allocation Delivered 
1 
Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 1.41 0.44 1.8 19 14 
2 Andhra Pradesh 10.68 2.79 31.5 2000 570 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1.91 1.26 6.5 63 63 
4 Assam 6.92 2.02 21.7 1000 90 
5 Bihar 9.42 4.70 64 500 364 
6 Chandigarh 1.83 0.76 3 25 20 
7 Chhattisgarh 3.52 1.67 21.2 230 190 
8 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu 1.09 0.70 4.75 20 10 
9 Delhi 17.16 7.30 64.8 575 575 
10 Goa 1.77 0.96 8.8 200 140 
11 Gujarat 18.17 9.38 28.5 2500 1694 
12 Haryana 6.75 1.96 26.3 400 250 
13 Himachal Pradesh 2.60 1.32 9 500 500 
14 Jammu and Kashmir 7.82 4.07 27.8 908 331 
15 Jharkhand 2.96 1.51 28.2 460 385 
16 Karnataka 12.19 3.87 49.7 2025 731 
17 Kerala 4.65 1.49 39.5 480 414 
18 Ladakh 1.30 0.69 6 130 100 
19 Madhya Pradesh 12.33 7.40 54 679 475 
20 Maharashtra 24.81 11.88 97.2 4047 3488 
21 Manipur 1.65 0.62 5.7 97 15 
22 Meghalaya 1.15 0.42 4.75 54 44 
23 Mizoram 1.16 0.31 4.2 115 115 
24 Nagaland 1.15 0.25 3.75 120 90 
25 Odisha 5.31 2.19 13.5 567 440 
26 Puducherry 1.89 1.01 4.7 107 107 
27 Punjab 3.79 2.40 20.7 310 100 
28 Rajasthan 13.07 6.49 63 1500 1300 
29 Sikkim 1.25 0.47 3.25 10 0 
30 Tamil Nadu 14.01 5.39 72.3 1450 574 
31 Telangana 10.44 2.35 42.5 1400 1175 
32 Tripura 2.01 0.93 5.5 92 92 
33 Uttarakhand 2.30 1.53 8 400 210 
34 Uttar Pradesh 16.20 8.96 89.4 1000 466 
35 West Bengal 13.78 4.35 43.5 320 260 
36 Lakshadweep 0.40 0.20 2.25 7 0 
37 Central Institutions 32.39 17.01 102.516 1096 391 
Total 271.25 121.00 1083.77 25,406 15,783 
****** 

131 
 
Annexure IV 
Regulatory initiatives / measures undertaken by Authority during the COVID-19 
Pandemic:  
The following are some of the important measures initiated by IRDAI:   
i. To protect the interests of the policyholders the authority vide circular dated 4 th 
March, 2020 advised all insurers to expedite processing of claims relating to 
COVID-19 and to ensure that COVID specific claims are not repudiated without 
being reviewed thoroughly.  
ii. For those who could not renew their health insurance policies due to lock-down, 
IRDAI directed insurers to allow extra time for payment of premium and to 
continue the policy in the meanwhile.  
iii. To ease payment of premiums by policyholders, renewal premiums in respect of 
all existing health products due for renewal up to 31 stMarch, 2021 are allowed to 
be collected in instalments at the option of insurers. 
iv. Clarification was issued that health insurance policies that cover the costs of 
hospitalization would also cover the treatment of COVID -19.  
v. Insurers were advised to make available group health covers at affordable cost to 
various organizations / employers / establishments.  
 
vi. In order to expedite settlement of claims, IRDAI through circular dated 18 th 
April, 2020 fixed a time of two hours for granting both cashless pre-
authorization and for discharge of the insured patient from the hospital. 
 
vii. In order to ensure that claims are settled seamlessly, insurers were advised to put 
in special efforts for electronic submission of documents for settlement of claims 
during lockdown.  
 
viii. Insurers were advised to allow telemedicine services as part of the treatment.   
 
ix. Through circular dated 23 rd June, 2020 all insurers (Life, General and Health 
Insurers) have been allowed to offer COVID – 19 specific short term (from a 
minimum tenure of three months to 11 months) health insurance policies. Life 
insurers are allowed to offer short term benefit based policies. 
 
x. Standard Covid specific product s for short duration (3 ½ months, 6 ½ months 9 
½ months) with common policy wordings have been designed to address the 
basic health insurance needs of general public by providing financial protection 
against COVID-19.   
a. All general and health insurers are mandated to offer standard health 
indemnity Insurance policy known as “Corona Kavach”. As a gesture to 
the efforts of frontline healthcare workers, a 5% discount in premium is 
provided to all health care workers (including doctors, nurses) who are 
forefront in the fight against COVID-19. “Corona Kavach” policy is also 

132 
 
permitted to be issued in „group‟ so as to enable various organisations 
obtain short term COVID cover on their employees / workers.  
b. All Insurers (General, Health and Life) transacting Health Insurance 
business are encouraged to offer “Corona Rakshak” a  benefit based 
product. 
xi. IRDAI advised insurance companies to ensure cashless facility is made available 
at all empanelled network providers (hospitals).   
xii. Through circular dated 16th July, 2020, instruction was issued that a makeshift or 
temporary hospital  permitted by Govt. will also be treated as a hospital for the 
policyholders.   

133 
 
Annexure V 
COVID-19 specific products as on 11.08.2020 
 
 
S.No 
 
Insurer  
 
Name of the product 
 
Type of the product 
(Individual/Group) 
 
 
          Coverage 
        (Tenure:1 year) 
 
 
1. 
 
Star Health  
Insurance Co.  
 
Star Novel Corona 
Virus (n 
CoV)(COVID-19) 
Insurance Policy 
 
(Individual product) 
 
 
 
a) The product offers fixed benefit options of 
Rs.21000/- or Rs.42000/-on positive 
diagnosis of Corona Virus Infection. 
 
b) The product requires inpatient 
hospitalization for the claim to be payable 
and travel outside India is restricted. 
 
c) Waiting period is 16 days. 
 
2. 
 
ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Co Ltd 
 
COVID-19 Protection 
Cover 
 
(Group product) 
 
 
 
 
a) Fixed benefit product with 
minimum Sum Insured of Rs.25000/- and 
maximum Sum Insured of  Rs.500000/- 
 
 
b) The Insured will be paid the Sum Insured as 
lump sum on diagnosis of COVID- 19. 
Optional cover for tele consultation and 
ambulance assistance is available. 
 
c) Waiting period-14 days 
 
3. 
 
Future Generali  
India Insurance  
Co Ltd 
 
Corona Virus  
Insurance 
 
(Group product) 
 
 
a) Fixed benefit product with 
minimum Sum Insured Offered is Rs.50000/- 
and maximum Sum Insured Offered is 
Rs.300000/- 
 
b) Sum Insured as lump sum in case the Insured 
is quarantined (50% of Sum insured) or 
diagnosed with COVID-19 (100% of Sum 
insured).  

134 
 
  
c) Waiting period-30 days. 
 
4. 
 
Go digit General 
Insurance Co Ltd 
 
Digit illness group 
insurance  
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
 
a) Fixed benefit product with minimum Sum 
Insured of Rs.50000/- and maximum Sum 
Insured of Rs.300000/- 
 
b) The product covers 24 illnesses (optional) 
and corona virus infection is one among 
them. 
 
c) Benefit payable on positive test result 
(diagnosis) is 100% of Sum Insured and 
0-50% if patient is quarantined in a 
government authorised hospital for 
minimum number of days as chosen by 
the policyholder. 
 
d) Waiting period options – 48 hrs, 7 days, 
15 days, 30 days. 
 
5. 
 
Reliance General 
Insurance Co. Ltd 
 
Reliance Covid 19 
protection Insurance 
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
a) Fixed benefit product with minimum Sum 
Insured Rs.25000/- and maximum Sum 
Insured Rs.200000/- 
 
b) 15 days waiting period 
 
c) Coverage: 
 
1) Base Covers - Diagnosis Cover 
 
2) Optional Covers:  
 
i. Quarantine Cover 
ii. Loss of Pay Cover  
iii. Loss of Job Cover  
iv. Travel exclusion Cover  
 
 
6.  
 
Bajaj Allianz  
GIC Ltd 
 
Corona Care (Group) 
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
a) The group health product is an indemnity based 
Product with; Minimum Sum Insured:  Rs.25000/-   
and 
        Maximum Sum Insured: Rs.200000/- 
 
b)   Waiting period-15 days 
 

135 
 
 
7. 
 
Cholamandalam  
MS 
General Insurance 
Company Limited  
 
 
Chola MS COVID-
19 Cover-Group  
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
a) Fixed benefit product. 
b) Benefit paid on Positive diagnosis for 
Novel Corona Virus. 
c) Minimum SI of Rs. 10000.00 and 
Maximum SI of Rs. 50000.00  
(in the multiples of Rs. 10000 as chosen 
by the policyholder). 
d) Waiting period is 16 days. 
 
e) Product also offers two optional covers 
on payment of additional premium. 
 
1. Daily Cash Benefit:  
 
If insured is hospitalized as Inpatient for 
treatment of COVID-19 OR in Quarantine 
for diagnosis OR suspected of Novel 
COVID-19, a Daily cash benefit of Rs. 
250.00 to Rs. 1000.00 (in the multiples of 
Rs. 250.00 as chosen by the policyholder) 
on every 24 hours of hospitalization up to 
a maximum of 15 days is paid. 
2. Loss of Job. 
In case of Involuntary termination or 
permanent dismissal or temporary 
suspension from employment, imposed on 
the insured by the employer during the 
policy period due to Diagnosis or 
Quarantine for confirmed COVID-19, a 
sum equal to 50% of the chosen Basic Sum 
Insured per month upto a maximum of 3 
months is paid.  
 
This cover is however available only for a 
permanent salaried employee who has 
served atleast 1 year in the organization.   
 
8. 
 
 
Star Health 
Insurance 
 
 
 
Star Group Novel 
Coronavirus 
(nCoV) 
(COVID19) 
 
(Group product) 
 
 
Two plans are available. 
1. Indemnity Plan: 
(a) If the insured person shall contract and is 
diagnosed with Novel Coronavirus (nCoV) 
(COVID19) requiring Hospitalization in 
India, then  the Company will pay 
Hospitalization expenses incurred up to sum 
insured. 
 
(b) SI Options:  
 

136 
 
        25,000/-; 50,000/-; 1,00,000/-, 1,50,000/-; 
2,00,000/-; 2,50,000/- and 3,00,000/- 
(c)  Waiting period:15 days 
2. Lumpsum plan: 
 
(a)   If the insured person shall contract and is 
diagnosed with  Novel Coronavirus (nCoV) 
(COVID19) requiring   Hospitalization in 
India, then Company will pay the sum 
insured stated in the schedule. 
(b) SI Options: 
      Rs.10,000/- to Rs.1,00,000/- (in the multiples 
of 1000/-) 
(c) Waiting period:15 days 

137 
 
 
9 
 
Reliance General 
Insurance Co. Ltd 
 
Group Mediclaim -
Reliance Covid- 19 
protection Insurance 
 
Group product 
 
 
 
a) Fixed benefit product with minimum Su m 
Insured Rs.25000/- and  
maximum Sum Insured Rs.200000/- 
b) 15 days waiting period 
c)  Coverage: 
i) Base Cover - Diagnosis Cover 
ii) Optional Covers:  
1) Quarantine Cover 
2) Loss of Pay Cover  
3) Loss of Job Cover  
 
Name of 
Add-on 
Sum Assured 
Min Max 
Quarantine 
Cover 
50%of 
Sum 
Insured 
50%of Sum 
Insured 
Loss of 
Pay Cover 
 (Max. 30 
days) 
1%of 
Sum 
Insured 
 per day 
5% of Sum 
Insured per day 
Loss of 
Job Cover 
50%of 
Sum 
Insured  
per 
month,  
1 month 
of cover 
50%of Sum 
Insured per 
month,  
3 months of cover 
Travel 
exclusion 
Cover 
100% of 
Sum 
Insured 
100% of Sum 
Insured 
 
10. 
 
Cholamandalam  
MS General 
Insurance Company 
Limited  
 
 
Chola MS COVID-
19 Cover 
 
(Individual product) 
 
 
 
a) This is a fixed benefit product. 
 
b) Benefit will be paid on Positive diagnosis for 
Novel Corona Virus. 
 
c) The product is offered for minimum SI of Rs. 
10000.00 and Maximum SI of Rs. 50000.00  
(in the multiples of Rs. 10000 as chosen by 
the policyholder). 
 
d) Waiting period is 16 days. 
 
e) Product also offers two optional covers on 
payment of additional premium. 

138 
 
 
 
1) Daily Cash Benefit:  
 
If insured is hospitalized as Inpatient for 
treatment of COVID-19 OR in Quarantine 
for diagnosis OR suspected of Novel 
COVID-19, a Daily cash benefit of Rs. 
250.00 to Rs. 1000.00 (in the multiples of 
Rs. 250.00 as chosen by the policyholder) 
on every 24 hours of hospitalization up to a 
maximum of 15 days is paid. 
2) Loss of Job Benefit:  
In case of Involuntary termination or 
permanent dismissal or temporary 
suspension from employment, imposed on 
the insured by the employer during the 
policy period due to Diagnosis or 
Quarantine for confirmed COVID-19, a sum 
equal to 50% of the chosen Basic Sum 
Insured per month upto a maximum of 3 
months is paid.  
This cover is however available only for a 
permanent salaried employee who has 
served atleast 1 year in the organization.  
 
11 
 
Reliance General 
Insurance Co. 
 
Group Mediclaim -
Reliance Covid- 19  
Indemnity 
 
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
1. This is a group product. 
2. 15 days waiting period is applicable. 
3. Product offers 3 base cover and 5 Add-ons. 
Minimum SI is INR 50000 and Maximum SI 
is  INR 5,00,000. Base Covers are offered on 
indemnity basis. Coverage is as under: 
 
Cover                      Short Description 
Hospitalisa
tion Cover 
The Company indemnifies the 
Insured Person up to the Sum 
Insured, for medical expenses 
incurred on Hospitalization of 
Insured Person due to Diagnosis 
of presence of COVID-19 
Pre-
Hospitalisa
tion Cover 
 
The Company indemnifies the 
Insured Person for the medical 
expenses incurred upto 30 days 
prior to date of Hospitalisation 
Post-
Hospitalisa
tion Cover 
The Company indemnifies the 
Insured Person for the medical 
expenses incurred upto 60 days 

139 
 
post discharge from the Hospital 
                                                                 
Add On Covers 
Quaranti
ne Cover 
The Company shall pay upto 
50% of Sum Insured for medical 
expenses incurred during 
Quarantine , starting from the 
fourth day of Quarantinefor a 
maximum of 15 days during the 
Policy Period 
Ambulan
ce Cover 
The Company shall pay the 
Insured Person upto Rs 3500 per 
hospitalisation for expenses 
incurred on availing Ambulance 
services, provided that the 
Ambulance is availed in relation 
to Hospitalisation due to 
Diagnosis of presence of 
COVID-19 
Daily 
Cash 
The Company shall pay Insured 
Person an opted per day daily 
cash payout for each 24 hours of 
Hospitalisation starting from 
second consecutive day of 
Hospitalisation or fourth day of 
Quarantine for a maximum of 30 
days 
Convalesc
ence 
Cover 
The Company shall pay the 
Insured Person a lumpsum opted 
payout to the surviving Insured 
Person for a minimum 14 days of 
Hospitalisation 
Travel 
Exclusion 
Cover 
Waiver of travel restriction.The 
Insured Person shall be eligible 
for claim under Hospitalisation 
Cover even if he/she has 
travelled to the travel-restricted 
countries 
 
 
12 
 
Reliance General 
Insurance Co. 
 
Reliance Covid- 19  
Indemnity Policy 
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
1. This is a group product. Target segment is 
non-employer-employee groups. 
2. 15 days waiting period is applicable. 
3. Product offers 3 base cover and 5 Add-
ons. Minimum SI is INR 50000 and  
  Maximum SI is  INR 5,00,000. Base 
Covers are offered on indemnity basis. 
Coverage is as      under: 

140 
 
 Cover                      Short Description 
Hospitalisa
tion Cover 
The Company indemnifies the 
Insured Person up to the Sum 
Insured, for medical expenses 
incurred on Hospitalization of 
Insured Person due to Diagnosis 
of presence of COVID-19 
Pre-
Hospitalisa
tion Cover 
 
The Company indemnifies the 
Insured Person for the medical 
expenses incurred upto 30 days 
prior to date of Hospitalisation 
Post-
Hospitalisa
tion Cover 
The Company indemnifies the 
Insured Person for the medical 
expenses incurred upto 60 days 
post discharge from the Hospital 
Add On Covers 
Quaranti
ne Cover 
The Company shall pay upto 
50% of Sum Insured for medical 
expenses incurred during 
Quarantine , starting from the 
fourth day of Quarantinefor a 
maximum of 15 days during the 
Policy Period 
Ambulan
ce Cover 
The Company shall pay the 
Insured Person upto Rs 3500 per 
hospitalisation for expenses 
incurred on availing Ambulance 
services, provided that the 
Ambulance is availed in relation 
to Hospitalisation due to 
Diagnosis of presence of 
COVID-19 
Daily 
Cash 
The Company shall pay Insured 
Person an opted per day daily 
cash payout for each 24 hours of 
Hospitalisation starting from 
second consecutive day of 
Hospitalisation or fourth day of 
Quarantine for a maximum of 30 
days 
Convalesc
ence 
Cover 
The Company shall pay the 
Insured Person a lumpsum opted 
payout to the surviving Insured 
Person for a minimum 14 days of 
Hospitalisation 

141 
 
Travel 
Exclusion 
Cover 
Waiver of travel restriction. The 
Insured Person shall be eligible 
for claim under Hospitalisation 
Cover even if he/she has 
travelled to the travel-restricted 
countries 
 
  
13. 
 
ICICI Lombard GI 
Co.Ltd 
 
COVID Shield 
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
The group health product is an Indemnity based 
product with 
 Minimum Sum Insured Rs.25000/- and 
Maximum Sum Insured is Rs.500000/- 
 Waiting period is 15 days 
 
 
In patient 
Treatment  
Up to Annual 
Sum Insured 
Pre and Post 
hospitalization 
expenses 
Up to Annual 
Sum Insured 
Hospitalization 
expenses for 
quarantine 
Up to Annual 
Sum Insured 
Health Assistance NA 
Road Ambulance 
cover 
Up to 2% of 
Annual sum 
insured 
maximum of Rs. 
5,000 
Domiciliary 
Hospitalisation 
Up to 50% of 
Annual Sum 
Insured 
Tele Consultation NA 
 
14. 
 
Kotak Mahindra 
General Insurance Co 
Ltd  
 
KOTAK COVID-
19 SECURE 
 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
This product offers the following covers out of 
which one or more covers can be opted: 
  i.          Covid-19 Diagnosis Cover (Lump sum 
benefit on diagnosis of COVID-19) 
    ii.             In-patient Hospitalization Cover 
  iii.            Ambulance Cover 
  iv.            Hospital Daily Cash Benefit 
     v.            ICU Daily Cash Benefit 

142 
 
  vi.            OPD Benefit 
vii.            Convalescence Benefit             
  
2.  Initial waiting period of 15 days and survival 
period of 30 days is applicable. 
  
 
15. Tata AIG General 
Insurance Co. 
Tata AIG COVID 
Protection Group 
Insurance 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
1. This is a group product. Target segment is 
Employer- employee Groups, Non-
employer employee Groups and Social 
sector. 
2. 15 days waiting period is applicable. 
3. Product offers corona virus disease 
(Covide-19) cover on individual sum 
insured basis with SI from INR 5000 to 
INR 2 Lakh on benefit basis. 
 
16. 
 
Royal Sundaram 
General Insurance Co. 
Ltd 
 
COVID SECURE 
 
(Individual Product) 
 
 
 
 
1. This product is offered on individual 
basis as lumpsum benefit 
 
2. Fixed benefit of Rs.25000/-   & Rs. 
50000/- (Lump sum on diagnosis)  
will be payable to the customer on 
positive diagnosis from a Govt authorized 
Diagnostic Centre for treatment of 
Corona Virus and has been under 
inpatient hospitalization in India 
3.  Waiting period is 30 days 
 
 
17. 
 
Reliance General 
Insurance Co. Ltd 
 
Reliance Covid- 19 
protection Insurance 
 
(Individual Product) 
 
 
 
1. It is a benefit based individual product proposed 
to be offered on Assured Benefit basis. 
2. 15 days waiting period is applicable. 
3. Product offers 3 plans as under: 
Cover Plan A Plan B Plan C 
Sum 
Insured 
25000,  
50000, 
100000, 
125000,   
150000, 
25000, 
50000, 
100000, 
125000, 
150000,  
25000, 
50000, 
100000, 
125000, 
150000, 
200000 

143 
 
200000 200000 
a. 
Diagnosi
s Cover* 
100% of 
Sum 
Insured 
100% of 
Sum 
Insured 
100% of 
Sum 
Insured 
b. 
Quarantin
e Cover* 
Not 
Include
d 
50% of 
Sum 
Insured 
50% of 
Sum 
Insured 
c. .Loss of 
Pay 
Cover 
Not 
Include
d 
Not 
Include
d 
Opted 
Percentag
e of Sum 
Insured 
per  
day 
subject for 
a 
maximum 
of 30 
days;  
Options: 
1%, 2%, 
3%, 4%, 
5% of 
Sum  
Insured 
d. .Loss 
of Job 
Cover  
Not 
Include
d 
Not 
Include
d 
50% of 
Sum 
Insured 
for each 
opted  
month, 
maximum 
up to 
150% of 
Sum  
Insured 
e. 
Ambulanc
e Cover 
Not 
Include
d 
Rs. 
2500 
Rs. 2500 
f. Travel 
Exclusion 
Removal 
Cover** 
Optiona
l 
Optiona
l 
Optional 
    
 

144 
 
 
18. 
 
Aditya Birla Health 
Insurance Co. Ltd 
 
Group Assure 
COVID-19 
(Group Product) 
 
 
 
The group health product with the following 
Features 
Sum Insured Offered
: 
For Cover 1: Hospitalization: Sum Insured (S.I) up 
to  Rs 2,00,000 /Rs 3,00,000 
For Cover 2: Virus Detection Pay out: S.I: Up To 
Rs 25,000 
For Cover 3: Virus Detection and Hospitalization: 
S.I:  up to RS 25,000 
For Cover 4: Reunion Travel: SI: up to Rs 
5,000/Rs 10,000 
b) Waiting period is 15 days 
Coverage Offered 
Cover Payout Basis 
 Hospitalization  Indemnity 
Virus Detection Pay out Fixed Benefit 
Virus Detection and 
Hospitalization 
Fixed Benefit 
Reunion Travel-(Optional 
Cover)  
Indemnity 
 
 
19. 
 
Universal Sompo 
General  
 
 
COVID-19 Group  
Health Policy 
 
(Group)  
 
 
 
Sum Insured minimum: Rs.50000/- and Maximum 
is Rs.5 Lakhs 
2.Base cover: 
a) COVID-19 Hospitalisation Cover 
b) Ayush Treatment 
c) Pre-Hospitalization 
d) Post Hospitalization  
e) Home care treatment expenses 
f) Ambulance charges  
 
3.Optional Covers: 
a) OPD Cover 
b) Hospitalization Cover  
4.Indemnity and Benefit based 
    

145 
 
20. Star Health Star Group 
COVID Insurance 
Policy 
 
 
1. The product has two plans: Indemnity and 
Lumpsum plans 
2. Coverage:  
i. Coverage and other terms and 
conditions of Indemnity plan are 
observed to be similar to Corona 
Kavach policy designed by the 
Authority 
ii. Coverage and other terms and 
conditions of benefit based plan 
are similar to Corona rakshak 
Policy designed by the 
Authority. 
3. Policy period: 3.5,6.5 and 9.5 months 
 
 
21. 
 
Religare HIC 
 
Covid Care  
 
(Individual product)  
 
 
 
1. Two plans –  Covid Care Plus & Covid Care 
Advantage.  
2. Covid Care Plus provides coverage for in-
patient hospitalisation, Day care, 
pre-hospitalisation (30 days), post-
hospitalisation (60 days).  
Coverage for quarantine upto 1% of SI. 
 
3. Covid Care Advantage- OPD + Covid Care 
Plus.  
OPD benefit for consultation, pharmacy and 
diagnosis. 
4. All coverage are only indemnity based. 
5. No coverage for home quarantine.  
However, it provides coverage for quarantine 
at government authorised institutional facility  
for persons with positive diagnosis.  
6. Sum Insured - 3 lakh to 10 lakh 
7. Maximum age for entry: 70 years (both 
proposer and adult) 
8. Significant exclusions -  Insured Person 
travels to any containment 

146 
 
zone/city/district/country where travel has been 
restricted by any Government Authority 
9. Product is available on Individual and Family 
Floater basis (2A+2C) 
 
 
22. Bajaj Allianz GI Co 
Ltd 
 
Corona Protection  
Policy  
 
(Group)  
 
 
The group health product with 
1. Minimum Sum Insured Offered:  
Rs.50,000/- and  
2. Maximum Sum Insured Offered: 
Rs.20,00,000/- 
3. Waiting period is 15 days 
4. Policy tenure: 
          Three and Half Months (3 ½ months), Six 
and Half            Months (6½ months), Nine Half 
Months (9 ½months) and a year (12 month) 
5. Coverage Offered 
 
 This is both indemnity and benefit based 
product. 
   
23.  In addition to the above IRDAI mandated all general and health insurers to offer COVID specific Standard 
Health Insurance Policy “CORONA KAVACH”.  The following are the key features of the product.  
Product Name Corona Kavach,[Company Name] 
Category Individual 
Product Type Available on Individual and  Floater Sum Insured Basis 
Type of Cover 1. One  Base Cover on Indemnity Basis-  Covid Hospitalization cover 
2. One Optional Cover on Benefit Basis-  Hospital Daily Cash 
Sum insured Rs 50,000/- (Fifty Thousand) to 5,00,000/- (Five Lakh) (i n the multiples of 
fifty thousand) 
Waiting Period 15 days 
Policy Period Three and Half  Months (3 ½ months), Six and Half Months(6 ½ mont hs), 
Nine and Half  Months (9 ½ months)   including waiting period. 
Eligibility 
Policy can be availed by persons between the age of 18 years up to min imum 
65 years.  Policy can be availed for Self, spouse, Parents and Parents -in-law, 
Dependent Children up to 25 years of age. 
Hospitalization 
Expenses 
Medical Expenses of Hospitalization for Covid for a minimum period of 24 
consecutive hours only shall be admissible 
Pre Hospitalization For 15 days prior to the date of hospitalization/home care treatment 
Post Hospitalization For 30 days from the date of discharge from the hospital/completion of ho me 
care treatment 
AYUSH Covered up to sum insured opted 
Home Care 
Treatment Expenses 
The Company shall indemnify costs of treatment incurred by the Insured 
person on availing treatment at home for Covid on Positive diagnosis  of 
Covid in a government authorized diagnostic centre maximum up to 1 4 days 
per incident, which in the normal course would require care and treatment at 
a hospital but is actually taken while confined at home subject to policy ter ms 
and conditions. 
Discount 
5% discount in premium shall be provided to health care workers (in cluding 
doctors, nurses, midwives etc.). 
 

147 
 
Modes of premium 
payment  
Single Premium 
Hospital 
 
For the purpose of this policy any set-up designated by the governme nt as 
hospital for the treatment of covid shall also be considered as hospital. 
Co-morbidities 
 
Any co-morbid condition triggered due to covid-19 shall be covered during  
the period of hospitalization for covid-19.  
 
All general and health insurers (30 general and health insurers) are offering this product.  
24.  The Authority has also designed a standard Covid specific benefit based product and has 
encouraged all insurers (General, Health and Life) to offer this individual C OVID specific Standard 
benefit based health policy called “Corona Rakshak Policy”. Insurers are advised to endeavor 
offering this product. The following are the key features of the product.  
 
Product Type On individual basis 
Category of Cover Benefit based 
Sum insured Rs 50,000/- (Fifty Thousand) to 2,50,000 (Two and half La kh) (in the multiples 
of fifty thousand) 
Policy Period Three and half months (3 ½ months), six and half months (6 ½ months) and 
nine and half months (9 ½ months) including waiting period. 
Waiting Period 15 days 
Eligibility Policy can be availed by persons between the age of 18 years up to minimum 65 
years. 
Coverage 
COVID Cover: Lump sum benefit equal to 100% of the Sum Insured shall be 
payable on hospitalization for a minimum continuous period of 72 hours on 
diagnosis of COVID. 
Modes of premium 
payment  
Single Premium 
 
The following insurers are offering “Corona Rakshak”. 
Sl. No. Insurers 
1 Cholamandalam MS General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
2 Edelweiss General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
3 Future Generali India Insurance Co. Ltd. 
4 Go digit General Insurance Co Ltd  
5 HDFC Ergo General Insurance  
6 HDFC Ergo Health Insuarnce  

148 
 
7 IFFCO TOKIO General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
8 Kotak Mahindra General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
9 Navi General Insurance Ltd. 
10 Reliance General Insurance Co.Ltd 
11 Star Health & Allied Insurance Co.Ltd. 
12 The New India Assurance Co. Ltd 
13 The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. 
14 Universal Sompo General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
15 
 
SBI General Insurance Co Ltd 
16 
 
ICICI Lobard Genral Insurance Co Ltd 
17 
 
Aditya Birla Health Insurance Co Ltd 
18 
 
Liberty General Insurance Ltd 
19 
 
Manipal Cigna Health Insurance Co Ltd  
  
 

149 
 
Annexure-VI 
 

150 
 
Annexure-VII 
Table-1 
Total Ration Card and Beneficiaries under NFSA ( in lakhs) 
State/UT Population (as per 
Census 2011) 
Total Coverage as 
per 2011 Census 
Total Ration 
Cards 
Total No. of NFSA 
*Beneficiaries 
Andaman and Nicobar 
Island 
 
3.80 
 
0.633 
 
0.166 
 
0.609 
 
 
Andhra Pradesh 
 
 
846.66 
 
 
268.23 
 
89.458 
 
 
268.230 
Arunachal Pradesh 13.83 8.705 1.776 8.211 
Assam 311.69 251.898 57.234 251.529 
Bihar 1,038.05 871.163 161.880 871.163 
Chandigarh (DBT) 10.55 4.959 0.668 2.794 
Chhatisgarh 255.40 200.768 51.433 200.768 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu 
 
5.86 
 
3.557 
 
0.625 
 
2.522 
Delhi 167.53 72.780 17.442 72.733 
Goa 14.58 5.322 1.426 5.320 
Gujarat 603.84 382.847 66.113 382.536 
Haryana 253.53 126.491 26.996 126.490 
Himachal Pradesh 68.57 36.816 6.809 28.645 
Jammu & Kashmir 125.49 74.132 16.754 72.050 
Jharkhand 329.66 264.254 56.796 263.700 
Karnataka 611.31 401.931 117.480 401.930 
Kerala 333.88 154.800 37.853 154.800 
Ladakh -  0.293 1.439 
Lakshadweep 0.64 0.219 0.052 0.219 
Madhya Pradesh 725.98 546.422 116.726 546.420 
Maharashtra 1,123.73 700.167 154.534 700.167 
Manipur 28.56 25.057 6.024 24.670 
Meghalaya 29.64 21.455 4.215 21.455 
Mizoram 10.91 7.063 1.557 6.682 
Nagaland 19.81 14.787 2.871 14.047 
Odisha 419.47 326.212 86.680 323.596 
Puducherry (DBT) 12.44 6.344 1.790 6.150 
Punjab 277.04 141.446 35.742 141.446 
Rajasthan 686.21 446.620 97.970 446.620 
Sikkim 6.08 4.066 0.899 3.788 
Tamil Nadu 721.39 364.694 111.340 357.337 
Telangana - 191.70 53.190 191.620 
Tripura 36.71 25.018 5.785 24.828 
Uttar Pradesh 1,995.81 1,520.586 361.038 1,436.522 
Uttarakhand 101.17 61.938 13.667 61.938 
West Bengal 913.48 601.838 563.416 601.838 
Grand Total 12,103.275 8,134.918 2,328.699 8,024.817 
*Figures are subject to change from time to time. 

151 
 
Table-2 
Capital wise Ration Card and Beneficiaries under NFSA ( as per Central 
Repositry ) 
 
S 
No 
 
State/UT 
 
Capita
l 
Total Ration 
Cards in State 
Capital(Total) 
Total number of 
Beneficiaries in 
State Capital 
 
1 
Andaman and 
Nicobar Is 
 
Port Blair 
 
4,732 
 
17,528 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Visakhapatnam 7,14,176 21,98,401 
 
3 
Arunach
al 
Pradesh 
 
Itanagar 
 
- 
 
- 
4 Assam Dispur 1,60,808 6,70,153 
5 Bihar Patna 7,12,297 38,15,452 
6 Chandigarh Chandigarh 66,799 2,88,308 
7 Chhattisgarh Raipur 3,00,205 12,48,591 
 
 
 
8 
Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 
and Daman 
and Diu 
 
 
 
Daman 
 
 
 
12,034 
 
 
 
50,077 
9 Delhi New Delhi 78,761 3,16,042 
10 Goa Panaji 67,387 2,52,466 
11 Gujarat Gandhinagar 1,51,336 7,19,172 
12 Haryana Chandigarh 66,799 2,88,308 
 
13 
Himach
al 
Pradesh 
 
Shimla 
 
60,395 
 
2,44,399 
 
14 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
 
Jammu 
 
1,85,100 
 
7,51,635 
15 Jharkhand Ranchi 4,64,309 19,85,792 
16 Karnataka Bengaluru 4,99,909 16,77,354 
17 Kerala Thiruvananthapuram 4,55,350 16,79,489 
18 Ladakh Leh & Kargil 29,268 1,43,918 
19 Lakshadweep Kavaratti 5,155 22,188 
20 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal 3,15,660 15,37,899 
21 Maharashtra Mumbai 24,555 1,00,893 
22 Manipur Imphal 2,24,836 8,81,213 
23 Meghalaya Shillong 1,12,351 5,42,067 
24 Mizoram Aizawl 54,205 2,35,827 
25 Nagaland Kohima 28,887 1,25,767 
26 Odisha Bhubaneswar 3,72,007 14,00,807 
27 Puducherry Pondicherry 1,35,873 4,96,960 

152 
 
 
28 Punjab Chandigarh 66,799 2,88,308 
29 Rajasthan Jaipur 7,27,757 31,11,999 
30 Sikkim Gangtok 36,488 1,43,645 
31 Tamil Nadu Chennai 6,30,164 21,87,874 
32 Telangana Hyderabad 3,51,024 13,77,069 
33 Tripura Agartala 1,37,016 5,54,748 
34 Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 7,77,036 29,35,885 
35 Uttarakhand Dehradun 2,27,916 10,14,068 
 
36 
 
West Bengal 
Kolkata ( from 
NFSA Dashboard) 
 
10,05,014 
 
10,48,305 
37 Total  92,62,408 3,43,52,607 
Figures are provisional. 
 

153 
 
Annexure VIII 
 
(i). Relief package under Pradhan Mantri Garib KalyanYojana: 
 
Central Government announced a Rs 1.70 Lakh Crore relief package under Pradhan Mantri Garib 
KalyanYojana (PMGKY) for the poor people to help them fight the battle against Corona Virus. The details 
of the package are as per Annexure  
i. Insurance cover of Rs 50 Lakh per health worker fighting COVID-19 will be provided. 
 
ii. 80 crore poor people will be provided 5 kg wheat or rice and 1 kg of preferred pulses (per family), free of 
cost, every month for the next three months. 
 
iii. 20 crore women Jan Dhan account holders will be given cash assistance of Rs 500 per month per pe rson 
for next three months. 
 
iv. 8 crore poor families registered under the scheme of Ujjwala will get 1 Gas cylinder, per fa mily, per 
month free of cost for the next three months. 
 
v. MNREGA wage to be increased Rs 202 a day from Rs 182, which will benefit 13.62 crore families. 
 
vi. An ex-gratia financial assistance of Rs 1,000 per person will be given to 3 crore poor senior citize n, poor 
widows and poor disabled. 
 
vii. Government will front-load Rs 2,000 to farmers in first week of April under the existing PM Kisan 
Yojana to benefit 8.7 crore farmers. 
 
viii. Wage-earners earning below Rs 15,000 per month in businesses having less than 100 workers, would be 
given 24 percent of their monthly wages into their PF accounts, per person, per month for next three months. 
 
ix. Central Government has given orders to State Governments to use Building and Construction Workers 
Welfare Fund to provide relief to Construction Workers and support to 3.5 Crore registered workers. 
 
PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana which was for the period of three months, April- June, 2020, has been 
extended till the end of November, 2020 for providing additional foodgrain @ 5kg/person/month free of cost 
to all the beneficiaries (AAY & PHH) covered under TPDS as per provisions of NFSA (including those 
covered under DBT). 
 
Quantification of the benefits reached to/availed by the targeted sections 
The details of migrant workers who received benefits of various relief measures announced by the 
Government after the imposition of lockdown and the details of expenditure by the Central and State 
Governments are as follows- 
 
The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that as part of the Rs 1.70 lakh crore Pradhan Mantri Gari b Kalyan 
package, the Government announced free food grains and cash payment to women and poor senior citizens 
and farmers. The swift implementation of the package is being continuously monitored by Central and 
States/UTs Governments. Around 42 crore poor people received financial assistance of Rs 67,478 crore 
under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package. The following are the salient features of the Package :  

154 
 
i. Rs 17,891 crore front loaded towards payment of the first instalment of PM-KISAN to 8.94 crore 
beneficiaries.  
 
ii. Rs 10,325 crore credited to 20.65 crore (100%) women Jan Dhan account holders as first installment. 
Rs. 10,315 crore credited to 20.63 crore (100%) women Jan Dhan account holders with second 
installment. Rs. 10,312 crore credited to 20.62 crore (100%) women Jan Dhan account holders with 
third installment. 
 
iii. Total Rs 2,814.5 crore disbursed to about 2.81 crore old age persons, widows and disabled persons in 
two installments. Benefits transferred to all 2.81 crore beneficiaries in two installments.  
 
iv. 1.82 crore Building & construction workers received financial support amounting to Rs 4,968.35 crore.  
 
v. 117 Lakh MT of food grains have been lifted by 36 States/UTs for April. 37.07 LMT of foodgrains have 
been distributed, covering 74.14 crore beneficiaries by 36 States/UTs for April 2020. 36.87 LMT of 
food grains have been distributed, covering 73.74 crore beneficiaries by 36 States/UTs for May 2020. 
31.18 LMT of food grains have been distributed, covering 62.35 crore beneficiaries by 35 States/UTs for 
June 2020. Out of 5.8 LMT of Pulses allocated for three months, 5.83 LMT of Pulses have been 
dispatched to various states/UTs. Total 4.63 LMT Pulses have been distributed so far to 18.2 crore 
household beneficiaries out of 19.4 crore such beneficiaries. 28 States/UTs have distributed 100% 
Pulses for April, 22 States/UTs have completed 100% distribution for Pulses for May, 11 States/UTs 
have completed 100% distribution for June.  
 
vi. Under Atma Nirbhar Bharat, 8 LMT has been allocated for two months for stranded migrants and so far 
6.39 LMT foodgrains has been lifted by 36 States/UTs. 1.16 LMT distribute to 2.33 crore beneficiaries 
by 35 States/UTs as first month entitlement, and 1.07 LMT distributed to 2.15 crore beneficiaries by 31 
States/UTs as second month entitlement. 1st tranche of 39,000 MT Chana(legumes) earmarked and 
33,620 MT of Chana have also been despatched to States/UTs. Total 10,302 MT distributed to 0.70 
crore beneficiaries. 7,042 MT distributed by 25 States/UT for May, and 3,260 MT distributed by 12 
States/UT for June.  
 
vii. Total 8.52 crore PMUY cylinders have been booked and already delivered for April and May 2020 
under this scheme so far. And 3.64 crore PMUY cylinders booked for June 2020 and 3.46 crore PMUY 
free cylinders delivered to beneficiaries for June 2020. 
 
viii.   24.64 Lakh members of EPFO has taken benefit of online withdrawal of non-refundable advance from 
EPFO account amounting to Rs. 6804 crore.  
 
ix. Increased MNREGA wages has been notified w.e.f 01-04-2020. In the current financial year,  113.65 
crore person‟s man -days of work generated. Further, Rs 41,469 crore released to states to liquidate 
pending dues of both wage and material. 
 
x.  24% EPF contribution transferred to 41.16 Lakh employees account amounting to Rs. 1497.31. 

155 
 
Annexure IX 
 
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PM-GKAY):  
Additional free-of-cost foodgrain for all NFSA beneficiaries @ 5 Kg/person/month (over & above regular 
monthly entitlements under NFSA):  
a) In the month of March 2020, pursuant to the announcement of pro- poor „Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan 
Package (PMGKP)‟ to ameliorate the hardships faced by the poor due to economic disruptions caused by the 
Covid-19 outbreak in the country, this Department on 30/03/2020, had initially allocated a total of a bout 120 
Lakh Metric Tons (LMT) foodgrain (Rice/Wheat) under the PM-GKAY (Phase-I) to all States/UTs for 
additional free-of-cost foodgrain distribution to about all 80+ Crore beneficiaries covered under  National Food  
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA), at the scale of 5 Kg per person per month for a period of three  months (April-June 
2020),over and above regular monthly NFSA foodgrain entitlements, so that poor and vulnerable 
families/beneficiaries do not suffer on account of non-availability of foodgrains and are able to access the same 
easily without facing any financial distress. 
b) Further, keeping in view the need for continuous food-security support to the poor and the needy, the PM-
GKAY has been extended further for a period of next 5 months upto November 2020i.e. PM-GKAY (Phase-II). 
Accordingly, this Department on 30/06/2020 had allocated another 201 Lakh MT foodgrain under PM-GKAY 
(Phase-II) for free-of-cost additional distribution to about all 80+ Crore NFSA beneficiaries in the country 
during July to November 2020.  
c) As regard, distribution is concerned, under PM-GKAY (Phase-I), States/UT combined have lifted a total of 
more than 117.9 LMT(99%) of total allocated foodgrain from the FCI/Central Pool, and have reported a total 
distribution of nearly 111.6LMT (93.53%) of allocated foodgrain for the period of three months April-June, 
2020, as per following month wise-details:  
I. 94.3% of April quota to about 75.03 Crore beneficiaries,  
II. 94.2% of May quota to about 74.92 Crore beneficiaries, and 
III. 92.1% of June quota to about 73.24 Crore beneficiaries. 
d) Whereas, under PMGKAY (Phase-II), as per the report upto 24/08/2020, States/UT combined have lifted a 
total of more than 80.44 LMT of total allocated foodgrain from the FCI/Central Pool, and have reported a tot al 
distribution of nearly 53.32 LMT of allocated foodgrain for the period of July and Aug, 2020, as per following 
month wise-details:  
I. 34.47 MT (86%) of July quota to about 68.94 Crore beneficiaries, and 
II. 18.84 MT (46.8%) of August quota to about 37.68 Crore beneficiaries 

156 
 
Annexure X  
Atma Nirbhar Bharat Scheme (ANBS):  
Fee-of-cost foodgrain for migrants/stranded migrants @ 5 Kg/person/month:  
a) Pursuant to the economic measures announced by the Government of India under the “Atma Nirbhar Bharat 
Package” (ANBP), this Dep artment on 15/05/2020 had allocated a total quantity of about 8 Lakh MT of 
foodgrains (7 LMT Rice and 1 LMT Wheat) to all States/UTs under “Atma Nirbhar Bharat Scheme” 
(ANBS) for free-of-cost distribution to all migrants/stranded migrants and other needy persons across the 
country who neither covered under NFSA nor under any other State PDS scheme, or not able to access their 
NFSA foodgrains, to help them mitigate their food-security plight during the unprecedented COVID- 19 
situation. 
b) Since, no data regarding migrants across the country was available with this Department, a liberal fig ure of 
8 Crore migrant persons (10% of total 80 Cr. NFSA population) was estimated. Accordingly, a uniform 
allocation of monthly 4 LMT foodgrain (total 8 LMT) was communicated to all States/UTs (10% of 
respective monthly allotment under NFSA) for free- of-cost distribution to migrants/stranded migrants at a 
scale of 5 Kgper person per month for a period of two months i.e. May and June 2020.  
c) The State/UT Governments are responsible for implementation of the ANB scheme including issuance of 
guidelines within State/UT, identification of migrants/stranded migrant persons and distribution of free 
foodgrains to them. Accordingly, State/UT governments were given complete freedom in distribution and 
they were free to distribute this additional ration to anyone who did not possess any ration card. 
d) As per reports received from States/UTs up to 24.08.2020, a total of 6.38 LMT (80%) foodgrain were lifted 
from FCI/central pool by all States/UTs combined. However, further lifting of foodgrain has been stopped  
w.e.f. 25/06/2020.  
e) Although, States/UTs made concerted efforts to identify target persons (i.e. migrants, stranded migrants, 
migrants in transit and migrants in quarantine centers, etc. in collaboration with other State Departments 
such as Labour Departments and relevant agencies/NGOs, etc.) on war footing and distributing free 
foodgrains to them under ANBS; many States/UTs have informed that a majority of targeted migrants have 
already moved back to their home States/UTs where they may have access to NFSA/State Sche me 
foodgrains. Thus, the liberally allocated quantity of 8 LMT foodgrains under ANBS may not be 
utilised/distributed completely.  
f) It is mentioned that initial estimates of 8 Crore persons were liberal and situational as projected in the 
media. However, as indicated by States/UTs later, during the course of identification, a number of about 2.8 
Crore persons was projected to be covered by States/UTs combined, against which nearly 2.14 Crore  
persons were covered up to30/06/2020 who have received a total of 1.07 LMT foodgrain until then. 
g) Further, as per the request of many States/UTs, the Government has extended the distribution period of 
already lifted foodgrains by States/UTs up to 31/08/2020 and accordingly, as per reports from States/UTs up 
to 24/08/2020, so far, 2.61 LMT foodgrains have been distributed to 2.4 crore, 2.5 crore, 30.5 lakh and 10 
lakh migrants in the month of May, June, July and Aug‟20  respectively. under the Atma Nirbhar Bharat 
Scheme so far.  
 
h) It is a matter of satisfaction that every needy/migrant citizen who needed food security a ssistance during the 
time of crisis, were fed, and also it should be a matter of further relief that this number turned out to be  

157 
 
much less than initially estimated number of 8 Crore. And therefore, 8 Crore should not to be construed as 
the real target but an intended target to serve if it had existed. 
 
 

158 
 
Annexure XI  
 
One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC):  
Empowering migrant beneficiaries to access subsidised foodgrains under NFSA through nation-wide 
portability of ration cards:  
a) As part of the efforts of this Department for bringing technology-driven reforms in the functioning of the 
Public Distribution System (PDS), the implementation of One Nation One Ration Card program is an 
endeavour of this Department to empower the migrant NFSA beneficiaries to access their food-security 
entitlements (under NFSA) anywhere in the country through nation-wide portability of NFSA ration cards. 
b) This facility is being implemented by this Department in in collaboration with States/UTs, to ensure the 
delivery of subsidised foodgrains to all migrant NFSA beneficiaries/households who gets an option to lift 
their entitled foodgrains from any Fair Price Shop (FPS) of their choice, anywhere in the country, by using 
their existing/same ration card issued in their home State/UT, after going through biometric/Aadhaar 
authentication on an electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) device installed at the FPS.  
c) This initiative aims to majorly benefit a large number of migratory beneficiaries, mostly workers, 
labourers, daily wagers, etc. in both organized and un-organized sectors, who frequently change their 
place of dwelling in search of temporary employment across the country, who were traditionally deprived 
of their food-security entitlement in the event of migration outside their native place/village/town.  
d) The main enablers of this initiative are the installation of ePoS devices at the FPSs with 
biometric/Aadhaar authentication facilities and Aadhaar seeding of all beneficiaries with their ration cards. 
Thus, eligible migrant beneficiaries, if desire, may lift their quota of subsidised foodgrains in another 
State/UT by just providing either their ration card number or Aadhaar number to any FPS dealer, and the 
details of their available entitlements will be shown on that ePoS device and the beneficiary can lift 
desired quantity of available quota after biometric/ Aadhaar authentication on the ePoS device. 
e) This Department initially operationalised the facility as inter-State portability in 4 States of Andhra 
Pradesh & Telangana and Gujarat & Maharashtra w.e.f. August 2019. Four more States of Karna taka & 
Kerala and Haryana & Rajasthan also started inter-State portability w.e.f. October 2019 (clusters of two 
adjoining States each). Later, w.e.f. January 2020, with the integration of another 4 States of Goa, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Tripura the facility of “national portability” was seamlessl y enabled in a 
single national cluster of 12 States.  
f) Presently, the facility of national/inter-State portability is enabled in 24 States/UT, namely – Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Maharashtra, Odisha, Sikkim, Rajasthan, 
Punjab, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Nagaland and Manipur 
covering nearly 65 Crore beneficiaries (80% of total NFSA population) across 24 States/UT who now 
have an option to lift their entitled foodgrains from any FPS of their choice anywhere in these 24 
States/UT through One Nation One Ration Card plan. 
g) Further, constant efforts are being made by this Department to expand the reach of national portabilit y to 
the beneficiaries of remaining States/UTs also in association with respective State/UT. 
 
Food Corporation of India (a CPSE of this Department): 
 

159 
 
Movement of food grains during COVID-19 pandemic- FCI has moved large quantity of food grains despite 
inconveniences associated with the COVID-19 pandemic to reach food grains to deficit states to distribute 
among the needy. A total of 7812 rakes of food grains with approximate quantity of 218.74 LMT have been 
loaded from 24.03.2020 to 23.08.2020. 
 
Procurement of Food grains-  
1.  As on 24.08.2020, cumulative procurement of Wheat in RMS 2020-21 is 389.83 LMT whereas 
corresponding procurement during RMS 2019-20 was 347.90 LMT. Therefore, procurement of Wheat in 
current marketing season exceeds by 12.05% than the previous season in corresponding period. 
2. As on 24.08.2020, cumulative procurement of Paddy in terms of Rice in KMS 2019-20 is 509.53 LMT 
whereas corresponding procurement during KMS 2018-19 was 440.50 LMT. Therefore, procurement of Rice 
in current marketing season exceeds by 15.67% than the previous season in corresponding period. 
 
Permission to use Used Bags- In view of closure of Jute mills in the country due to Covid 19 pandemic 
and consequently the non-supply/unavailability of jute bags, this Department with a view to ensure 
smooth procurement operations by State Governments/FCI, as a one timemeasure,had approved the use 
of once Used gunny bags for packaging of Wheat and Rice supplied to central pool based on the 
proposals received from the State Governments. 
 
Permission to use Leftover New Bags- Permission was also granted to State Governments for using leftover 
new bags of previous seasons available with them in RMS 2020-21. 
 
Relaxation to use HDPE/PP Bags in place of Jute bags- As the Jute mills were not able to manufacture and 
supply gunny bags due to Covid-19 situation, dilution to use 7.01 lakh HDPE/PP bales (1bale=500 bags) in 
place of Jute bags was obtained from Ministry of Textiles so that uninterrupted procurement operations could 
be undertakenby States/FCI. 
 
Permission for Purchase of HDPE/PP bales through non-GeMportals- 
In view of the extra-ordinary situation arising out of the COVID-19 pandemic, DFPD as a one-tim e 
measure allowed purchase of HDPE/PP bags through competitive bidding and using any other 
Government portal or Government approved portal. Permission to State Governments w as granted for 
purchase of HDPE/PP bales through non-GeM portals upto 30.06.2020. 
Open Market Sale Scheme-  
DFPD has issued instruction to FCI for supply of foodgrains to all the charitable/non-govern mental 
organizations etc. engaged in relief operations/running community kitchens for migrant 
labourers/vulnerable groups due to the present lock down condition. These foodgrains w ould be 
supplied throughout the country at the uniform rate of Rs. 21 per Kilogram for wheat  and Rs.22 per 
Kilogram for rice. As initially the scheme was till June, 2020, it has been extended till March, 2021, at 
the same rate and terms and conditions.  
 
Central Warehousing Corporation (CPSE of this Department)
 
 
As on 22.08.2020, a quantity of 128.53 lakh MT foodgrains has been handled by 253 Central Warehouses 
across India. This includes a quantity of 28.84 lakh MT handled through 1846 Railway rakes at 127 Central 

160 
 
Warehouses during lockdown and unlock period till 22.08.2020. Under PMGKAY 
(PradhanMantriGareebKalyan Anna Yojana), a quantity of 26.01 lakh MT foodgrains have been distributed 
from Central Warehouses of CWC during lockdown period.   All 25 CFS/ICDs of CWC have been kept 
operational during lockdown and CWC has handled 219523 TEUs till 22.08.2020 thereby significantly 
contributing in decongesting gateway ports. 
All 37 Agri-warehouses of CWC in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana State have been got notified to function a s 
market place (Mandi) through respective State Governments. This has been implemented for the first time in 
the Country. These warehouses are WDRA registered and e-NWR are being / can be issued. Inte gration of e-
NWR with e-NAM are in place at aforesaid places for carrying out warehouse-based sales of Agri -
commodities.   