 
    
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
                                                                                                                                        
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HOME AFFAIRS 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 20 MARCH, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 20 MARCH, 2007) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2007/ PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA) 
                                    C O N T E N T S 
  
 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                            
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                              
                                                                       
3. REPORT                                                                                              
                 
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
  
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations on which the  
Committee does not desire to pursue the matter in view  
of the Government’s reply                                              
                         
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
  
  
∗4.        OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSION AT A GLANCE 
  
*5.       RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE                                                                                                        
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(Constituted on 5 August 2006) 
  
1. Smt. Sushma Swaraj                      - Chairperson
      
Page 1 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

______________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f 10th October 2006 vice Shri Rahul Gandhi who was nominated to Standing Committee on Hunan Resource    
   Development.                                                       
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri V. Narayanasamy    
3. Shri Rishang Keishing    
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan    
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia    
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra   
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
8. Shri N. Jothi   
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra    
10. Shri Sanjay Raut 
    
LOK SABHA 
  
11. Shri L.K. Advani   
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala   
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi   
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee    
15. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo  
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti   
17. Shri Tapir Gao   
18. Shri T.K. Hamza     
19. Shri Raghunath Jha   
20. Shri Naveen Jindal   
21. Shri Ajit Jogi   
22. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen   
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan   
24. Shri Sachin Pilot   
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan   
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy   
27. *Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan     
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh   
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh    
31. Shri Mohan Singh   
           
 SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary 
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer 
Page 2 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

INTRODUCTION 
            I, the Chairperson of the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to  submit the Report on it s behalf, do hereby present 
this One Hundred and Twenty Fourth Re port on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the One Hundred and Nineteenth Report on Demands fo r
Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
  
2.         The One Hundred and Nineteenth Repor t of the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajy a Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19
May 2006.  
  
3.         The Ministry of Home Affairs furn ished the Action Taken Repl ies on the One Hundred and
Nineteenth Report of the Commit tee on 18.08.2006.  On 22.08.2006 the Mini ster for Home Affairs laid
on the table of the Lok Sabha the status of implementation of reco mmendations contained in the said
report of the Committee pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s direction dated 24.09.2004.  
  
4.         The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 15
March 2007. 
  
5.         The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
                                                                                                         
                                                               
 
                                                                                    
  
REPORT 
  
  
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Take n by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its One Hundred and Nineteenth Repor t on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for the year 2006-07.  
  
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Report. Subsequently, the Minister for Home Affairs laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha
a statement on the status of implementation of recommendations contained in that Report. They have
been categorized as follows:  
  
(i)         Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 8.3,9.2, 10.5,13.3, 15.5, 15.6,15.7,16.4, 17.5, 17.10.0, 17.10.1, 17.14  
                        (Chapter-I) Total- 12 
  
New Delhi, 
15 March, 2007. 
SUSHMA SWARAJ  Chairperson, 
Department-relatedParliamentary  Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs 
Page 3 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

(ii)        Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to    
            pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
                                    Para Nos. 11.2 
                        (Chapter-II) Total- 1 
  
(iii)       Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the   
            Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
                        Para Nos. 12.2,14.2 
                        (Chapter-III) Total- 2 
CHAPTER I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
  
REVAMPING OF CIVIL DEFENCE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 8.3 
Civil Defence is an important and integral part of the defence of  the country. Particularly during
times of war Civil Defence Organi sation has a vital role in guard ing and protecting the people and
supporting civil administration. The Committee appreciates that National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) proposes to have relook at the sc heme of Revamping of Civil Defence and integrate
it into the National Disaster Management. The Committee agrees that Civil Defe nce is the right
organisation to be involved in Disa ster Management.  It however fe els that unduly long time has been
taken for revamping the Civil Defe nce System.  The Committee theref ore recommends that the issue
may be got cleared from the NDMA Committee and the Non-Plan Expenditure Committee and the final 
plan of action may be prepared for revamping the Civil Defence in th e shortest possible time schedule.
The Committee also recommends that funds for the scheme may be allocate d at RE 2006-07 stage an d 
the scheme may be implemented during the current financial year.  
  
ACTION TAKEN 
            The Ministry of Home Affairs accep ts the recommendation of the Committee to the extent that
there is a need to revamp the Civil Defence System at the earliest.  Once the NDMA Committee submits
its report/recommendations, appropriate proposals will be formulated and will be processed for approval
of the Government at the earliest.  However, to tal implementation of the scheme is proposed to be
completed in a period of 3 fiscal years. 
  
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN  
             
The matter is being pur sued with the NDMA Co mmittee for expediting its
report/recommendations so that th e scheme could be r ecast accordingly and processed for approval. 
Efforts will be made to obtain approval for the scheme and comm ence its implementation during the
current fiscal year.  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee urges upon the Ministry to get the matter cleared from NDMA Committee
and start implementin g the scheme in ri ght earnest durin g the first quarter of the ensuin g
financial year. 
  
Page 4 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

MODERNISATION OF FIRE SERVICES 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 9.2 
The Committee regrets that as in the case of th e scheme of Revamping of Civil Defence, the
scheme of Modernisation of Fire Se rvices too could not take off last year inspite of a provision of Rs.
134.26 crore in BE 2005-06. The Commit tee takes a serious view of th e fact that new schemes are 
initiated, allocations are made and they do not take  off due to procedural and administrative delays.
Although fire services in the c ountry are primarily the responsib ility of the States/Municipal
Committees/ Corporations, the services across th e country are abysmally below the International
Standards. The Committee desires that Modernisation of Fire Services which is a comprehensive scheme
should be equipped with modern  technology, gadgets and infrastr ucture.  The Committee while
expressing concern over delay of one year in implementing the scheme urges upon the Government to
get the scheme cleared in a definite time frame from NDM A and Planning Commission and make
necessary allocation at RE 2006-07 stage. The Committee also urges upon the Ministry to implement the 
scheme during the current fiscal year.              
  
ACTION TAKEN 
            The proposed scheme for Modernisation of Fire Services, formulated by the Ministry, is intended
as a one-time measure for financial assistance, in the form of gran ts in aid, to the States/UTs fo r
expansion, strengthening and modern ization of Fire Services upto a basic minimum level within a
definite time frame.  NDMA has seen and approve d the draft Scheme.  Under the proposed scheme, the
States/UTs are to contribute land for construction of  buildings for new Fire Stations and State Level
Training Institutes besides incu rring the recurring expenditure on payment of staff salary and
maintenance/up keep of buildings , vehicles and equipments afte r the scheme ge ts implemented. 
Provision of Rs. 134.26 crore was made  for the scheme on Non-Plan side  in BE 2005-06 in anticipation 
of final approval of the scheme so that implementation could immediately take  off.  However the
scheme could not be sanctioned during 2005-06.  The consent/confirmation of the States for discharging
their part of responsibility envisaged under the scheme is being obtained.  Once the consultation with the
States is completed, the Ministry will process the sc heme for approval of the competent authority at the
earliest.    
  
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN  
            Approval/clearance of the NDMA for th e draft scheme has been obta ined.  The States have been
asked to communicate their consent/concurrence for di scharging their part of responsibility under the
proposed scheme which includes provi sion of land for construction of buildings for new Fire Stations
and State-level Training Institutes besides incurring the recurring cost of staff salary and maintenance of
buildings, vehicles and equipments after completion of the implementation of the scheme.  The matter is
being pursued with the States. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            The Committee takes exception to th e fact that the consent/conf irmation of the States for
discharging their part of  responsibilit y envisa ged under the scheme is bein g obtained now. 
Discussions with all the State Governments should have been done at the draft stage itself before it
is finalized and approved b y NDMA.  The Committee also  takes a serious note of the fact that the
allocation was made in 2005-06 without makin g this exercise.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that an earl y confirmation from all the State Governments ma y be obtained and
Page 5 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

ensure that the scheme is implemented at the earliest. 
  
MODERNISATION OF PRISONS 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 10.5 
The Committee expresses its serious concern over th e laxity of some States in implementing the
scheme. Improving the conditions of prisons has been a widely disc ussed topic in the public domain. 
There is no two opinion that prisons  in the country need to be hum anized. Infrastructure and living
conditions inside the prisons ne ed to be improved. The present scheme of the Government, i f
implemented in the right earnest,  would go a long way in improving the conditions, if  not completely
change the face of the Prisons. Th e Committee would, theref ore, like the Ministry  of Home Affairs to
coordinate closely with the State Governments and impress upon them the need  for timely and effective
implementation of the scheme. Th e Committee recommends that th e additional allocation for the
purpose may be made at the RE stage.  The Committe e agrees that the scheme  needs to be extended fo r
two years, as desired by the Ministry so that the full amount of Rs.1800 crore is utilised.  
  
ACTION TAKEN                                                                                                                       
            The Ministry of Home Affairs is cl osely monitoring the scheme a nd coordinating with the State
Governments.  Review meetings ha ve been held from time to ti me and State Governments impressed
upon the need for timely and effec tive implementation of the Scheme.  Union Home Minister has also
written letters to Chief Ministers impressing upon the need for proper, timely and effective utilization of
funds allocated to them un der the scheme.  The concer ted efforts made by the Ministry have resulted in
considerable improvement in the pace of implem entation of the scheme.  During the year 2005-06, the 
State Governments were able to utilize Rs. 510 crore as against Rs. 156 crore only in 2004-05. 
  
            The Union Government has recen tly, by a Cabinet decision, extended the Scheme by anothe r
two years with effect fr om 1.4.2007 without affecting the total outl ay of Rs. 1800 crore with a view to
providing sufficient time to States to complete the works and fully utilize the allocations made to them. 
  
            The Budget Estimate for 2006-07 is  Rs. 180 crore out of which Rs. 114.838 crore has already 
been released to the States.  Considering the improve ment in the pace of im plementation of the scheme
by State Governments, it is likely that additional funds would be required at Revised Estimate stage. 
  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
             
The Committee hopes that after completion of the scheme conditions of jails in the country
would under go ma jor chan ges.  It is therefore imperative that the State Governments should
evince keen interest in the implementation of the scheme. 
  
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION OF KASHMIRI MIGRANTS  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 13.3         
The Committee regrets to observe that the Gove rnment is not serious in fully utilising the
amount allocated at BE stage for rehabilitati on of Jammu & Kashmir migrants. When Central
Government has made the allocation, State like J&K should have  come forward with the schemes fo r
utilising the mone y, particularly in view of its bein g a terrorist sava ged State. The Committee furthe r
Page 6 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

observes that the State Governme nt should not have a ny hesitation in form ulating the schemes
for which Central Government is prepared to allocate necessary funds.  The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its recommendation made in its 112 th Report (para 8.3, page 15) on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) that the full amount allocated for the reha bilitation schemes for the J&K migrants should be 
utilised. The Committee also urges upon the Government to impress upon the J&K Government to come
forward with schemes in time and implement them without delay. 
                                         
ACTION TAKEN 
  
            The State Government of J&K has be en requested to ensure that  reimbursement claims may be
preferred with due care to enable fu ll utilization of the funds by the end of the financial year.  The State
Government has also been requested to come fo rward with schemes in time and implement them
without delay so as to ensure full utilization of the expenditure within the financial year. 
             
            The State Government has introduce d double-shift system of work ing to overcome the limited 
working season available in the State.  MHA on it s part has provided advan ce Non-Plan Assistance o f 
Rs. 27 crore in May 2006 for meeti ng expenditure under ‘Relief and Reha bilitation’ Head of Security 
Related Expenditure (SRE) for the m onths of previous year for which claims have not been submitted
and for first quarter of this year (2006-07). 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
  
  
NAXALISM 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 15.5 
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the growing influence of naxalites all over the
country and feels that it is no more a law and order problem bu t poses a threat to internal security as is
evident from their declaration of Compact Revolutionary Zone or Re d Corridor from Nepal to Tamil
Nadu, almost a third of the country’s total area.                                                                                     
  
ACTION TAKEN 
             
Of the total 12476 police stations  in the country, naxal violen ce was reported from 509 police
stations in 11 States in 2005.  Available reports, however, suggest that CPI (Maoists) have been trying to
increase their influence and activity in parts of Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Uttr anchal and also
in new areas in some of the already affected States. 
  
            The Central Government accords a very  high priority to review a nd monitor the naxal situation
and the measures be ing taken by the States on both security and development fronts to control it. 
Several monitoring mechanis ms have been set up at the Centre to  do so.   These include a periodical
review by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) of the naxal situation, a Standing Committee of the
Chief Ministers of the naxal af fected States chaired by the Un ion Home Minister, Quarterly
Coordination Centre meetings chaired by the Union Home Secretar y with the Chief Se cretaries and the
Directors General of Poli ce of the affected States  and the monthly Task Fo rce meetings of Nodal
Officers of naxal affected States and Central agencies taken by Special Secretary (IS), MHA.  The States
have also been asked to hold a monthl y review b y the DGP and the bi-monthl y review b y the Chie f 
Page 7 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

Secretary of the naxal situation a nd the measures and strategies to  contain the naxa l problem on both
security and development fronts. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 15.6 
In this context, it would also be pertinent to mention here the Prime Minister’s observation in a 
meeting of the CMs of Naxal affected States held on 13th April, 2006 in New Delhi, that:  
“... It would not be an exaggeration to say that the problem of naxalism is the single 
biggest internal security challenge ever faced by our country...” 
 
ACTION TAKEN  
  
            In view of the naxal movement ch aracterized by growing militarisation, army style organization,
better trained cadres, attacks on large targets through large scale frontal assaults and better coordination,
the Prime Minister, wh ile addressing the 2 nd meeting of the Standing Comm ittee of Chief Ministers o f 
naxal affected States on 13.4.2006, inter-alia, observed that naxalism is  the single biggest internal
security challenge ever faced by the country. 
  
            The Central Government views the naxalite menace as an area  of serious concern.  The
Government remains firmly committed and determined to addressing the problem.  Essentially, the State
Governments would need to pursu e effective measures to furthe r improve ground level policing and
development response, besides count ering the negative propaganda unlea shed by naxalites, to contain
and control this menace.  The Ce ntral Government will continue to coordinate and supplement the
efforts and resources of the Stat e Governments on both s ecurity and developmen t fronts to meet the
challenge posed by naxalism. 
  
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
Para 15.7 
            There is, therefore, an urge nt need to curb the naxal activities with an iron hand an d
simultaneously address the associated economic problem.  There needs to be more seriousness in
implementing the programmes fo r developing the infrastructure in the affected districts; to improve the
economic conditions of the citizens; and winning back  the confidence of those,  who are alienated from
the mainstream of the society and aligning with the naxals.  The Comm ittee recounts that in its earlie r
reports, it had impressed upon the Mini stry to adopt a holis tic approach in tackling the naxal menace.
The Committee would once again like to  reiterate its recommendation to the
effect.                                                      
  
ACTION TAKEN  
             
            The Central Government remains firm  and fully determined not to  tolerate naxal violence and
decisively deal with it.  The G overnment has been pursuing a mul ti-pronged approach to address the 
problem on political, security and development fronts in a holistic and coordinated manner.  The Central
Government has taken the following measures in this regard: 
  
--         Financial Assistance to the aff ected States under the Poli ce Modernisation (PM) and 
Security Related Expenditure (SRE) Schemes. 
--         Comprehensively revised SRE Scheme extended for another 5 years beyond 31.3.2006. 
            --         Deployment of adequate Central Para Military Forces on no cost basis. 
            --         Additional  India Reserve (IR) Bns sanctioned to naxal affected States and   
Page 8 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

                        the States   advised   to recruit maximum persons from   the naxal affected    
                        areas. 
            --         Supply of mine protected vehicles (MPVs) to neutralize IEDs/Landmine   
blasts. 
--         Need based air support to naxal affected States for evac uation of casualities and 
movement of security personnel for anti-naxal operations. 
--         Formulation and implementati on of a Standard Operat ing Procedure (SOP) fo r 
conducting intelligence driven inter-State jo int operations against naxalites and thei r
infrastructure. 
--         Strengthening of intelligence set up in the States and str eamlining sharing/collection 
mechanism. 
--         40% recruitment in Central Para-Military Froces from the border areas and areas affected
by militancy or naxalism to wean away the potential youth from the path of naxalism. 
--         States asked to undertake special recr uitment drives to fill up va cancies in police stations 
in the naxal affected areas. 
--         States asked to undertake special recr uitment drives to fill up va cancies in police stations 
in the naxal affected areas. 
--         Deployment of SSB along the Indo-Nepal Border. 
--         Financial assistance of Rs. 2475 cror e for 55 naxal affected dist ricts in 9 States under the 
Backward Districts Initiative (BDI) comp onent of the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana
(RSVY). 
--         More districts affected by naxal influence/activity have been proposed for inclusion under 
the Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) Scheme. 
  
--         The affected States have been asked to: 
(i)         ensure effective implementati on of land reforms and the Panchayats (Extension
to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA) a nd formulation of resettlement and
rehabilitation(RR) policy for displaced tribals.  
(ii)                Set-up and improve delivery systems for people centric developmental activities 
in the naxal affected districts. 
(iii)               To ensure full and effective utilizati on of funds under va rious developmental 
schemes such as Bharat Nirman, BDI,  National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme, PMGSY etc. 
(iv)              To formulate effective Surrender and Rehabilitation Policy. 
(v)                Organise programmes through mass medi a to counter the naxal propaganda an d
highlight the misdeeds of naxalites a nd create awareness among masses about the
futility of their ideology of violence and armed struggle. 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            The Committee notes the response of the Ministr y.  It would like to impress upon the
Ministry and all the concerned au thorities to effectivel y monitor the scheme s.  The Committee
desires that an ef fective monitoring mechanism needs to be set up in the Ministr y so that there is
no laxity in implementation of the schemes. 
  
MODERNISATION OF POLICE FORCES  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 16.4 
Page 9 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

The Committee is constrained to learn that the scheme of such  a magnitude and importance has
not been implemented in the Union Territories though it has been  implemented in the States.   The
Committee feels that the scheme   should have been taken up on a priority basis and the proposed
allocation could have been made  a part of the budgeta ry provision of 2006- 07, if the necessary 
processing was done well in time.  The Committee hopes that necessary allocation would be made at RE
stage in 2006-07 and the scheme would take off in the current financial year. 
  
ACTION TAKEN  
  
The proposal for introduction of the Scheme for M odernization of Police Forces in the Union
Territories was approved by the Cabinet only on 23 rd February 2006 and by that time budget provisions 
for 2006-07 had already been finalized.  However, n ecessary action is being taken to provide require d
provision in the supplementary grants during 2006-07. 
            In the meanwhile, all the UTs were  asked to prepare Annual Acti on Plans for 2006-07 and these 
plans have been scrutinized and changes have been suggested. 
            The total outlay of the Police Mode rnisation Scheme for UTs for five years is Rs. 884 crore
(Non-plan).  UT-wise allocation is indicated below: 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            The Committees notes the response of the Ministr y.  It would like to be apprised of the
mechanism in the Ministr y to oversee the implem entation of the Scheme and the status o f
utilization of the allocated amount by each UT.  
  
DELHI POLICE  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 17.5 
The Committee while appreciating the effort s being made by Delhi Police to improve its
functioning and also to improve its image, feels that there is still a lot of room for improvement.  The
Committee recommends that Delhi Police should conduct a survey on the perception of the people about
it.   Senior officers should undert ake surprise and disguised visits to police stations and deploy decoy
complainants and observe the behaviour of the pers onnel there.  It will give Delhi Police important
inputs about effectiveness of  its various steps at the ground level, trying to imp rove its functioning and
its interface with the public.   
  
ACTION TAKEN                                                                                                                  
            The Ministry of Home Affairs had advised Delhi Police to conduct a survey to know the
perception of the people as reco mmended by the Committee. Delhi Police has intimated that it has
requested BPR&D to conduct a survey to know the perception of the people about Delhi Police. 
            In the meanwhile, Delhi Police has taken various ste ps to im prove policing and police-public 
Sl. No. Name of UTs Allocation (Rs. in crore)
I Delhi 612.00
II Pondicherr
y   66.00
III Lakshadwee p  16.5
IV Chandi garh    7.0
V Andaman & Nicobar Islands 134.00
VI Daman & Diu  22.5
VII Dadra & Na
gar Haveli  26.00
  Total  884.00
Page 10 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

relations at ground level.  These include laying emphasis on fair a nd free registration of complaints;
installation of CCTV ca meras at police stations; setting up of reception desks at every police station;
deployment of police officers to atte nd to complaints; ensuring availability  of officers at  districts, sub-
divisions and police stations fo r public hearing; taking up a la rge number of Community Policing
Programmes in all the districts,  such as Neighbourhood Watch Scheme , Aman Committee, Police Post
“Dost”, Community Liaison Groups, Godhull, Abhaas, Akash, Nidar, etc. 
  
            Delhi Police has also launched a new sc heme ‘Parivartan’ to provide safe an d free environment 
to women/girl children in densely populated areas which are prone to  violence against women in North-
West District, North-East District, South-West District and West District. 
  
            A Vigilance Branch headed by DCP has been functioning in  the Police Headquarters fo r
prevention and detection of corrupt ion or other malpractices on the part of police officers including
brutality, torture, misbehaviour, wrong filing of cases et c.  Public Grievances Cells have been set up in
all Police Districts including Crime & Railways, Traffic and IGI Airport. 
  
            On an average, ten police stations are being checked by the officer s of Vigilance Branch in a
week. During checking, a decoy complainant is sent to reporting room of police station to lodge a
complaint about a cognizable offence and the behaviour of the police personnel on duty is watched. 
  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
             The Committee would like to be inform ed of the status of the BPR&D surve y. In case the
survey has been completed and findin gs submitted to Government, th e salient points thereof ma y
be communicated to the Committee alongwith action proposed to be taken thereon.  
  
CRIME AGAINST WOMEN  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 17.10.0 
The way crime is perpetrated against women in Delhi and the feeling th at women are not safe
and secure in the National Capita l Region do not give a positive picture about  the National Capital
Territory (NCT) of Delhi to the rest of the world. Th is perception wi ll have a negative impact on the
women tourists visiting India.  The Committee feels th at the crime against women seems to have
acquired serious proportions and is anguished to note that all efforts ma de in this regard by Delhi Police
have failed to bring substantial ch ange in the situation.  It is lega lly as well as morally binding upon the
law enforcement agency to make sincere efforts in nabbing the perpetrators of crime against women and
see to it that punishment is handed down in such a way as to set an example to deter potential offenders. 
The Committee is of the view that the lackluster style of functioning of th e police force is greatly
responsible for not instilling a se nse of security and confidence amongst the women in Delhi. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate women police pers onnel should be deployed in police
stations and at other places considered vulnerable for women. Investigation of cases of crime against
women should be completed within a definite time frame so that convi ction of the delinquent is secured
without losing time. The Committee also recommends that Delhi Police should launch a drive to educate
women in self-defence through posters and pamphl ets and also launch aw areness campaigns amongst 
women about their proactive approach in dealing with the cases of  atrocities committed against them.  
The Committee further recommends that Delhi Police should address this issue with utmost sincerity
and honesty by adopting all necessary measures.                 
ACTION TAKEN 
Page 11 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

  
 Delhi Police has taken safety of women as a priority area and launched new schemes for helping
women in distress.  Efforts have been made to reach out to women whenever and wherever they are in
need to provide assistance at their doorsteps. 
  
            Presently, three police stations in  Delhi, namely, Roop Nagar, Lodhi Colony and Shastri Par k
(Metro) have women Inspectors as  SHOs.  Moreover, 10 women Inspec tors have been posted as Addl.
SHOs.  257 W/SIs/ASIs and 887 W/HC s/Cts. have been posted in di stricts for investigation, duty
officer, beat officer and on other duties.  Crim e Against Women cells are functioning in all the nine
districts of Delhi Police.  Wome n police personnel have been deploye d in PCR Vans ne ar girl schools,
colleges and slums.  Women police personnel have also been deployed in Tourist Police Vans which
exclusively cover tourist locations in Delhi.  Recently, the Governme nt has conveyed its sanction to the
conversion of 700 posts of male Constables (Executive) into t hose of Women Constables in Delhi
Police.  This will further strengthen Delhi Police in tackling the problem of crime against women. 
  
            There are a few Police Stations i. e., Sultan Puri, Uttam Nagar, Nand Nagari, Dabri, Samaypu r
Badli, Gokul Puri, Mangol Puri, Najafgarh, Nangloi, Bhajan Pura and Seema Puri where the incidents of
rape cases are slightly more.  Th e composition of populat ion, social economic st rata, large families,
small dwelling units, unhygienic living conditions a nd large migrated population settled in these
colonies are the factors responsible for slightly higher rate of crime including rape cases. 
  
            Investigation of woman related cases are give n top priority and all efforts are made to complete
investigations and file challans in a time bound manner.  Whenever the accused is in custody, efforts are
made to complete investigation within 60 to 90 days .  In all other cases, effo rts are made to complete
investigation expeditiously. 
  
            Special attention is being paid to crime against women and top prio rity is given to crimes like
rape, molestation and kidnapping.  A study of victims a nd accused profile over the years reveals that the
rape was committed by strangers in only 2.58% cases in 2005, 4.36% cases in 2004, 6.94% cases in
2003, 11.91% cases in 2002.  This is on account of higher transparency and awakening on the part of the
women and confidence of their guardi ans in the law enforcement agency.  It would be evident from the
above details that 97.42% of cases  are those where perpetrators were known to the victims and had been
interacting with them in normal c ourse of life whereas about 2.58% of  cases are those, where the victim
had not known the perpetrator.  On ly a portion of this, 2.5%  cases are preventable by police vigilance. 
In the remaining cases, social aw areness and education in families,  schools and colleges would help to
improve the attitude of society towards women. 
  
            The steps taken by Delhi police to prevent crime against women are indicated below: 
  
a.         Crime Against Women Cell: 
  
            Apart from a centralized Crime Against Women Cell at Nana k Pura, Crime Against Women
Cells have been established in al l the 9 police districts to investig ate the complaints of matrimonial
discord, harassment, cruelty and sexual harassment.   The CWC, Nanakpura ha s been strengthened by
posting of DCP, Addl. DCP and AC sP to further improve the qual ity  of enquiry and level o f
supervision. 
  
b.         Crisis intervention Centres: 
             
            In all districts, Rape Crisis Intervention Centres have been established to deal more
professionally with the rape and sex abuse cases.  Durin g investigation, help of NGOs and professionals
Page 12 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

such as social workers, doctors, psychologists, lawyers, prosecutor s and special counselors is taken. 
Special measures are taken so that trauma of wo men victim is reduced.  The women victims can also
call the police to attend to her complaint at any place of her choice. 
  
c.         Investigation: 
  
            All cases of rapes and other relate d crimes are either  investigated by Wo men Police Officers o r
Women Police Officers are associated with the Investigating Officers of such cases. 
  
d.         Constitution of Special Session Courts with female Judges: 
  
            On the request of Delhi Police, th ree Special Session Courts with  female Judges as presiding
officers were constituted by the High Court and are helped by three female prosecutors to try fresh cases
of rape since 1st April, 2003. 
  
e.         Preventive Measures: 
  
(i)         A lady police constable has been  added to the PCR Vans patrolling the prominent
women colleges to facilitate the women complainant during crucial hours. 
(ii)                In Prominent women colleges, “Security Re view Committees” ha ve been constitute d 
with Police Officer as its Member.  This Committee shall inspect the existing security
situation both inside and outside the colleg e and would suggest on the security needs to
make the campus incident free. 
(iii)               A “New Contact Programme” ha s been launched in all the Districts to contact the
teaching faculty and students of  women colleges.  This cont act shall be at the level o f
DCPs and other Senior Officers, who interact  with the teaching faculty and the students
on the issues relating to Crime Against Women and how to handle them. 
(iv)              Campus complaint boxes have b een located in Universities  in consultation with the
educational authorities and student leader s in North and South Campuses of Delhi
University, Jawahar Lal Nehru University and Jamia Millia University. 
(v)                A proactive step in training young women pa rticularly college going girls in self-
defence has been taken. 
(vi)              Plain-clothes police staff have been posted at vulne rable places in the city to curb eve-
teasing and molestation, to k eep surveillance on criminals and take action against such
persons.  Similarly, surprise checking of th e buses has been initiated on sensitive and
vulnerable routes to check the incidents of eve-teasing and pick-pocketing. 
(vii)             Educative literature and pamphlets containing Dos and Don’ts and self-defence tips and 
a booklet on the safety of women titled “Apni Hifazat Apne Aap” ha ve been prepared 
and circulated to girls in women colleges.  Women Help Line numbers have been painted
inside DTC buses to help lady commuters in case of any problem. 
(viii)           Instructions have been issued to all poli ce officers to deal with the women and thei r
problems with due regard and respect to the honour and dign ity of the women.  Keeping
in view the sensitivity of the issues related to women, the name and address of the victim
or informer is kept confidential. 
(ix)              A Women Help Line with toll fr ee No. 1091 and other Nos. 23411091 and 23317004
with hunting lines have been st arted in the Police Control R oom to attend to the distress
calls from women and also to guide them in such situati on.  Specially trained women
officers have been deputed on the Women Help Line for this. 
(x)                A round the clock, “Women Mobile Team” has been constituted to attend to urgent & 
serious distress/emergency calls from women. 
(xi)              Gender sensitization courses are being conducted in Units and Districts. 
Page 13 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

(xii)             Sensitization of the force towards problem of  the women in day-to-day life and also 
about crime against women. 
(xiii)           Police Staff at all levels ar e regularly briefed to take prompt and effective action 
whenever any complaint is received regarding crime against women. 
(xiv)           Extra staff has been deploye d at the girls/women instit utions to keep watch on
suspicious persons and to give sense of security.  Police ha d undertaken an Anti-Ragging 
(Anti Eve-Teasing) campaign through the Press.  Advertisements were released and some 
leaflets were also distributed. 
(xv)            Delhi Police has taken medi a campaign on regular basis to inform general public and 
women in particular about the existing f acilities/services provided to help women. 
Educative and informative materi al is distributed amongst al l sections of the society fo r
legal awareness. 
(xvi)         Recently a new scheme called Parivartan has been launched.  It is a pioneering effort in 
the history of Delhi Police to provide a safe and free environment to women/girl children
in densely populated areas prone  to violence against women.  It has bene introduced in
the areas of Police Station: Roop Nagar, Maurice Nagar, Sultan Puri, Mangol Puri,
Jahangir Puri, Samaypur Badli, Mukherjee Naga r, Model Town, Asho k Vihar, Saraswati
Vihar, Adarsh Nagar, Rohini , Shalimar Bagh and Bawana.  The beats in these areas are
covered by women police officer s also.  Women police officer s supervise and patrol the
beats and prevent crime against members of their own sex.  Women beat constables help
women facing any kind of problem.  The pr oject has received a good response from the
public and there has been decl ine in the number of complain ts of violent crime against
women in the area. 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 17.10.1    
The Committee is also given to understand that a large number of wome n are working in Call
Centers in NCR and travel long dist ance from their place of residence to their place of work at odd
hours.  Cases of rapes and atrocities on such wome n employees have been reported from certain places. 
The Committee, therefore, desire s that Delhi Police should take al l precautionary measures to ensure
that such incidents do not happen in  NCT of Delhi. The Committee also  feels that there is a need fo r
gender sensitization among Delhi Poli ce personnel and all efforts may be made for ensuring attitudinal
change amongst Delhi Police personnel.  
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
            Delhi Police has taken the following me asures in connection with sa fety and security of women
during transportation, to and from office, at odd hours in Call Centers in Delhi: 
  
a.         All PCR Vans are covering the Call  Centers and Women Hostel s in their respective beat
areas by patrolling. 
b.         A toll free Women Help Line N o. 1091 is functioning round the clock in Central Police
Control Room.  Specially  trained policewomen are handl ing women related complaints
apart from sending PCR vans, local police and mobile women vans of PCR. 
c.         Local police is interacting with th e Call Centre Employers with a view to sensitizing
them about various precautions which need to be taken by them including verification of
drivers, asking them to drop the female empl oyees right at their door  steps, driving only
on main roads and not through deserted lanes etc.  Literature on DO’s and DON’Ts was 
made available to them. 
d.         Roads which are normall y used b y such em ployees are covered throu gh Motor C ycles
Page 14 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

and PCR vans in addition to deployment of pickets. 
e.         CAW Cell Nanakpura has started a training programme for gender sensitization of SHOs
and Addl. SHOs.  This exercise is aime d at improving police re sponse towards women
victims.  The gender sensiti zation training is going to be  a year long exercise.  A
workshop was also organized on Inte rnational Women’s Day i.e. on 8 th March, 2006 fo r 
Inquiry and Investigating officers of the CAW Cell to sensitize them. 
  
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
            The Ministry of Home Affairs had advised Delhi Police to take follow-up action on the 
recommendation of the Committee for the security of girls/women working in call centres in NCR. 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
         The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and reiterates that the initiatives taken by the
Delhi Police need to be pursued in the ri ght earnest and on a continuous  basis.  There should not
be an y complacenc y. The Committee also desire s that a separate cell ma y be set up in the
Headquarters of Delhi Police to monitor the implementation of all the measures enumerated. 
  
HOUSING 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
Para 17.14 
The Committee feels that proper housing facilities for police personnel particularly at the level of
Constable and Head Constable will go a long way in improving their efficiency particularly their attitude
and behaviour.  The Committee expr esses its deep anguish over the laxity shown by Delhi Police in
improving the satisfaction level in the housing of Delh i Police personnel particul arly at lower level. 
Inspite of serious concern expre ssed by the Committee in the earlier years and recommendations made
for improvement, there is no percep tible change in the situation.  Housing is one of the basic
requirements, particularly for people working in an organisation like Delhi Police and it should be made
available to the extent possible.  The Committee also expresses its concern that inspite of facing problem
from several fronts in meeting the housing requirement  they have not been able to set up the Delhi
Police Housing Corporation.  Housing Corporation will be an important step in the direction of solving
the problem and the Committee stro ngly recommends that it may be  established dur ing the current
financial year. The allocation made for housing in the current year i.e. Rs.55 crore may be fully utilized
in the construction and purchase of housing units.  The Committee is happy to learn that Rs. 100 crore
are going to be made available ev ery year for housing of Delhi Poli ce personnel from out of the new
scheme likely to be launched i.e. Modernisation of Police Forces in UTs.  The alloca tion could not be
made for this scheme at  BE 2006-07 due to procedural delay a nd the Committee has already made its 
observation in para 16.4 supra.  Since the scheme has already been approved, the Committee desires that
allocation may be made for the sche me and Delhi Police may finalise it s proposal for utilisation  of the
amount likely to be made available to it.         
  
ACTION TAKEN 
            Delhi Police has been allocated Rs. 55 crore under the head “H ousing” in its regular budget 
during the current financial year.  Out of this, a sum of Rs. 15.08 cr ore has been spent up to May, 2006.
 Delhi Police proposes to spend their remaining Rs .39.92 crore during the remaining part of the year on
the projects as indicated below: 
  
Page 15 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

 Name of the project Amount to be 
utilized (Rs. in 
lakh)
Page 16 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

  
It will be seen from the above th at the entire sum of Rs. 55 crore ar e likely to be utilized by the
end of the financial year.   
  
The Government have recently i ssued sanction for introduction of  Police Modernisation Scheme
in UTs.  A sum of Rs. 100 crore is proposed to be allocated to Delhi Police under the head “Housing” 
under the scheme.  Delhi Police has intimated that utilization of th e amount to be allocated under the
Police Modernisation Scheme during the current fi nancial year depends on availability of land and
ready-built flats.  Delhi Police is vigorously pursuing the matter  with DDA and other land-owning 
agencies to get ready-built flats/land. 
  
As regards setting up of Polic e Housing Corporation, the Govern ment, with the approval of the
Union Cabinet, has issued sanction vide MHA’s letter No. 14014/02/05-UTP dated 10.7.2006 for setting 
up a Police Housing Corporation for Delhi Police.  The proposed Corpor ation will be registered as a
company.  It will have an authorized  capital of Rs. 10 crore.  Initially, the subscribed capital will be Rs.
5 crore. 
  
The Composition of the Board of Directors will be as follows: 
  
(i)         Commissioner of Police – Ex-officio Chairman 
(ii)
                Joint Commissioner of Police, Delhi – Managing Director 
(iii)               One Representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs – Director 
(iv)              One Representative of Government of NCT of Delhi – Director 
(v)                One Representative of Ministry of Urban Development – Director 
(vi)              One Representative of DDA – Director 
  
The Corporation will have a few core staff in permanent positions.  Besides the Managing Director, who
will be an IPS Officer of AGMU  Cadre of the IG rank, there should be a Supe rintending Engineer, one
Executive Engineer and two Assi stant Executive Engineers from  CPWD and One General Manage r
(Finance) on deputation.  The tota l supporting officer staff should not be more than 10 including
personal staff.  The technical staf f required for supervising execution of works will be on project based
contract assignments.  This kind of pattern is proposed with a view to  reduce the establishment cost and
to keep the long term liabilities to  the minimum.  Such pattern has been adopted by the well-performing 
Police Housing Corporations. 
S. 
NO. 
A Police Housing at Secretariat 16-B, Dwarka by RITS (Type II: 
180, Type III: 144, Type IV: 16 & Type V: 2) Total : 342 Flats 
1500.00 
  
B Police Housing at Mandoli (Type  II: 120, Type III: 360, Type 
IV: 60) Total : 540 Flats   
  200.00 
C Boundar y wall for the land measuring 333.09 acres at Wazirabad   800.00 
D Ma jor/Special repair/EOR   200.00 
E Purchase of Ready Built Flats subj ect to allotment of the same by 
DDA or any other agency.  Howeve r, at present  no agency has 
offered any flat except RBI. But rates offered by the RBI is very 
high i.e. Rs. 113.75 crore for 208 quarters.  CPWD has valued 
the price of these flats at Rs. 7.44 crore.  MHA has taken up the 
matter with Secretar y (Banking), Ministry of Finance, Jeevan 
Deep Building, Parliame nt Street for negotia ted settlement at a 
reasonable price.  Decision awaited.
1291.60 
  Total  3991.60 
Page 17 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

  
            The equity contribution of Rs. 5 cror e will be made from the no n-plan budget provision of Delhi 
Police for 2006-07. 
  
            Delhi Police has initiated action fo r setting up of the Corporati on in accordance with the
Government decision. 
  
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN  
  
            The Ministry of Home Affairs had issued sanction, with the approval of the Union Cabinet, to set
up a Police Housing Corporation fo r Delhi Police.  The Ministry  is monitoring the progress o f
expenditure on housing projects to ensure utilization of funds allocated for the purpose.  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            According sanction for setting up Housing Corporation for Delhi Police by the Union 
Cabinet is not sufficient.  The Ministr y should ensure that th e Corporation is set up
immediately.        The Committee desires that the Corporation should start functionin g at least in
2007-08. The Committee would also like to be  informed of the status of housin g pro jects at
Dwarka and Mandoli and about the purchase of ready-built flats  from RBI. 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (BTC) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 11.2 
The allocation of Rs. 100 crore made for the development of BTC is a separate package
announced by the Government of India as per the agreement.  Bu t the Committee is not in agreement
with the practice of making this pr ovision out of the allocation made to Non Lapsable Central Pool o f
Resources. NLCPR being an accumulation of unspent balance of the 10% earma rked in the Budget by
various Ministries/Departments, is  primarily a development fund; us ing it for other schemes is a
negation of the rationale behind the creation of the Fund. NLCPR has a very li mited reserve and if this
Rs. 100 crore is provided out of this Fund for BTC, the fund would get deplete d.  The Committee feels
that the NLCPR being a fund for development of No rth East States, should be  used for the purpose fo r
which it is created.  The Ministry  of Home Affairs may therefore d ecide on allocation of Rs.100 crore
for BTC out of their resources.     
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
            Planning Commission was requested to consider the matter in consultation with the Ministry o f
Finance.  The Ministry of Finan ce has advised the Ministry of De velopment of North Eastern Region
that Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) should pr ovide Rs. 100/- crore for BTC from its Budget.  
Possibilities are being explored for arranging Rs . 100/- crore under the budget of MHA in the current 
financial year. 
  
Page 18 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

FURTHER ACTION TAKEN  
  
            On reconsideration, it has been deci ded that the special package for BTC would continue to be
with the Ministry of Developmen t of North-Eastern Region (DoNER ) and necessary funds for this 
purpose may be provided in the budget of Ministry  of DoNER outside non-lapsable central pool o f 
resources. 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee notes the reply. 
CHAPTER III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
PENSIONARY BENEFITS TO CPO PERSONNEL 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
Para 12.2 
The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why the Ministry of Finance is not acceding to the
request of the Ministry of Home Affairs for continuing the same pens ionary benefits to Central Police
Organisations (CPOs) as is applicable to the Ar my personnel.  The duties performed by most of the
CPOs’ personnel are, more or less, similar to that of the Army.  The Committee, therefore, endorses the
proposal of the Ministry of Home Affairs for continuance of the pens ionary benefits to the personnel o f
Central Police Organisations (CPOs) as in case of the Army personnel.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may once again take up the matter with the Ministry o f
Finance and that Ministry may favourably consider the proposal at the earliest.   
   
ACTION TAKEN 
            The Ministry took up the matter with Ministry of Finance for exem ption of Central Paramilitary
Force personnel from the purview of  New Pension Scheme.  However,  on re-examination of the matte r
it is felt that the VII Schedule to the Consti tution does not make any di stinction am ong the ‘Arme d 
Forces of the Union’.  He nce, there was no necessity for any clarification from Ministry of Finance.  
Therefore, with the approval of Ho me Minister, earlier re ferences have been withdrawn and it has been
decided that CPF personnel recr uited after 01/01/2004 onwards wi ll be governed by CCS (Pension)
Rules 1972. 
  
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
  
            In this regard, the Ministry of Fi nance stated that New Pension Scheme was implemented with
approval of Cabinet.  Therefore,  Ministry of Home Affairs may take up the matter with Cabinet fo r
consideration. 
  
            Accordingly, matter will be placed before the Cabinet for consideration.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            The Committee is disturbed over the fact that Government is dra gging its feet in the
matter.  It stron gly reiterates that the personnel of Central Paramilitar y Forces recruited after
Page 19 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

1.1.04 should be governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.  
  
  
MULTIPURPOSE NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS SCHEME 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 14.2 
The importance of the Mulit-purpose National Iden tity Card Scheme (MNI Cs) in a country like
India with thousands of kilometres of porous International Border and with the large pr esence of illegal
immigrants posing a grave threat to  the internal security, need not be overemphasized.  The Committee
is, however, disappointed at the pace of implementation of the pilot pr oject.  If the pilot project itself is
taking such a long time, preparation of MNICs for al l the citizens may take se veral more years.  The
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to accord high priori ty to the Scheme and accelerate
completion of the Pilot Project wi thin a specific time frame rather than dragging it endlessly.  The
Committee is confident that based on the experience gathered in the implementation of the Pilot Scheme
for the last two and a half years,  the Government would be in a position to evolve time bound action
plan for implementation of the scheme at the national level. 
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
The pilot project was initiated in  November 2003 to be completed in one year.  However, actual
implementation has taken far longer due to difficulties encountered at almost each and every stage due
to following reasons: 
  
(a)
                this is the first time that such a project has been undertaken in the country. 
(b)               no precedent is available for such a comp lex project involving both processes an d
technology.   
(c)                unavailability of data entry operators in regional languages. 
(d)               difficulties in capturing of photographs and finger biometrics, specially for persons who
stay outside for employment, study etc. 
(e)                power was not available. Diesel Generator sets were to be arranged from far off places. 
(f)                 validation of individual data for correct spellings of names and other attributes. 
(g)                very cumbersome and tedious process of verifica tion of citizenship;  individuals were 
not found at their place of residence. 
(h)                weak document base for determ ining citizenship of individua ls in rural areas, specially
for agricultural labourers, landless labourers, married females etc.  
(i)                  unavailability of officials from State Government for this work. 
  
Following has been the physical and financial progress of the Project so far: 
  
(a)        Out of the tota l Budget of Rs. 19.89 crore allocated  during the financial year 2005-2006, 
total expenditure of Rs. 3.39 crore was incurred.  The ma jor expenditure would be on
identity (smart)cards which would be in curred after the cards are prepared and
distributed.  This is expected to be done in the current year i.e. 2006-2007. 
(b)        Steps are underway for completion of  the pilot projec t without delay.  The progress on
different items of work relating to Pilot Pr oject on Multi-purpose National identity Cards 
has been as follows:- 
             
(i)         Field data collection thr ough house-to-house enumeratio n of specified items o f 
information  of each individual for preparation of population register – completed.
(ii)                Data entry in electronic format—completed.
Page 20 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm

(iii)               Verification of Citizenshi p Status by verification team - 98.32% (Except in 
Assam). 
(iv)              Data correction – 98.22%. 
(v)                Verification of evidences for citizenship from official records and preparation of
eligibility report on citizenship status by Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) - 89%. 
(vi)              Declaration of citizenship by Sub Distri ct Registrar of Citizen Registration
(SDRCR) - 83% (under progress) 
  
(c)                Technical issues 
  
The production and distribution of identity (smart ) cards will be done through the consortium o f
Central Public Sector Undertaki ngs (CPSUs) which has gi ven their proposal.  The revised estimates fo r
the Pilot Project have been prep ared based on this and are awaiti ng approval of the Committee on Non-
plan Expenditure (CNE). 
  
            The Hardware/Software for the MNIC centers have been installed in all the centers.  Database of
Population Register have been load ed in 19 MNIC Centres.  Integrat ion of software prepared by BEL
and NIC has been completed and loaded at all 19 MNIC centers.  Networking and linking of the MNIC
Centre with RGI office has been done through BSNL except at two cen ters of J&K and one centre at
Nautanwa, UP.  The software for counter operation for addition/deletion thr ough births & deaths and
change in names, addresses, marital status etc. has been developed and tested. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
            The Committee notes the pro gress made in the pilot pro ject of MNIC.  However, the
Committee feels that  much more pro gress was expected on the pro ject. Now that the networkin g
and linking of MNIC Centres with RGI Office has been done and that the software also developed
there should not be an y more scope for dela y in completion of the pro ject.  The Committee hopes
that the pilot project would be completed during 2007-2008.   
  
  
  
**** 
  
 
∗  To be appended at printing stage. 
Page 21 of 21STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/124threport.htm