.. 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL, 1995 
(Presented on 22nd May, 1995) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 1995/ Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka) 
C.S. (H.A.)--25 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ..........•..................•...............•.•..•.• 
2. REPORT ............•...•...•...•........•.......•...•...•............••.•.................... 
3. AMENDMENWSUGGESTIONS GIVEN BY THE MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(APPENDIX) •...•.•••••.......•.....•••.•.•••••.....•••••....•....•••••.•...•.•..•...•....... 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE •.•.•................ 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
1-4 
5-10 
11-13 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devsbank er Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raaj Babbar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
15. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
19. Prof. M. Kamson 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Sivgh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. &hri Prem Chand Ram 

43. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R. C. Sope111a, Director 
(ii) 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 

1 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee, present this Eighteenth Report relating to the Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 
1995•. The Bill seeks to make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping with 
terrorist and disruptive activities and to supplement the criminal law. 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred .. the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha on the 18th May, 1995 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and 
report within two days. 
3. Accordingly, the Committee considered the Bill in its meeting held on the 19th May, 
1995 and also heard the Home Secretary. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report in its meeting held on the 22nd 
May, 1995. 
5. Some Members of the Committee gave amendments/suggestions on the Bill which 
are appended to the report. 
6. In his presentation, the Home Secretary stated that the following provisions under 
TADA which were either misused or had the potential of being misused are proposed to be 
dropped in the new legislation:-
(i) Section 5 of TADA Act makes unauthorised possession~f arms in a notified area 
an offence. The Arms Act provides for deterrent punishment for possession of 
certain classes of unauthorised arms. Therefore, there is no need to repeat the 
provision in the new legislation. 
(ii) Section 15 of T ADA Act provides that confessions made to a police officer are 
admissible in evidence. This is against the grain of the normal provision of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 whereunder statements made to the police are not 
admissible as evidence. 
(iii) Section 21(1)(c) and (d) lays down certain presumptions relating to confessions. 
This section provides that if it is proved that one of the accused makes a confession 
that the other has committed the offence, it shall be presumed that the other 
(accused) has committed the offence. It also provides that if it is proved that an 
accused has made a confession to any person other than a police officer, it shall be 
presumed that he has committed such an offence. 
(iv) Section 20(8)(b) provides that a court shall not grant bail unless it is satisfied that 
•Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part-11, Section 2, dated the 18th May, 1995. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, dated the 18th May, 1995. 

there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty Of an 
offence under T ADA. This provision made it extremely difficult to obtain bail in 
TADA cases. 
The Home Secretary also enumerated the following safeguards in the proposed 
legislation to check its abuse:-
(i) Presently under TADA Act an appeal from the designated court lies to the 
Supreme Court. It has been argued that under Indian conditions , with prevailing 
poverty, it is difficult for poor people to approach straightaway the Supreme Court . 
In the new legislation, an appeal has, therefore, been provided to the High Court . 
(ii) As suggested by the Supreme Court, a provision has been made -that investigation 
in the cases relating to terrorist and disruptive activities should be done by an 
officer not below in rank than that of a Deputy Superintendent of Police. This 
would cut down the misuse substantially. 
(iii) A provision has been made that for vexatious , malicious or corrupt actions by the 
police whereby any person is wrongly arrested or threatened to be arrested , are 
made punishable with an imprisonment upto one year or with fine, or with both. 
(iv) In a normal case any police officer can 1egister a case, make an investigation , and 
file charge-sheet . But, in the new legislation there are three stages. Firstly, no 
information about the commission of an offence shall be recorded by the police 
without the prior approval of the District Superintendent of Police . Secondly , the 
investigation of an offence shall not be done by a police officer below the rank of 
Deputy Superintendent of Police/ Assistant Commissioner of Police. Thirdly , no 
court shall take cognizance of an offence under this new legislation without the 
previous sanction of Inspector-General of Police/Commissioner of Police . 
7. Among the salient feature s of the present Bill, the Home Secretary mentioned the 
setting up of the Special Courts for speedy disposal of the cases, because if the cases relating 
to terrorism are also to be dealt with by the ordinary courts , it woufd take years together 
•before the case would come up for hearing or it may not come up for hearing at all. 
Secondly , the police custody is for thirty days as against sixty days under the TADA Act . 
The judicial custody which was earlier one year (six months divided into two parts) has been 
reduced to six months (in two parts of three months each). If the investigations are not 
completed within this period; the court has to be approached again. 
8. Several Members were of the view that the opposition to TADA today is based on 
thousands of T ADA cases made out against thousands of innocent persons and that the new 
legislation does not provide any relief to these! persons. The Home Secretary clarified that a 
criminal law had always prospective effect and not -applied retrospectively . The proposed 
legislation would come into force after it becomes an Act of Parliament and would apply to 
the offences committed thereafter. He further added that in respect of the old TADA cases, 
there_ is already a provision in sub-section (4) of section 1 of the TADA Act , according to 
which the old cases would continue ~o be dealt with as per the existing law of the land. The 
Home Secretary, however, apprised the Committee that the cases of T ADA detenues are 
being reviewed administratively at the Central and the State level as per the direction of the 
Supreme Court. Under this direction, high level administrative committees are to be 
constituted. At the Central level, the Committee is headed by the Home Secretary, and the 
Law Secretary and the Director, CBI as its members. At the State level, these Committees 
would consist of the Home Secretary, the Law Secretary and the Director-General of Police . 
In some cases, these Committees are beaded by Retd. High Court Judges. These 

Committees review the cases to see whether the T ADA provisions have been applied 
properly or not. As a result of this system of review, thousands of cases have been 
cancelled/withdrawn/filedlfADA provisions dropped benefiting a very large number of 
persons. In this context, the Home Secretary stated that these review Committees were 
being made more powerful and vigorous and they were also meeting regularly. 
9. In reply to another query regarding the need for statutory review Committee in the 
Bill, as in the case of National Security Act, Maintenance of Internal Security Act etc., the 
Home Secretary clarified that under the National Security Act and other preventive 
detention laws, there is no court and there is no trial. The detenue does not go to the court 
and the court has only wni jurisdiction. But in the present case a charge-sheet is filed, trial 
takes place and the court decide the case. The idea of statutory review C~mmittee would, 
therefore, be meaningless. So, there is a wide difference between the two. It is for this 
reason that the Supreme Court has observed that as regards pending T ADA cases, these 
should be admin'istratively reviewed. 
10. Some Members expressed the appreh&nsion that the new legislation might be 
misused against political opponents, trade unionists and workers. They were of the firm view 
that adequate safeguards should be there in the proposed fegislation to check its misuse. In 
reply to a quer y whether the proposed legislation has been brought after consulting the 
Chief Ministers, the Home Secretary stated that discussions had taken place with them and 
their views had been ascertained and the Bill has been prepared reflecting their views. 
11. Prior to considering this Bill, the Committee had occasion to discuss the TADA in 
its meetings held on the 4th and lOth May, 1995 and hear the Home Secretary in the matter. 
After deliberations, the general view which emerged in the Committee was that the T ADA 
Act should be repealed and either a separate legislation should be enacted to counter 
terrorism or the essential legal requirements to fight terrorism be incorporated in the normal 
laws of the land, with in-built safequards against misuse. The view of the Committee and the 
connected papers were forwarded to the Government for consideration. 
12. In view of the above and after hearing the Home Secretary and taking into 
consideration the views expressed by the Members on 19th May, 1995 the following views 
emerged while adopting the Report on the Bill on 22nd May, 1995:-
- The present bill was uot necessary as the existing laws of the land were adequate to 
curb the menace of the terrorism. 
- The bill in necessary to counter terrorism and disruptive activities. 
- The bill should be criculated to all Chief Ministers for their views and public opinion 
should also be elicited. 
- The present law should not be a permanent statute and should be periodically 
reviewed after every three years. 
- Compensation should be given to innocent victims of the TADA. 
- The direction of the Supreme Court regarding Review Committees should be made a 
part of the new legislation. 
- An integrated view should be taken of the whole situation and that the existing Jaws 
such as N.S.A., D.I.R etc. were quite adequate to meet the problem of terrorism 
and disruptive activities. So, there was no need to incorporate some of the· provisions 
of the T ADA in the new legislation. 
- The definitions in the new .legislation should be modified and made specific to check 
its misuse. 

In the light of the suggestions, views, observations and amendments made by the 
members, the Committee adopts this Report on the Bill for consideration of the House. 
NEW DELHI; 
May 22, 1995 
RAJNI RANJAN SAHU 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

J ' 
To 
APPENDIX 
(vide para 5 of the Report] 
The Chairman 
Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Home Affairs 
New Delhi. 
May 19, 1995 
Dear Sir, 
I propose the following amendments to the Criminat Law Amendment Bill, 1995: 
1. Part II Clause 3, Sub-Clause I should be re-written as foMows: 
Whoever with intent to question, or disrupt, whether directly or indirectly, the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; or intends to bring about or supports any claim, 
whether directly or indirectly, for the cession of any part of India or the secession of any 
part of India from the Union, and uses terror for achieving this aim by using bombs, 
dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or fire-aims or other 
lethal weapons or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other substances 
(whether biological or otherwise) of a hazardous nature in such a manner as to cause, or as 
is likely to cause, death of, or injuries to, any person or persons or loss of, or damage to, or 
destruction of, property or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the 
community , or detains any pe~n and threatens to kill or injure such person in order to 
compel the Government or any other person to do or abstain from doing any act, commits a 
terrorist act. Explanation-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(a) "cession" includes the admission of any claim of any foreign country:to any part of 
India; and 
(b) "secession" includes the assertion of any claim to determine whether a part of India 
will remain within the Union. 
2. Delete Clause 4. 
3. Delete Clause 18 (2). 
With regards, 
SAIFUDDIN CHOUDHURY 
M.P. 
N.B. Kurnari Mamata Banerjee, M.P. endorsed the above amendments. 
5 

To 
The Chairman 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
New Delhi. 
May 20, 1995 
Dear Sir, 
I propose the following amendments to the Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 1995:-
1. The Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 1995 seeks to replace the 10 year old Terrorist 
and Disruptive Activities (prevention) Act (TADA). Even though TADA was 
draconian the saving grace was that it was time-bound, unlike the present Bill which 
would become a permanent law in our statute book. There is no need for making 
this law as perpetual. I suggest three-year time limit for the operation of the law 
after which it may be reviewed according to the needs of the times. 
2. Oauses 3 and 4 define terrorism and disruptive activities. These definitions are not 
precise but nebulous and capable of misuse. Clause 3 contains .15 independent 
offences. It is nothing but rearrangement of offences against the State as enumerated 
in Macaulay's Penal Code. This clause should be made precise so as to exclude trade 
union activities and political activities like peaceful 'hartal' etc. Otherwise a country 
made bomb or a gelatine stick can easily be planted and false charges may be cooked 
up. 
3. Oause 4 deals with disruptive activity. It enumerates several independent offences 
and is a mere restatement of provisions dealing with the public tranquility in the 
Indian Penal Code. We find in some of these provisions the Kafkaesque dimensions. 
For instance under sub clause (3) of clause 4 'prophecy' 'prediction' 'pronouncement' 
have been made offences. The astrologers and god-men that the members of the 
Cabinet at Delhi frequent may qualify for being contingent terrorists should the~ 
dilate on their longevity. 
4. Oause 8(7) says the judge or the additional judge of the Special Court may continut 
in service even after superannuation i.e. until the case is over. This will give place t1 
picking up of selective judges and therefore this provision should be deleted. 
5. Oause 14 provides for keeping the identity and address of a witness as secret an 
permits avoidance of their names and addresses in the Special C'...ourt's orders c 
judgements or in any records of the case accessible in public. Probably it is due t 
the apprehension that the said witness may be harmed. Yet, it is not fair. TI 
identity should be known to the accu&ed and cross-examination of the witness is 
must for any fair trial. Therefore, this obnoxious provision ~ould be deleted. 
6. Clause 18(2) :xtends the remand period. One of the factors that caused the misuse 
T ADA was the difficulty in getting the bail for the accused. The present provisi• 
may likewise tempt the authorities to misuse the said Act and therefore I comme 
for its deletion. 
6 

I 
7 
7. A Review Committee at the State and Central level should be immediately appointed 
to review the cases of those booked under T ADA and their early release should be 
effected forthwith. 
Thanking you, 
MURASOLI MARAN 
M.P. 

The Chairman, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
New Delhi. 
Res. Sir, 
I enclose herewith the proposed amendments to the Criminal Law Amendment Bill 
1995: 
I would request you to circulate this to all members of the committee. 
N.B. Enclose the proposed amendments. 
With regards, 
Mamata Banerjee 
2V5195 

SUGGESTED MODIFICATIONS TO THE 'CRIMINAL LAW 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1995' 
Part II 
*Section 3(4) 
Section 4 (2) (I) 
Section 4 (3) (B) 
*Section 4 ( 4) 
•section 6 
Part III 
Section 8 (1) 
Section 9 
Section 10(2) (C) 
Part IV 
Section 18(2) (b) 
Section 19 (1) 
*Section 21 (2) 
NOTE 
I. • : Very lmportaat. 
Add after the word "whoever" tbe word "knowingly" 
Substitute "and territorial integrity" with "territorial integrity 
and national unity" 
Delete 
Add after "whoever" the word "knowingly" 
Add after the word '"'order" the words ''for reasons to be 
recorded in writing" 
Add a proviso to defme the word "area or areas" as "district 
or a set of contiguous districts" 
A provision may be added for transfer or a case from one 
district to another district within that State with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court 
Delete 
Add after the word "Public Prosecutor" the words ''with the 
concurrence of the Government concerned'' 
After the word ''Code" add the words ''no one shall be 
detained" 
Add the word "knowingly" after the word "accused" 
2. Note: Slac:e preYioally rqillered ~ are DOC llddreued by the aew le&Jaladoa, a policy utemeat bu to be made by tbe 
Mlabter lbat dlere wW be ~eres by Screeoln& CCIIIUillttes at State/Central level witbla a spedtk time frame. 
9 

THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL, 1995 
NOTE 
The Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 1995 has been introduced on 18th May, 1995 in the 
Rajya Sabha. In the Statement of Objects and Reasons (Para 4) given for the present Bill, it 
has been mentioned that Chief Ministers and Governors of States have been consulted "and 
in the light of views expressed by the Chief Ministers and Governors as also the Leaders of 
various political parties, the Government have decided not to extend the life of the Terrorist 
and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act." This seems to be far from the truth. The 
consensus in the Chief Ministers' Conference was in favour of the retention of the TADA 
Act with some modifications to provide safeguards against its possible misuse. 
Section 17 - Bail 
The provisions for granting bail have now been diluted to the extent that even hardened 
terrorists would be able to get bail easily. This will have serious repercussions particularly in 
J & K where terrorism is at its extreme. Under the T ADA, an appeal from the designated 
court lies with the Supreme Court. This should continue. 
Section 24(2) - Punishment of Police Officials 
Under the proposed sub-section (2) of Section 24, punishment of imprisonment upto J 
year has been provided for policemen or corruptly or maliciously proceed or threaten t< 
proceed against any person for an offence under the new Jaw. This provision of actim 
against policemen would totally demoralise the police force and no police officer would lik• 
to proceed under the new law for fear of prosecution. When the proposed law alread 
provides for registration. of a case with the approval of the SP and launching of prosecutio 
only with the sanction of the IG, Police, there is no need at all to provide for prosecution c 
policemen. Hence, this sub-section should be deleted. 
Strengthening the Bill 
As pointed out above, the Criminal Law Amendment Bill as it has been drafted seen 
to have no teeth to deal with the threat of terrorism and disruptive elements. The curre· 
situation in the country requires a stringent law to deal with the anti-national elemen 
seeking to spread terrorism in the country. The proposed law would be ineffective in dealiJ 
with the menace of terrorism. 
10 
Sd/-
(1) Guman Mal Lod 
22-5-95 
(2) Maj. Gen. B.C. Khand 
(3) Ram · Nath Kovi 
(4) Ram Nagina Misl 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS 
COMMITTEE 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
OF THE 
The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Friday, May 19, 1995 in Committee Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Murasoli Maran 
6. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
7. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
8. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
10. Prof. M. Kamson 
11. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
12. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhary 
13. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
14. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
15. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
16. Shri Ram Singh 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Rabi Ray 
19. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
Shri C.D. Arha, Joint Secretary 
11 

12 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary (Legal Affairs) 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary (Legislative Deptt.) 
Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Joint Secretary (Legislative Deptt.) 
2. • • 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and 
Law, Justice and Company Affairs and asked the Home Secretary to make a presentation on 
the Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 1995. The Secretary in his presentation apprised the 
Committee of the obnoxious provisions of TADA which were sought to be deleted in the 
Bill. He also mentioned the safeguards in the Bill to check 'its Misuse'. The Members put 
certain queries regarding the Bill which were replied by the Home Secretary. To a query, 
the Home Secretary clarified that the provisions of the Bill would be applicable prospectively 
and the existing T ADA cases· would be dealt under the latter. 
4. The Committee completed its general discussion and clause-by clause consideration of 
the Bill. It decided to present/lay the Report, in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on May 22, 
1995 and authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ramnath Kovind to present the 
Report in the Rajya Sabha and Prof. M. Kamson and Shri Dharampal Singh Malik to lay 
the same in the Lok Sabha. The Committee directed the Secretariat to prepare the draft 
Report and place the same before it at its next meeting to be held on May 22, 1995, for 
consideration and adoption. 
5. The Committee than adjourned at 6.10 p.m. to meet again at 9.30 a.m. on Monday, 
May 22, 1995. 
•••Relates to other matter. 

vm 
EIGHm MEETING 
The Committee met at 9.30 a.m. on Monday, the 22nd May, 1995 in Committee Room 
No. 63, First floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Raaj Babbar 
6. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
7. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
WK SABRA 
8. Prof. M. Kamson 
9. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
10. Dr. Girija Vyas 
11. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
12. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
13. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
14. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
15. Shri Rabi Ray 
16. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
17. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
18. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman stated that as per the direction of the Committee given 
in its meeting held on the 19th May, 1995, the draft Report on the Criminal Law 
Amendment Bill, 1995 has been prepared by the Secretariat incorporating all the 
suggestions/amendments given by the members and that the same is before the Committee 
for consideration and adoption. 
3. The Committee took up consideration of the draft Eighteenth Report. Members 
expressed divergent views on the Bill and gave additional suggestions/amendments. The 
Chairman assured that all the suggestions would be included in the Report before 
presentation to the House. The Report was adopted. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 a.m. 
13 