PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT
Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninth Report on Demands For
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)
217
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 426
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING
COMMITTEE ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT
Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninth Report on Demands For
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-48
Chapter I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government.................................................................................. 1-10
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government's reply ........ 1 1-12
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee................... 13-32
Chapter IV Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the
Government have not been received............................................... 33-48
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................... 49-57
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 59-62
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................. 63-79

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
2. Shri Pratap Keshari Deb
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
6. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
7. Shri R.K. Sinha
8. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
@9. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
10. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
16. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
17. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
18. Shri Ashwini Kumar
$19. Vacant
20. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
21. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
(i)
@ Shri Rakesh Sinha, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated  w.e.f.  14th December, 2018.
$ Vacant consequent upon resignation of Shri Harish Chandra Meena from Lok Sabha Seat (i.e., Dausa Parliamentary
Constituency of Rajasthan) w.e.f. 24th December, 2018.

(ii)
22. Shri Nagarajan P.
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal
24. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
25. Shri Dilip M. Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Ankit Bhatia, Assistant Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the Two Hundred Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The Two Hundred Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 13th March,
2018. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs
requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in
the Report. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the English Version of the Action Taken Notes on
the above mentioned Two Hundred Ninth Report to the Committee on 23rd July, 2018 and the Hindi
Version on 28th August, 2018.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
on 19th and 18th December, 2018 respectively in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha
dated 24th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Seventeenth Report and adopted the same at
its meeting held on 5th February, 2019.
5. The Recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
   N
EW D ELHI; P . CHIDAMBARAM
5th February, 2019 Chairman,
Magha 16, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
ANIMERS : Andaman & Nicobar Islands Institute of Medical Sciences
BADP : Border Area Development Programme
BGB : Border Guard Bangladesh
BPR&D : Bureau of Police Research & Development
BSNL : Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
CAG : Comptroller and Auditor General
CAPFs : Central Armed Police Forces
CCPWC : Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children
CCS : Cabinet Committee on Security
CCTNS : Crime & Criminal Tracking Network System
CFL : Compact Fluorescent
CP : Commissioner of Police
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
CPOs : Central Police Organisations
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CS : Coastal Security
CSS : Coastal Security Section
CVCF : Central Victim Compensation Fund
DCPW : Directorate of Communication Police Wireless
DD : Daman Diu
DDRF : Delhi Disaster Response Fund
DFSS : Directo rate of Forensic Science Services
DG : Director General
DNH : Dadar & Nagar Haveli
DPC : District Planning Committee
DPR : Detailed Project Report
(iv)

(v)
ERSS : Emergency Response Support System
EWDS : Early Warning Dissemination System
FBTS : Full Body Truck Scanner
FFR : Freedom Fighters' Rehabilitation
FY : Financial Year
GPCB : Gujarat Pollution Control Board
GPS : Global Positioning System
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Oceanic Information Services
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MoPF : Modernisation of Police Forces
MPCS : Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters
NA TGRID : National Intelligence Grid
NBCC : National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd
NCRMP : National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
NCT : National Capital Territory
NDMP : National Disaster Management Plan
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NECP : National Emergency Communication Plan
NEERI : National Environmental Engineering Research Institute
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
NHM : National Rural Health Mission
NIDM : National Institute of Disaster Management
NISG : National Institute of Smart Governance
NMAC : Home Minister's Advisory Committee
OFC : Optical Fiber Cable
PCC : Pollution Control Committee

(vi)
PM : Police Modernisation
PMU : Project Management Unit
PoJK : Pakistan occupied Jammu & Kashmir
PoT : Proof of Technology
PP A : Power Purchase Agreement
PRI : Panchayati Raj Institutions
RCC : Reinforced Cement Concrete
SCI : Shipping Corporation of India
SDRF : State Disaster Response Fund
SLEC : State Level Empowered Committee
SPUNNER : Special Unit for North East Region
SPUWAC : Special Unit for Women & Children
TCIL : M/s Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd
TD : Trial Directives
TPC : Tender Purchase Committee
TSU : Tear Smoke Unit
UC : Utilisation Certificates
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
USOF : Universal Service Obligation Fund
UTLA : Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration
UTs : Union Territories

REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2018-19) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Two Hundred Ninth Report was presented to Rajya
Sabha/laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on 13th March, 2018.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Ninth Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.2.7, 2.3.2, 3.5.6, 3.6.7, 3.6.18, 4.3.5, 4.7.12, 5.17.4, 5.22.2 and 5.24.4 (of Two
Hundred Ninth Report)
Total recommendations - 10
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies: Para Nos. 5.5.5, 5.11.3 and 5.12.2 ( ibid)
Total recommendations - 03
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.3.3, 3.1.7, 3.1.8, 3.3.4, 3.4.6, 3.4.9, 3.4.12, 4.2.6,
4.5.4, 4.6.5, 4.9.4, 5.3.2, 5.4.2, 5.5.2, 5.6.5, 5.7.3, 5.9.2, 5.10.3 and 5.23.2 ( ibid)
Total recommendations - 19
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action taken steps
in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 2.2.8, 2.2.9, 3.4.11, 3.5.3, 3.6.15, 3.7.4, 3.8.4, 3.8.5, 4.2.3,
4.4.3, 4.5.5, 4.8.10, 4.10.4, 5.6.3, 5.8.3, 5.12.1, 5.13.4, 5.14.4, 5.15.4, 5.15.5, 5.16.4, 5.19.3,
5.21.1, 5.25.4 and 5.26.3 ( ibid)
Total Recommendations - 25
In respect of 25 recommendations in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished interim
reply or couched its response in vague terms.
The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes
in respect of the observations/recommendations made in the Report.
3. The details of analysis of the ATNs have been cited in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 ALLOCATIONS, PROJECTIONS AND VARIATION
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee notes that the allocation of capital component granted under Demand No. 48
pertaining to the police forces was reduced by more than 5% from 
` 11178.36 crore to ` 10604.78 crore
at RE stage in 2017-18. This reduction under this component points towards an un-healthy expenditure
trend. The Committee is aware that several projects of national importance such as border infrastructure,
police modernisation, NATGRID, etc. are being implemented under this head and efficient utilisation of
funds is required for timely implementation of these projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should streamline the procedures and strengthen the monitoring mechanism to achieve better
utilisation of funds under this head during FY 2018-19. (Para 2.2.7 of 209th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 Ministry of Home Affairs consists of two major Grants  viz.  Grant No.46- MHA and Grant No.48
-Police. Funds of ` 11178.36 crore was allocated under Capital Section of both the Grants taken together.
1.1.3 Major portion of the Capital Section is under Grant No.48-Police. Capital allocation under Grant
No.48-Police is mainly under Police Infrastructure and Border Infrastructure and Management.
1.1.4 Ministry had constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of former Home Secretary
Shri Madhukar Gupta to suggest ways to strengthen border protection and address the issue of gaps and
vulnerability in border fencing along the India-Pakistan border. Less expenditure was incurred under
Indo-Pak Border as some of the projects were reviewed and re-prioritized.
1.1.5 In order to achieve better utilization of funds under Border Management and Infrastructure, regular
review meetings to monitor the expenditure on the ongoing projects in Indo-Pak and Indo-Bangladesh
borders are held with various executing agencies.
1.1.6 Further, fund of Coastal Security section was mainly for procurement of 225 boats sanctioned
under Phase-II of Coastal Security Section (CSS). However, the boats could not be procured during the
financial year 2017-18. Police Modernization (PM) Division of the Ministry is at an advanced stage for
award of contract for procurement of 225 boats sanctioned under Phase-II of the CSS. Fund of CS
section shall be utilized mainly for procurement of aforementioned boats in the FY 2018-19.
1.1.7 In order to reduce the time in processing of procurement related cases and to enhance the
capabilities of CAPFs to incur capital expenditure, the following steps have been taken:-
(i) Clubbing of Provisioning Sanction with Authorization. Now there are only two stages  i.e.
authorization-cum-provisioning sanction and expenditure sanction against earlier three stages
for procurement.
2

3
(ii) Power of approving Qualitative Requirements (QRs)/Trial Directives (TDs) has been delegated
to Directors General (DsG), CAPFs.
(iii) Trial of samples once conducted during the tender process for technical evaluation will have
validity of 1-2 years to avoid recurrent trials.
(iv) Delegated financial power of DsG , CAPFs has been enhanced from ` 1 crore to ` 2 crore
for procurement of items for trial purpose.
(v) Special DG/ADG in charge of Provisioning in CAPFs shall head the meeting of Tender
Purchase Committee (TPC) instead of DsG, CAPFs.
(vi) Delegated financial power of DsG, CAPFs has been further delegated to lower functionaries
(till the Commandant) for procurement of stores under the various provisioning heads.
(vii) DsG, CAPFs have been delegated financial power for procurement of motor vehicles for
their newly raised units/establishments up to ` 20 crore in each case.
(viii) The expenditure by CAPFs is closely monitored.
1.1.8 In addition to the submissions made above, it is submitted that the Ministry has recently enhanced
the limits for delegation of financial powers to Directors General/ Directors of CAPFs/ CPOs from
` 10 crore to ` 15 crore for Works to be executed by CPWD/ PWOs as per Rule, 133(2)&(3) of GFR,
2017 in consultation with IFAs and from ` 50 lakh to ` 1 crore for Minor Works (petty repairs of Non
Residential Buildings / Residential Buildings) as per Rule 133 (1) and 133 (2) & (3) of General Financial
Rules, 2017. A copy of the order is enclosed as Annexure-I.
1.1.9 It is further submitted that in order to expedite the expenditure including capital expenditure, the
Ministry regularly conducts expenditure review meetings at the highest level ( viz. Home Minister/ Home
Secretary/ Financial Advisor). The Ministry ensures that the budget controlling authorities of respective
organizations/Divisions under its control leave no stone unturned towards entire expenditure allocated for
the FY 2018-19.
1.1.10 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for future compliance.
Further Recommendation
1.1.11 The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry to reduce the time in processing
of procurement related cases and to enhance the capabilities of CAPFs to incur capital expenditure.
The Committee, however, feels that specific measures need to be taken for different projects of
national importance such as border infrastructure, police modernisation, and NATGRID to reduce
procedural delays and improve fund utilization. The Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised
about any such specific measures taken under these projects.
1.2 Under-utilisation of Funds
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee notes that by 20th February, 2018 the Ministry was able to spend only 61.58 per
cent of the allocation granted under the capital component in RE 2017-18 under both the Demand Nos.

4
46 and 48. This was despite a reduction in allocation from ` 11,501.33 crore to ` 10,908.68 crore at
RE stage. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for this poor capital expenditure and wonders
as to how the Ministry would be able to spend more than 38 per cent of the allocation with just 40 days
remaining in the current financial year. The Committee fears that a large sum of capital funds may have
to be surrendered by the Ministry and it may subject them to further cuts. The Committee expresses its
displeasure at the poor capital expenditure by the Ministry and is of the view that year after year such
sub-optimal utilization of funds is simply inexcusable. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should try to remove all operational bottlenecks and undertake corrective measures to address the issues
underlying the continued poor capital expenditure pattern. (Para 2.3.2  ibid )
Action Taken
1.2.2 Ministry of Home Affairs consists of two major Grants viz. Grant No. 46-Ministry of Home
Affairs and Grant No. 48-Police. The Capital Allocation under both the Grants for the FY was `11,501.33
crore which was reduced to `10,908.66 crore mainly due to slow pace of expenditure under Border
Infrastructure and Management Scheme of the Ministry and under provisioning heads of CAPFs.
1.2.3 The progress in expenditure of funds on Border Infrastructure Works is dependent on various
factors, viz., difficult terrain, non-availability of site due to pending land acquisition, public protests,
objection by Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB), etc.
1.2.4 Less expenditure was incurred under India-Pakistan Border Works as some of the projects were
reviewed and re-prioritized on the recommendation of the Madhukar Gupta Committee Report.
1.2.5 It is further submitted that under Grant No. 46-MHA and Grant No. 48-Police, the Ministry has
been able to spend 99.22 % w.r.t. BE / RE under Grant No. 46 MHA and 105.21% w.r.t. BE and
99.72 % RE under Grant No. 48- Police of total (Revenue + Capital) funds allocated and as far as capital
expenditure is concerned, the Ministry has been able to achieve 93.20% w.r.t. RE under Grant No.
46- MHA and 99.45% w.r.t. RE during the FY 2017-18. Thus, the Ministry was able to utilize considerable
funds efficiently.
1.2.6 However, it is further submitted that in order to expedite the expenditure including capital expenditure,
the Ministry regularly conducts expenditure review meetings at the highest level ( viz. Home Minister/
Home Secretary/ Financial Advisor). The Ministry ensures that the budget controlling authorities of
respective organizations / Divisions under its control leave no stone unturned towards entire expenditure
allocated for the FY.
1.2.7 Further, as explained in the reply to Para No. 2.2.7, steps are being undertaken to enhance the
capabilities of CAPFs to incur capital expenditure both under Works and for procurement related activities.
1.2.8 However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. All efforts will
be made to remove the bottlenecks and procedural delays that have led to slow pace of expenditure.
Further Recommendation
1.2.9 The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to achieve significant fund utilization at
the end of fiscal year 2017-18. However, the Committee feels that the Ministry needs to obviate

5
the uneven distribution of fund utilisation pattern during the fiscal year and achieve near-
uniform utilization pattern throughout the year so that the necessary funds are not surrendered
at RE stage. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Ministry must undertake
proactive measures to achieve optimum utilization of funds during all four quarters of a fiscal
year.
1.3 Infrastructure for Disaster Management
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee is displeased to note the underutilization of funds allocated under the head
Infrastructure for Disaster Management. The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Ministry
regarding the delay in the commencement of the construction work, of south campus of the National
Institute of Disaster Management, due to which the funds could not be utilized. The Committee fails to
understand why the construction could not begin despite the demarcation of land for the purpose and
desires to be apprised about the reasons for this delay. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that the Ministry should resolve the bottlenecks that have delayed the construction work and ensure that
the construction will commence at the earliest. (Para 3.5.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 The DPR/cost estimate was approved in 2017-18 on 5th October, 2017. MoU has been signed
between NIDM and NBCC on 9th October, 2017. On completion of formalities of advance position,
filling of alienation form and demarcation of the land in 17th January, 2018 NBCC has been given the
go-ahead to start the construction of NIDM, Southern Campus. Mobilization of advance of `3.43 core
was released to NIDM on 23rd March, 2018. The advance can be released only after finanlization of
tender and award of work by NBCC as the exact value of tender cost and the cost put to tender would
be known only then Therefore, fund couldn't be utilized during FY-2017-18. Hon'ble Vice President of
India laid the foundation stone of NIDM Southern Campus on 22nd May, 2018.
Further Recommendation
1.3.3 The Committee while taking note of the reply hopes that the construction of NIDM would
be completed within the time frame.
1.4 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP)
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee recalls that EWDS system was scheduled to be commissioned in both Odisha and
Andhra Pradesh by the middle of 2017. However, now the date of commissioning has been pushed
forward to April, 2018 for Odisha and July/August 2018 for Andhra Pradesh. Since the installation has
been completed at most of the sites, the Committee expects the Ministry to expedite the testing phase.
The Committee also cautions that any further delay in the commissioning of the project may have adverse
effects in these States during this year's cyclonic season. (Para 3.6.7 ibid)

6
Action Taken
1.4.2 The latest status of the commissioning of the EWDS in Phase-I states is as under:-
Odisha
1.4.3 Sites finalization, Radio Frequency and Survey work has been completed. Physical installation of
EWDS equipment is complete at all sites (total 161) and testing is under progress. System is likely to
be commissioned soon.
Andhra Pradesh
1.4.4 Sites finalization, Radio Frequency and Survey work has been completed. Physical installation of
EWDS equipment is completed at most of the sites (total 257) and the System is likely to be commissioned
by July/August, 2018.
1.4.5 Project Management Unit (PMU) in NDMA is taking all efforts for commissioning of EWDS at
the earliest.
Further Recommendation
1.4.6 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) is likely to be commissioned soon in Odisha and
was to be commissioned in Andhra Pradesh by July/August, 2018. The Committee desires to be
apprised whether or not the EWDS has been commissioned in both the States.
Recommendation
1.4.7 The Committee observes that a substantial number of bridges and saline embankments are still
under execution in Phase-I of NCRMP . The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the
States for an early completion of this Phase. In Phase-II, the implementation of most of the works is
yet to begin. The Committee recommends that all the stages of processing should be completed as per
schedule and construction work should commence at the earliest. The Committee also notes that in respect
of six States, EWDS is likely to be commissioned by March, 2020 and recommends that the commissioning
of EWDS may be done as per the timeline. (Para 3.6.18 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.8 Out of total 35 bridges and 14 Saline Embankment under Phase-I, 25 bridges and 12 saline
embankments have been completed. Progress of balance bridges (10 nos) and saline embankment (2 nos)
is being monitored frequently to ensure completion before scheduled closure of project by December,
2018.
1.4.9 The initial delay in implementation of the Phase-II states is mainly due to the non-finalisation of
the sites, obtaining environment clearance, finalisation of design / Detailed Project Report, etc. However,
since most of the sites are now ready, it is anticipated that the work would pick up substantially and
the scheduled timelines would be adhered to.

7
1.4.10 For implementation of EWDS, Knowledge partners are already in place for 5 States, bid document
finalisation is expected by August, 2018 which may result into installation of equipment/ EWDS by
August, 2019.
Further Recommendation
1.4.11 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the timeline for the projects
undertaken would be adhered to while executing them. The Committee, however, desires to be
apprised about the completion status of the remaining ten bridges and two saline embankments.
1.5 Central Armed Police Forces
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee is displeased to see that the procedural bottlenecks have hampered the capital
expenditure of the Ministry. The Committee, however, takes note of the submission of the Home Secretary
that the Ministry has taken sincere efforts, during 2017-18, to simplify the procedures and resolve the
bottlenecks. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should institutionalise a credible system of
delegation ofpowers to empower the Forces and improve the capital expenditure. (Para 4.3.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 It was apprised to the Hon'ble Committee that the Ministry has taken sincere efforts, during
2017-18, to simplify the procedures and resolve the bottlenecks.
1.5.3 The powers delegated are reviewed from time to time and enhanced wherever need for such
delegation is felt.
1.5.4 As explained in the reply to Para No. 2.2.7, the Ministry in 2017 has substantially enhanced
delegated financial powers of Directors General/Directors of CAPFs/CPOs as detailed in the reply to Para
No. 2.2.7 (order placed at  Annexure-I ).
1.5.5 In order to reduce the time in processing procurement related cases and to enhance the capabilities
of CAPFs to incur capital expenditure, the Ministry has delegated substantial powers to CAPFs/CPOs.
The details could be perused in the reply to Para No.2.2.7.
1.5.6 In respect of Delhi Police, financial powers have been delegated to CP Delhi to simplify the
procedure which include:-
(i) Mature condemnation (upto `17 lakh) and procurement of vehicles against condemnation.
(ii) `10 crore for Major Works
(iii) `20 crore for procurement of machinery & equipment
(iv) ` 5 crore for outsourcing recruitment work
(v) `10 crore p.a. for hiring DTC buses
(vi) Full power for procurement of arms & ammunition from Ordinance Factory Board/Ordinance
Factory Depot, stationery, scaled clothing, tentage and hiring of CCTV cameras.

8
1.5.7 For border infrastructure projects bottlenecks are mainly due to pending land acquisition, objection
by Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB), etc. To overcome this problem the Government of West Bengal has
been authorized to purchase land under their land purchase policy. Similarly, the Government of Meghalaya
has been authorized to invoke urgency clause under the New Land Acquisition Act, 2013 for early
acquisition of land. The progress is being reviewed at various levels regularly.
1.5.8 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
1.5.9 The Committee notes the steps the Ministry has undertaken regarding delegation of
financial powers to forces that may enhance capital expenditure.
1.6 Modernisation of Police Forces
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Home Affairs has revived the Modernisation of
Police Forces Scheme on the recommendation of this Committee. The Committee is, however, of the
considered view that all the sub-schemes under the revamped Umbrella Scheme must be implemented
sincerely. The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate awareness should be generated amongst
the States and Union Territories regarding both the verticals comprising all the 17 sub-schemes.
(Para 4.7.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 All stakeholders/Divisions have issued suitable guidelines in respect of implementation of their
schemes/sub-schemes and suitable follow-up action has been taken up to generate awareness as
recommended by the committee. The States/UTs are actively participating in implementation of the
schemes.
1.6.3 So far as sub-scheme of 'Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police'( i.e., erstwhile MPF
scheme), workshops were organized in the months of January to March, 2018 at Bengaluru, Kolkata,
Bhopal and Chandigarh covering all the States. In the workshops, guidance regarding effective utilisation
of funds under the scheme for optimum benefit for the States was provided by Joint Secretary (Police
Modernisation) of Ministry of Home Affairs, as well senior officers from Bureau of Police Research &
Development (BPR&D), Directorate of Forensic Science Services (DFSS), Directorate of Coordination
Police Wireless (DCPW). The workshops were attended by senior level officers of the State Governments/
State Police Forces.
1.7 Education
Recommendation
1.7.1 The Committee takes into account the submission of the representatives of the UT of Dadra &
Nagar Haveli on the proposal forwarded to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for opening one
Medical College from among the 24 Medical Colleges proposed to be opened by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare. The Committee is of the considered view that Dadra & Nagar Haveli deserves to

9
have a medical college to cater to the health care needs of the local people at their door steps, and
therefore, strongly recommends that UT Administration of Dadra & Nagar Haveli, in tandem with the
Ministry of Home Affairs, must take up the matter with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to ensure
approval for opening of one Medical College in UT of Dadra Nagar Haveli. (Para 5.17.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.2 The proposal for establishment of a medical college in the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli has been
approved and conveyed to the UT Administration.
1.8 Medical and Health
Recommendation
1.8.1 The Committee takes into consideration the submission of the UT Administration of Dadra &
Nagar Haveli and observes that though the population is only 40,000 people, the area being remote, the
people living there need medical attention. The Committee, therefore, recommends that while appointing
doctors under NRHM, there should be a binding contract to serve at least for two years in the region
and they may be offered better pay and perks as incentive. (Para 5.22.2 ibid)
Action Taken
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
1.8.2 The view of committee is noted regarding taking of binding contract from doctors appointed under
NHM for serving at least 2 years in region. Moreover, the U.T. has already initiated the proposal for
enhancement of pay and perks of NHM doctors.
Daman and Diu
1.8.3 Proposal for a binding contract to serve for at least two years is under consideration.
Further Recommendation
1.8.4 The Committee wishes to be apprised of the decision taken on the above matters as early
as possible.
1.9 Demand No. 53 - Lakshadweep
Recommendation
1.9.1 The Committee observes that the UT Administration of Lakshadweep had taken up the work of
construction of roads on the lands not initially owned by UT of Lakshadweep. Although it is evident that
the people were happy to allow their land to be used because they required the roads, compensation is
being demanded now by the owners of the lands. The Committee feels that the UT Administration does
not have any option but to provide compensation to the people and, therefore, recommends that necessary
measures may be taken for the purpose. (Para 5.24.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.9.2 Considering the public requirement and necessity for roads, UTLA has constructed few roads in
some islands on the basis of consent given by land owners but, the procedural formalities of land

10
acquisition could not be completed mainly due to implementation of new land Acquisition Act from 2014
onwards. However, in such cases, UTLA has already initiated action to complete the procedural formalities
of land acquisition as per new Land Acquisition Act and land compensation has already been sanctioned
in some cases. In such cases, as an interim measure UTLA is providing compensation to the land owners
as lease rent and in cases where notification under the old Act has been issued but proceedings not
completed (due to the enactment of the New Act), final compensation includes interest on amount from
the date of initial notification.
Further Recommendation
1.9.3 The Committee takes note of the interim measures undertaken by the UTLA for providing
compensation to land owners as lease rent and hopes that all the cases of land compensation
would be settled at the earliest to the satisfaction of all land owners. The Committee desires to
be apprised as and when the procedural formalities of land acquisition as per new Land Acquisition
Act are finally completed.

11
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
2.1 SOURCES OF ENERGY
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee laments the fact that the A&N Islands still have to depend fully on the conventional
sources of energy for power generation. The Committee is of the considered view that the use of solar
energy for power generation must be intensively promoted taking into account the weather conditions of
the Islands. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the UT Administration must undertake
requisite measures to ensure installation of roof-top solar power plants in all the buildings in the Islands
beginning with all public buildings. The Committee also recommends that the work pertaining to the
proposed energy management centre must be completed expeditiously. (Para 5.5.5 of 209th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.2 UT Administration is taking measures to ensure installation of roof-top solar power plants in all
the buildings. Action already taken in this regard is as follows:
(i) 1 MWp Roof top solar power plant on 15 govt. buildings are installed and all are in operation
since April, 2017. UT Administration will purchase power from SECI @ `4.64 per unit
through Power Purchase Agreement for 25 years. This Project has generated 858333 units
till March, 2018 which has saved 225424 litres of diesel amounting to `134.80 lakh (@`59.80
per litre).
(ii) Installation of grid connected 1-10 KWp Rooftop Solar Power plant in private domestic
residence is in progress by M/s Ujaas Energy Pvt. Ltd., Indore and till date a total capacity
of 22.11 KWp has been commissioned. The target is 2 MWp.
(iii) Installation of 3 MWp Solar Rooftop in Govt. buildings:- Power Purchase Agreement (PPA)
has been signed with M/s Mundra Solar Pvt. Ltd. on 22nd March, 2018 for grid connected
solar roof top on Govt. buildings.
2.1.3 Administration has signed agreement with Power Grid during November, 2017 for setting up of
Energy Management Centre. Power Grid is finalising tender. Administration will ensure that the proposed
energy management centre is completed expeditiously.
Further Recommendation
2.1.4 The Committee notes the progress made in projects pertaining to installation of rooftop
solar power plants in private domestic residences and in Government buildings.
11

12
2.2 Light and Sound Programme at Cellular Jail in Port Blair
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Chief Secretary that the changes in the script
of the 'Light and Sound Show', held at the National Monument of Cellular Jail in Port Blair, are under
consideration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the suggestions of different stakeholders,
including those of people's representatives, may be considered favorably and incorporated suitably while
considering the change in the script of the light and sound show. (Para 5.11.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The UT Heritage Committee deliberated on the Detailed Project Report of upgradation of Sound
& Light Show of the Cellular Jail. The Committee decided script and duration of the show should be
kept the same. Further, it was also decided to obtain feedback from the tourists on the present Sound
& Light show inviting suggestions for improving the show and analysis of the feedback to be submitted
to the Administration.
2.3 Other Developmental Issues Pertaining to the UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in the Para 5.5.2 of 197th Report on Demands
for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) that the people's representatives should
have a say in decision-making process of UT since it does not have any legislative assembly, where
grievances of the people could be heard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT Administration
must consult the elected representatives while taking any policy decision or finalizing development
measures concerning the UT. (Para 5.12.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 A & N Islands is following grassroots level planning. Vision, Strategy and Action Plan formulation
process starts from the Gram Panchayat level. All the District prepare District level document covering
policy decision/ development measures/allocation of funds concerning the District and is placed before
the District Planning Committee (DPC) having representation of elected representatives for deliberation
and recommendation.
2.3.3 Administration has UT level Consultative Committee under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary
with Hon'ble Member of Parliament and other elected representatives and tribal leaders as members for
consultation regarding allocations and priority of schemes/projects under budget estimate/revised estimate.
2.3.4 A&N Islands have Administrator's Advisory Council, having representation of elected representative,
political parties, trade organisation, prominent citizens, etc., where policy decisions are discussed.
2.3.5 Further, Home Minister's Advisory Committee (HMAC), having representation of elected representative,
tribal leader, prominent citizens, etc., also exist where development issue and policy decision are taken
in respect of UT of A & N Islands.

13
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 UNDERUTILISATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee takes note of the sub-optimal expenditure incurred by most of the Governments of
UTs. The Committee is aware that the Union Territories have been pleading for more funds every fiscal
year for developmental activities. However, the trend of expenditure is not convincing enough to justify
the demands for higher allocations. The Committee fears that unless the Union Territories establish
strong fund utilization credentials, their demands for higher allocations may not be acceded to by the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Union Territories must demonstrate
a strong conviction for achieving optimal fund utilization in every quarter . The Committee also recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs may review the fund utilization status of every UT on a monthly basis
and implement corrective measures in a proactive manner. (Para 2.3.3 of 209th Report)
Action Taken
3.1.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The UT Administrations have been advised
to establish a robust mechanism to improve their consumption capacity for achieving optimal fund
utilization quarter-wise and also review the fund utilization status on a monthly basis.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee feels that the MHA has failed to grasp the intent of the recommendation.
The action taken by MHA is to strongly advise the UT Administrations to follow the direction for
strict compliance. But the recommendations of the Committee was for the MHA to ensure that
the fund utilization status of every UT be reviewed on a monthly basis and corrective measures
are taken in proactive manner. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation.
3.2 Demand No. 46 - Ministry of Home Affairs
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee observes the poor expenditure incurred by the Ministry during 2017-18 under
several heads viz. Other Disaster Management Schemes, Infrastructure for Disaster Management, Other
Central Miscellaneous Expenditure, and National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project with World Bank
Assistance. The Committee expresses its displeasure at the failure of the Ministry to ensure optimal fund
utilization and recommends that the Ministry should closely monitor the expenditure under these heads
to achieve optimal utilization during the next fiscal year. (Para 3.1.7 ibid)
13

14
Action Taken
3.2.2 The B.E. R.E and Utilisation under Demand No. 46 for the financial year 2017-18 is as follows:-
(` in Crores)
Sl. No. Name of Scheme B.E R.E Exp. % of utilisation
BE RE
1. ODMS
ODMP* 34.99 19.56 15.60 44.58 79.75
NDMP 2.02 6.66 2.68 132.67 40.24
NIDM (Estt.) 12.00 10.00 7.87 65.58 78.70
UNDP for DRMP 8.00 8.00 8.00 100 100
NDRR 50.00 50.00 50.00 100 100
T
OTAL 107.01 94.22 84.15 78.64 89.31
2. Infrastructure for Disaster Management
NDRF 180.00 183.96 183.69 102.05 99.85
NIDM-#OB 20.00 15.00 13.44 67.20 89.60
(Rohini)+ AP
NECP-PS-II 8.01 8.01 7.80 97.38 97.38
TOTAL 208.01 206.97 204.93 98.52 99.01
3. NCRMP 694.25 630.39 630.33 90.79 99.99
* the Utilisation was low due to non receipt of utilisation certificate from the State Govt.
# Due to certain quality issues arisen for the construction of Rohini Campus, the matter has been referred to CTE in CVC
in terms of MoU signed with NBCC. Construction would resume after receipt of report of CTE, CVC advice therein.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3 The Committee observes that the Ministry was not able to fully utilize the funds allotted
under several heads such as Other Disaster Management Projects and National Institute for
Disaster Management (Estt.) despite the fact that allocation was slashed at RE stage. The
Committee feels that such underutilization is inexplicable. The Committee had recommended
that close monitoring of expenditure needs to be undertaken but there is no action on that.
Therefore, the Committee again recommends that necessary measures may be taken to achieve
full utilization of funds under various heads of Other Disaster Management Schemes.
3.2.4 The Committee also observes that an amount of ````` 2.02 crore was allocated for National
Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) in B.E. 2017-18 that got increased to ````` 6.66 crore, out of
which only 40.24% utilization could be achieved. The Committee is not satisfied with the
explanation given by the Ministry that due to non-receipt of utilisation certificate from the State

15
Government, the allocation could not be utilised. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) may take up the matter with the State Governments and
supervise the situation. The Committee desires to be apprised about the steps taken in this
regard.
Recommendation
3.2.5 The Committee notes that there has been a significant shortfall in the funds granted under certain
heads, such as Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates, Infrastructure for Disaster
Management and Home Guards, as compared to the amounts projected by the Ministry. The Committee
is concerned as to how the Ministry would be able to cope with such a huge shortfall in the allocations.
The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to prudently utilise the allocations so that the
implementation of major projects under these heads is not adversely affected. (Para 3.1.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.6 An amount of ` 340 crore was allocated under Grant No. 46- Other Expenditure of MHA, Major
Head-3601: Grant-in-Aid to the State Government, 08- Other transfer/grants to States (sub-major Head),
08.111- Special Assistance (Minor Head), 03-Relief and Rehabilitation Grants, 03.09- Land Boundary
Agreement, 1974 and its Protocol, 2011, 03.09.31- Grant-in-aid General, at BE stage. However, it was
revised to ` 225 crore at RE stage.
(` in Crores)
Y ear Proposed Approved BE Shortfall Shortfall Impact of less
Outlay between b/w allocation
Projected approved of Funds
and outlay and
approved amount
outlay allocated
(3-4)   in BE
(4-5)
Infrastructure for 2017-18 203.00 208.00 208 5 0 No less allocationwas
Disaster Management made.
(NDRF(OB & RB)+
NIDM(CAMPUS)+
NECP
Infrastructure for Disaster 2018-19 352.92 240.00 240 112.92 0 Department of
Management (NDRF(OB Expenditure indicated
& RB)+NIDM(CAMPUS) that any furtherrequi-
+NECP rement will be considered
based on progress.
Home Guard
Re-imbursement to State 2017-18 25 25 25 0 0 No less allocation was
for Home Guards made.

16
Further Recommendation
3.2.7 The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee observes that
the data pertaining to Home Guards pertains to Financial Year 2017-18 while the committee had
pointed out the shortfall in allocation in the year BE 2018-19 vis-a-vis the amount projected by
the Ministry. The Committee finds that the Ministry has not furnished any details of utilization
of funds during the first quarter of 2018-19 under the head 'Infrastructure for Disaster
Management', which could have helped the Committee to understand whether or not the shortfall
in the allocation would affect the implementation of various projects. The Ministry has also not
indicated anything about its plan/proposal to seek any additional funds at RE stage. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should furnish complete details with respect to utilisation
of funds.
3.3 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee takes note of the measures taken during the last two years to enhance the capacity
of the NDRF. The Committee notes that the Ministry is considering proposals for the up-gradation of
equipment to enhance the operational capability of the NDRF and for the establishment of the NDRF
Academy to impart specialized training to NDRF/ SDRF personnel. The Committee is of the view that
both efforts are important to improve the operational efficiency of NDRF in the short term as well as
to build the capacity of the forces in the long term. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry must expedite the process of consideration of these proposals and grant an early approval.
(Para 3.3.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 Recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.3.3 The Committee feels that noting Committee's recommendation for compliance without any
action taken thereon tantamounts to no action. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation and desires that the Ministry furnish the details of action taken regarding the
operational efficiency of NDRF in the short term and capacity of the forces in the long term and
also on action taken on the proposals of NDRF.
3.4 Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee is aware that the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) had approved an allocation
of 
` 1005.99 crore for a period of five years from 2015-16 to 2019-20 for implementing the rehabilitation
package for returnees and up-gradation of infrastructure of the Bangladeshi Enclaves and Cooch Behar
District after the transfer of enclaves between India and Bangladesh under the Land Boundary Agreement.
Out of this, an amount of ` 280.00 crore was released up to 2016-17. The Committee notes that the

17
allocation of ` 340.00 crore, granted in BE 2017-18, was reduced at RE stage to ` 225.00 crore. The
Committee also observes that the Ministry was able to utilise only ` 143.00 crore by the end of January
2018. The Committee is displeased that as against a target of releasing around ` 200.00 crore per year
on an average from 2015-16 to 2019-20, the Ministry was able to release only ` 280.00 crore during
the first two years out of which only ` 206.00 crore has been utilised. The Committee is also dismayed
at the pace of fund utilisation during 2017-18. The Committee fears that this sub-optimal utilization of
funds will affect the implementation of this rehabilitation package for returnees. The Committee is
apprehensive as to how the important housing and infrastructure projects would be implemented in a
timely manner if such poor utilisation offund continues. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should pursue the State Governments concerned for better utilisation offunds and early
implementation of the package. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should send a team
to assess the status of implementation of various projects sanctioned under this package and submit its
findings to this Committee in the Action taken replies. (Para 3.4.6  ibid )
Action Taken
3.4.2 Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) had approved an allocation of ` 1005.99 crore for a period
of five years from 2015-16 to 2019-20 for implementing the rehabilitation package for returnees and up-
gradation of infrastructure of the Bangladeshi Enclaves and Cooch Behar District after the transfer of
enclaves between India and Bangladesh under the Land Boundary Agreement. However, after tendering
process by the State Government of West Bengal the cost of scheme was reduced to ` 783.49 crore
except the component development of Police infrastructure. An amount of ` 140 crore released during
each of the FY 2015-16 and 2016-17. ` 225 crore released during 2017-18.The remaining amount of
` 278.49 crore will be released to the State Government during 2018-19 and 2019-20. As far as the visit
is concerned, a visit was made by the then JS (FFR) from 9th November, 2017 to 12th November, 2017
and the next visit is scheduled shortly. Details of the last visit are placed at Annexure-II.
Further Recommendation
3.4.3 The Committee observes that the progress of implementation of rehabilitation package for
returnees and up-gradation of infrastructure of the Bangladeshi Enclaves and Cooch Behar
District is quite unsatisfactory. The Committee also observes JS (FFR) had made the visit to
assess the status of implementation in November, 2017, however, it has been a year since then.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the officers concerned must undertake a fresh visit
and submit a detailed status report on implementation of various components and projects of the
rehabilitation package.
Recommendation
3.4.4 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it failed to provide the current
status of implementation of the rehabilitation of persons who opted for Indian citizenship subsequent to
the exchange of enclaves between India and Bangladesh. The Committee is already aware about the
details of the package that was formulated for the rehabilitation of returnees. The Committee, however,
desires to know the ground level status of implementation of various provisions of this package. The

18
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should desist from giving a routine and evasive reply
and furnish a detailed status of implementation of various provisions of this rehabilitation package. The
Committee also desires to be apprised of the project-wise details against which the utilisation certificates
were submitted by the State Governments concerned and the various purposes for which those funds were
utilised. (Para 3.4.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.5 The scheme aims at ensuring permanent rehabilitation of the returnees. As per the report of State
Government of West Bengal work progress of construction of permanent cluster at Mekhliganj is about
45%, Haldibari 50% and Dinhata 12%, will be completed by September, 2018. Simultaneously, temporary
relief has been provided in the form of gruel kitchen, ration, tentage, utensils/fodder to the returnees.
Supply of dry ration is still in progress. Dry ration includes rice, kerosene oil, salt, mustard oil, masur
dal and milk powder which are being provided to each enclave dweller every month. The work progress
of installation of Hybrid Light Duty Tubewell and development of River Lift Irrigation has been completed.
Upgradation of Dinhatata S.D. Hospital started and upgradation of hospital infrastructure is about to
complete. Rural electrification works in all the 33 inhabited erstwhile Bangladeshi enclaves have been
completed and household electricity connection has been provided. One enclave namely Chitt Tilai is
being electrified through solar power. The work of 15 out of 16 piped water supplies has been completed.
Under upgradation of school infrastructure 17 additional class room, 26 additional toilets and 11 additional
girls toilets have been completed. Out of 25 Anganwadi centers, the development in 18 Anganwadi
centers has been completed. Out of 7 community halls, the work of 2 community halls completed. The
detailed progress report of State Government of West Bengal is enclosed as per Annexure-III.
3.4.6 As far as Indian Citizenship is concerned, it has already been granted to erstwhile Bangladesh
enclave dwellers vide notification dated 12th October, 2015 (Annexure-IV).
Further Recommendation
3.4.7 The Committee takes note of the progress report on rehabilitation package for the returnees
and upgradation of infrastructure of Cooch Behar District and erstwhile Bangladeshi enclaves in
India. The Committee, however, observes that the progress furnished is only till 30th November,
2017 and updated progress has not been furnished. The Committee also observes that the
progress with respect to several projects is dismal and is doubtful that the Ministry would have
been able to complete the projects within the stated date of completion, i.e., September, 2018.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite the implementation
of all the projects that are being implemented under the rehabilitation package and furnish latest
status on the same.
Recommendation
3.4.8 The Committee is not at all satisfied with the pace of the disbursement of financial assistance
being given to the Displaced Persons of PoJK and Chhamb. The Committee expresses its concern that
out of a package of 
` 2000 crore, only an amount of ` 436.11 crore has been disbursed by the
Government to 8851 beneficiary families. This is a matter of worry to the Committee. Keeping in view

19
the slow pace of disbursement, the Committee is apprehensive of the assurance given by the Ministry that
they would be able to complete the disbursement process during 2017-18. The Committee, nevertheless,
strongly recommends that the Government must undertake all out efforts for the disbursal of financial
assistance to the remaining 27,517 displaced families expeditiously to ensure the completion of disbursement
process during the current year itself. (Para 3.4.12 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.9 Under the Prime Minister's Development Package, 2015 an amount of `2000 crore, was allocated
for providing cash assistance of `5.5 Lakh per family to 36384 to displaced families from Pakistan
occupied Kashmir and Chhamb Niabat Areas by the Financial Year 2020-21. During the Financial Year
2017-18, only an amount of ` 300 crore was allocated for this Scheme. The allocated amount was highly
insufficient in comparison to the number of authenticated proposals furnished by the State Government
of Jammu and Kashmir for providing relief. Accordingly, an additional amount of `170 crore was made
available under this sub-Head by way of re-appropriation from the sub-Head SRE (R&R). It is stated that
the entire amount of `470 crore has been spent till 31st March, 2018 for providing relief to 9636
beneficiaries. This is in addition to ` 9.33 crore released to 175 beneficiaries during the Financial Year
2016-17. Accordingly, a total of ` 479.33 crore has been released to 9811 beneficiaries till 31st March,
2018. Thus, it is pertinent to mention that all authenticated proposals received from the State Government
during the Financial Year 2017-18 have been processed and the allocated amount has been fully disbursed.
3.4.10  In addition, during the 1st half of April, 2018, this Ministry has disbursed an amount of ` 99.04
crore to 2240 beneficiaries. Hence, no proposal for financial assistance from the State Government is
pending with this Ministry as on date.
Further Recommendation
3.4.11  The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry but is not convinced as to how the
Ministry plans to utilize the remaining amount out of the ````` 2,000 crore package. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should provide a detailed plan of action for implementation
of Prime Minister's Development Package, 2015 for J&K along with a timeframe for
implementation of various components and utilization of funds under the package. The Committee
also desires to know the number of families out of the total 27,517 families that are yet to
receive financial assistance and the number of families that have received full amount that was
promised under the package.
3.5 Allocation, Projections, Variations and Expenditure Trend
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee is disappointed to observe that the expenditure under some schemes, particularly
Nirbhaya, MoPF and CCTNS, Police Infrastructure (Delhi Police) and Maintenance and Border Check
Post has been abysmally low. The Committee understands that the under utilisation of allocated funds
became the reason for reduction of allocation offunds at RE stage under Demand No. 48 (Police). The
Committee strongly disapproves the declining trend of expenditure under these schemes and reiterates its

20
recommendation that the Ministry must undertake necessary measures to improve the absorption capacity
of the implementing agencies to ensure optimal utilisation of such funds in the upcoming fiscal year.
(Para 4.2.6  ibid )
Action Taken
3.5.2 The major portion of allocation under these schemes is under the Scheme 'Police Infrastructure'.
Most of the construction work is executed through Central Public Works Department, National Building
Construction Corporation and Border Roads Organisation. The funds are released to the executing
agencies by the concerned Offices/Departments, as per the demands raised by them. However, these
agencies are not able to utilize the entire funds released to them due to delay in acquisition of land, certain
climatic factors, labour problems, local agitations and non receipt of required clearances from the
concerned State Governments and non receipt of bills in time.
3.5.3 The progress of fund utilisation is reviewed at the CAPF/CPO level as well as at the Ministry level
regularly. Due to these efforts under the Scheme 'Police Infrastructure', against the BE of ` 4447.06
crore, the expenditure was ` 4556.74 crore (102.47%). Delhi Police utilized 99.95% of RE ( ` 249.38
Crore out of the RE of ` 249.51 crore) under the Police Infrastructure (Delhi Police).
3.5.4 To further expedite the process the Ministry has recently enhanced the limits for delegation of
financial powers to Directors General / Directors of CAPFs/CPOs from ` 10 crore to ` 15 crore for
Works to be executed by CPWD/ PWOs as per Rule, 133(2)&(3) of GFR, 2017 in consultation with
IFAs and from ` 50 lakh to ` 1 crore for Minor Works (petty repairs of Non Residential Buildings/
Residential Buildings) as per Rule 133 (1) and 133 (2) & (3) of General Financial Rules, 2017. A copy
of the order is enclosed as Annexure-I.
3.5.5 Under CCTNS the Ministry was able to utilise ` 244.99 crore out of the RE of ` 249.50 crore,
thus achieving a fund utilization level of 98.2%.
3.5.6 The slow pace of expenditure was witnessed under Integrated Check Posts (ICPs). As it involves
procurement of land, the land for the ICPs at Sunauli and Sutarkandi is likely to be completed and
process of acquisition of land at 6 more locations shall be initiated. Work is likely to be awarded for
construction of ICPs at 3 locations, Passenger Terminal Building at one location and accommodation for
Border Guarding Forces at 7 operational/under construction ICPs. Installation of Full Body Truck
Scanner (FBTS) is likely to be completed by September, 2018 at ICP Attari, Petrapole and Raxaul.
3.5.7 So far the Scheme of Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police (Erstwhile Modernisation
of Police Forces Scheme) is concerned, it has been experienced that under the scheme, States take quite
a long time to incur expenditure after release of funds. As per, General Financial Rules, the States have
to furnish Utilization Certificates (UCs) in respect of the funds released up to the previous year to last
year, for being eligible for release of funds during given year. During 2017-18 due to pendency of
Utilization Certificates, funds could not be released to the States as per their allocation. To increase
absorption capacity at the States end, the following measures have been undertaken:-
(i) In the new guidelines, approval cycle has been preponed and this is likely to advance the
release of funds thereby states will get more time to procure the approved items.

21
(ii) States Police have been adequately briefed regarding faster procurement. For this workshops
were organized at Bengaluru, Kolkata, Bhopal and Chandigarh. Various solutions to delay in
procurement of items were discussed.
(iii) The State Police have been advised to use GeM portal for further procurement.
(iv) In case of procurement through global tendering, States have been asked to club their
requirement of various items with that of Central Armed Police Forces.
(v) For enhancing the utilisation of funds and streamlining the process, the State Level Empowered
Committee (SLEC) of States has been reconstituted at Additional Chief Secretary/Principal
Secretary (Home)/Home Commissioner level and States are constantly instructed to submit
their Utilization Certificates (UCs) on time and in correct format.
3.5.8 In addition to the submission made above, it is submitted that the recommendation of the Committee
has been noted for compliance.
3.5.9 However, it is submitted that in order to expedite the expenditure, the Ministry regularly conducts
expenditure review meetings at the highest level ( viz. Home Minister/ Home Secretary/ Financial Advisor).
All the Budget Controlling Authorities of organizations / Divisions are given opportunity to come up with
any issues, relating to the expenditure that they may be facing, and then efforts are made to sort out
the issues, remove all bottlenecks and simplify the procedure.
Further Recommendation
3.5.10 The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry to enable the States to expedite
their procurement process, however, the Committee feels that the actual implementation of
these measures depends on the States concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should regularly take stock of the situation and over a period of time identify the
States that are prone to procurement delays. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
should establish an inter-state forum for interaction between the heads of State Level Empowered
Committees of different States under the guidance of the Ministry of Home Affairs so as to allow
them to share best practices for enhancing their absorption capacity and reduce procurement
bottlenecks.
3.6 National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID)
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee observes that the disturbing trend of poor expenditure and reduction in allocation
at RE stage continues in 2017-18 as well. The allocation of 
` 45.57 crore granted in BE 2017-18 was
substantially cut down to ` 22.77 crore in RE 2017-18. The Committee is not convinced by the explanation
furnished by the Ministry that funds could not be spent due to non-availability of appropriately qualified
professionals for various posts in the organization and due to reduced requirements under the head
'Machinery and Equipment'. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely monitor the
fund utilisation under NATGRID and ensure that the funds are not surrendered during the upcoming
fiscal year . (Para 4.5.4 ibid)

22
Action Taken
(` In crores)
BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18
Revenue 23.97 20.77
Capital 21.60 2.00
TOTAL 45.57 22.77
3.6.2 Provision of `21.60 crore in the head Machinery & Equipment was kept for payment to System
Integrator to be engaged for implementation of OSINT (EVA) Solution and development activities in other
tracks. Due to non-finalization of procurement tender, `2.00 crore retained for conducting Proof of
Technology (PoT) could also not be utilised and had been subsequently surrendered at RE stage.
3.6.3 An amount of ` 2 crore has been sought under 'Machinery and Equipment'. The expenditure was
to be incurred on procurement of Hardware and Software for Proof of Technology on Connectors. The
same was approved by the 5th Operations Committee meeting held on 29th November, 2017 (Minutes
issued on 4th January, 2018). Now, the technical specifications of the items to be procured are being
finalized and the same would be procured through Open tender process. As such, no expenditure was
incurred during the financial year 2017-18.
3.6.4 Out of the 41 critical roles of consultants approved, the action taken is as under:-
(i) At present, 14 consultants are on board.
(ii) Advertisements were issued by NISG for 9 positions in the second phase out of 19 and also
for 5 positions which remained unfilled in the first phase of 22 due to resignation /
unavailability of suitable candidates.
(iii) Out of the 14 positions, interviews for on boarding consultants for 12 roles were held from
13.02.2018 to 03.04.2018 and candidates for 9 positions selected.
(iv) For remaining 5 positions (4 from the second phase of 19 positions and 1 from the first
phase of 22 positions) Interviews will be held shortly.
3.6.5 NA TGRID is further examining timelines for engagement of 10 remaining consultants as per
requirements during FY 2018-19.
Further Recommendation
3.6.6 The Committee is surprised that even though an amount of `````21.60 crore was allocated
under Capital Head, the same was initially reduced to ````` 2 crore at RE stage and finally had to
be surrendered. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it only reaffirms
the fact that NATGRID's (National Intelligence Grid) operationalization has suffered due to
procedural delays and as a result the capital funds have been underutilized. The Committee also
notes that the technical specifications of the items to be procured have not been finalized yet.

23
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process
of procurement of Hardware and Software for Proof of Technology and complete the procurement
at the earliest.
3.6.7 The Committee also notes that a majority of Consultants are yet to be hired despite passage of
a long time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite the procurement
process and hiring of Consultants so as to achieve early operationalisation of NATGRID.
3.7 Central Police Organisations
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee notes that net total increase of 
`24.00 crore over BE 2017-18 at RE 2017-18 and
net total increase of `120.34 crore over BE 2017-18 at BE 2018-19 have happened on account of the
revenue component whereas the Ministry has not given satisfactory explanation for the drastic cut of
` 23.84 crore at RE 2017-18 in the capital component that has been reduced from ` 45.67 crore to `21.83
crore. The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to find out the actual reasons as to why each of these
six CPOs failed to utilise the capital allocation. The Committee also recommends that serious rethinking
be done by the Ministry in consultations with the end-users to cut down procedural delays that would
help them to get quick approval of various proposals for capital investments. Further, the Committee
believes that if the Ministry fails to take a quick relook at the existing system of capital expenditure
management of CPOs, the allocation of 
` 36.35 crore in BE 2018-19 may meet the same fate as in the
RE 2017-18. (Para 4.6.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 Among the CPOs the major reductions of ` 20.85 crore under the Capital Section has occurred
in respect of the Directorate of Communication Police Wireless (DCPW) and Tear Smoke Unit (TSU)
under the object head Machinery and Equipments as the proposals could not materialize in estimated time.
3.7.3 In addition to the submissions made above, it is submitted that the Ministry has recently enhanced
the limits for delegation of financial powers to Directors General / Directors of CAPFs/CPOs.
3.7.4 The Ministry has also recently delegated substantial financial powers to CAPFs/CPOs for
procurement related activities and for streamlining the procurement procedure, as explained in the reply
to Para No. 2.2.7. This is likely to help in better capital expenditure management to a great extent.
3.7.5 It is further submitted that in order to expedite the expenditure, the Ministry regularly conducts
expenditure review meetings at the highest level ( viz. Home Secretary/ Financial Advisor). All the Budget
Controlling Authorities of organizations / Divisions are given opportunity to come up with any issues,
relating to the expenditure that they may be facing, and then efforts are made to sort out the same and
remove bottlenecks and simplify the procedures.
3.7.6 However, the recommendations of the committee have been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.7.7 The Committee feels that by conducting the regular review meetings the Ministry should
have identified the reasons as to why the proposals under the head 'Machinery and Equipments'

24
were not materialising within stipulated time. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating its
recommendation to the Ministry to rethink to cut procedural delays expects that the Ministry
would furnish the status of proposals with respect to DCPW and TSU, along with specific reasons
for delay in procurement.
3.8 Schemes for Safety of Women
Recommendation
3.8.1 The Committee is surprised to note that the allocations made for Schemes for Safety of Women
has been drastically cut down from 
`313.30 crore at BE 2017-18 to just `81.75 crore at BE 2018-19
which is supposed to be spent by all the States and Union Territory Governments, including the Delhi
Police. The Committee is disappointed that the allocated amount of ` 22.69 crore (capital) could not
be utilised completely due to which the allocation got substantially decreased to `7.87 crore in RE
2017-18. The Committee strongly disapproves of this lack of seriousness in strengthening the safety and
security of women in the country. The Committee wishes to remind the Ministry that Nirbhaya Fund was
intended to implement schemes which are technology-driven and which will significantly enhance the
security of women. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should desist from allocating
funds, which are granted under the Nirbhaya Fund, for the purposes that can be covered by normal
spending. The Committee also recommends that at least one scheme should be implemented in every city
under the Nirbhaya Fund to significantly enhance the security of women. (Para 4.9.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.2 The Government places the highest priority to address the issue of rising crimes against women.
The allocation for 'Schemes of Safety of Women', BE 2017-18 was ` 313.30 crore. It includes ` 84.40
crore for Emergency Response Support System (ERSS), ` 200 crore for Cyber Crime Prevention against
Women and Children (CCPWC) and ` 28.90 crore for Schemes related to Delhi Police.
3.8.3 At the Revised Estimate stage, an amount of ` 76 crore was allotted for Emergency Response
Support System (ERSS). The ERSS project is to introduce nationwide single emergency number '112'
backed by Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD). During the period 2016-17 and 2017-18 funds have been
released to States and UTs for implementation of the same. Therefore, since most of the expenditure out
of the approved outlay under the scheme has already been incurred upto 2017-18, only a small amount
is required during 2018-19 for the balance activities. As such, this decrease in allocation cannot be
regarded as decreased attention towards the cause of safety of women.
3.8.4 In fact, the Government has recently identified eight large cities for implementation of Safe-City
Projects for women at a total cost of ` 2919.55 crore. The cities identified are Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata,
Mumbai, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Lucknow & Ahmedabad. It is expected that the cities shall start
implementing their plan in the fiscal year 2018-19.
3.8.5 It would thus be seen that there is no reduction in allotments for the purpose, on the other hand
there is a marked increase in allotments.
3.8.6 Further, under the Central Victim Compensation Fund (CVCF) Scheme, financial assistance of
` 200 crore as one-time grant has been sanctioned from Nirbhaya Fund and allocated to States / UTs

25
for compensating women victims on crimes committed against victims of acid attacks, rape, trafficking
etc. The entire amount of 200 crore has been disbursed to all the States/UTs during the financial year
2016-17. States/ UTs have been reminded for furnishing of Utilization Certificate for the amount received
by them under CVCF as a one-time grant.
3.8.7 The project of new office Building for office of Special Unit for Women & Children (SPUW AC)
and Special Unit for North East Region (SPUNER) at Nanak Pura, New Delhi under the Scheme for
Safety of Women (Funded by Nirbhaya Fund) has been awarded to M/s UPRNN. The building plan was
released on 21st September, 2017. During the financial year 2017-18, ` 21.17 crore was allocated under
the scheme for Safety of Women (Nirbhaya Fund), out of which ` 2.35 crore (Mobilisation Advance)
was released to M/s UPRNN on 9th August, 2017 and balance fund of `18.82 crore was surrendered
since the finalization of tender was under process. Hence funds could not be utilized due to no demand
by Executing Agency. Now, the work is likely to be awarded to the contractor shortly.
3.8.8 Under the head "Nirbhaya Fund" a budget of ` 35 lakh was allotted to this unit during the
financial year 2017-18 for procurement of Cyber equipment. Out of ` 35 lakh allocated, budget of
` 32,04,483/- was utilized during the financial year 2017-18. An amount of ` 2,95,517/- could not be
utilized due to technical difficulties occurring on GeM portal, though the expenditure sanction of the
competent authority was received.
Further Recommendation
3.8.9 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry that the decreased allocation made
for 'Schemes of Safety of Women' was primarily because most of the expenditure out of the
approved outlay for Emergency Response Support System had already been incurred upto
2017-18. The Committee, however, feels that the Ministry should have been more proactive in
finding new technology-driven projects that could have been implemented during the current
fiscal year. The Committee feels that Ministry should identify such innovative projects for
funding and implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
undertake sincere efforts to identify innovative technology-driven projects that can enhance the
safety of women, and seek additional funds for their implementation.
3.8.10 The Committee also observes that ````` 200 crore have been sanctioned as one-time grant for
Central Victim Compensation Fund (CVCF) Scheme for compensating women victims of acid
attacks, rape, trafficking, etc. The Committee appreciates the necessity and significance of the
CVCF Scheme, however, the Committee feels that this Scheme could have been funded from
sources other than Nirbhaya Fund, which was meant for funding initiatives aimed at enhancing
the safety and security for women in the country. The Committee feels that sanctioning funds
from Nirbhaya Fund for schemes pertaining to compensation would render the entire fund as a
fund for merely disbursal and would not have a desired impact at the ground level in enhancing
the security scenario for the women. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry should desist from sanctioning funds for such Schemes from Nirbhaya Fund and adhere
to the original purpose of Nirbhaya Fund. The Committee is also of the firm view that Nirbhaya
Fund should not be used for construction of buildings. Funds for construction of buildings should

26
come from other sources and not from the Nirbhaya Fund. Such allocations virtually defeat the
purpose of the Nirbhaya Fund.
3.9 Demand No. 49 - Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Recommendation
3.9.1 The Committee observes that the UT of A&N Islands has not been able to achieve optimal
utilisation of funds under some heads such as Disaster Management, Agriculture and Allied Activities,
Forestry and Wildlife, Road Transport, Roads and Bridges, and Port and Light Houses. The Committee
is constrained to express its deep displeasure to note that against an allocation of 
`782.81 crore under
'Shipping'in RE 2017-18, only ` 318.03 crore was spent till 31st January 2018 for the intended purpose.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the UT Administration should ascertain the reasons
for the under utilisation offunds and re-orient its work focus towards resolving the bottlenecks for
expeditious and prudent expenditure management and enhance the absorption capacity of the implementing
agencies of the on-going projects. (Para 5.3.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.9.2 The UT Administration has not been able to achieve optimal utilization of funds under some heads
of Agriculture and Allied Activities, Forestry and Wildlife, Roads and Bridges and Port and Lighthouses
mainly due to inclement weather condition and shortage of construction materials. The fair weather
happens normally during January to April, thus, major part of the expenditure has been incurred in the
last quarter.
3.9.3 As regards Disaster Management, an additional amount of `2.00 crore under 'Machinery and
Equipment' for payment of advance to the BSNL for commissioning of 35 Tsunami siren and `54.00
Lakhs under 'Major Works' for construction of office-cum-godown building have been obtained at the
RE stage for which approval of Parliament was obtained in the fourth and final batch of supplementary
demands for grants, 2017-18. Thus, the expenditure has been incurred in the last quarter.
3.9.4 As regards Road Transport, tender for purchase of buses could not be finalized due to lack of
competitive bidding, the tender specification as per its requirement got delayed due to implementation of
GeM, thus out of the budget kept for purchase of buses, an amount of `2.72 crore has been surrendered
to the Government of India.
3.9.5 As observed by the Committee against an allocation of ` 782.81 crore under 'Shipping' in RE
2017-18, only ` 318.03 crore was spent till 31st January, 2018 for the intended purpose. In this regard,
it is stated that the major part of the unutilized amount under the said head is the provision kept for 2nd
& 3rd stage payment towards construction of 2 x 1200 pax vessels. The additional funds for the same
has been obtained at the RE stage and cash supplementary was obtained in the second batch of
supplementary demand for grants, 2017-18, communication on the same was received from the Govt.
of India, MHA vide their letter dated 30th January, 2018. Moreover, there was delay in getting approval
of drawings by the LRS class United Kingdom for commencement of steel cutting for construction of
2 x1200 passenger vessels. Thus, the expenditure has been incurred in the last quarter.

27
3.9.6 In view of the above, it is stated that underutilization of funds has been due the reason beyond
the control of this UT Administration. However, effective mechanism for expeditious and prudent
expenditure management will be put in place to enhance the absorption capacity of the implementing
agencies of the on-going projects.
Further Recommendation
3.9.7 The Committee takes note of the Ministry's reply and observes that the final facts and
figures pertaining to fund utilization during the fiscal year 2017-18 have not been furnished. The
Committee desires to be apprised about the same so as to get a comprehensive assessment of
fund utilization by UT Administration of A&N Islands.
3.10 Disaster Management
Recommendation
3.10.1 The Committee observes that funds were allocated under the Disaster Management head for setting
up permanent GPS and seismic observatories which is a laudable step towards strengthening early
warning and emergency communication system. The Committee, however, recommends that all such
observatories must be set up within the stipulated timeframe. (Para 5.4.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.2 Setting up of GPS Observatories in 35 locations is the Project of Indian National Centre for
Oceanic Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad and M/o Earth Science, Government of India and
funded by the INCOIS.
3.10.3 Administration is coordinating the work of setting up of GPS observatories with INCOIS. NOC
from various Departments for the construction in 10x10 mtrs. of land has been obtained and construction
work has been has been stated for setting up of GPS Observatories. At present, construction work of
25 sites has been completed out of 35 sites. All the observatories will be set up on priority.
Further Recommendation
3.10.4 The Committee notes the progress made towards setting up of GPS observatories and
further recommends that the construction work of the remaining observatories may be expedited
so as to achieve timely completion. The Committee also desires to be apprised as and when all
the 35 observatories are set up and become functional.
3.11 Sources of Energy
Recommendation
3.11.1 The Committee notes that the 7-8% reduction in peak demand of power was achieved through
distribution of nearly four lakh LED bulbs in the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Committee
recommends that the Administration must continue with the scheme for replacing all the conventional
bulbs with LED bulbs throughout the UT for further reduction in peak demand besides improving the
overall energy scenario in the UT. For this purpose, the Administration must ensure the availability of

28
LED bulbs at affordable rates. The Committee hopes that this would help mitigate the power crisis of
A&N Islands to some extent. (Para 5.5.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.11.2 4 Lakh numbers of 9 Watts LED lamps received under DELP Scheme for distribution @ 4 Nos.
LED bulbs to each domestic consumers.
3.11.3 A total of about 3, 95, 305 LED bulbs have been distributed and remaining are available in different
site-offices to issue to consumers and replacement of defective bulbs. With this initiative, the peak
demand reduced to the tune of 7-8 per cent.
Further Recommendation
3.11.4 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and finds that no action seems to
have been taken on the Committee's recommendation to replace all the conventional bulbs with
LED bulbs throughout the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Committee, therefore, reiterates
its recommendation.
3.12 Medical and Public Health
Recommendation
3.12.1 The Committee is pained to note that only an honorarium of 
` 1000/- is being paid to the
community health workers, i.e. Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA), under the National Rural
Health Mission (NRHM) by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) because the same is
too meagre to reward the discharge of responsibilities under the scheme. The Committee is aware that
the mentioned amount is in addition to the incentives that are activity based. Nevertheless, the Committee
wishes to emphasize that performing duties in the remote and far-flung islands is an arduous task and
the incentives and honorarium being paid to ASHAs in such areas must invariably be higher than what
is being paid in other States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare should devise a credible scheme for providing greater incentive and higher honorarium
to ASHAs. (Para 5.6.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.12.2 ASHAs working under National Health Mission (NHM), A & N Islands are paid `1000/- per month
for routine activities and scheme wise performance based incentives are also paid which are fixed by
the M/o Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, New Delhi. Considering the grievances received from
ASHAs demanding to hike the monthly honorariums, a proposal of enhancement of honorarium is under
consideration with the UT Administration. If needed necessary projection may be made in the Annual Plan
of NHM for the year 2018-19. The matter pertains to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government
of India. The UT Administration has been advised to take up the matter for enhancement of incentive
and honorarium with the Ministry Health & Family Welfare.

29
Further Recommendation
3.12.3 The Committee is aware that the Prime Minister recently announced free insurance cover
under PMJJBY and PMSBY for Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) but no increase in the
monthly honorarium. The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendation.
3.13 Hiring of Transponders
Recommendation
3.13.1 The Committee observes that the hiring of the transponders is neither cost effective nor has the
ability to yield the desired bandwidth that is required for smooth operation of internet applications. The
Committee is of the considered view that the proposal for laying of Submarine Optical Fiber Cable
(OFC) must be taken on priority for implementation. The Committee strongly believes that the OFCs
would be able to provide a gamut of basic and important facilities, including making telemedicine a
reality. (Para 5.7.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.13.2 Department of Telecommunication is anchoring the project sub-Marine Optical Fibre cable between
Chennai to A&N Islands (Port Blair and 5 Islands viz: Havelock, Little Andaman, Car Nicobar, Kamorta
and Campbell Bay.
3.13.3 The Government of India has approved the DPR of the project at a total estimated cost of
`1102.38 crore (Capital cost of `880.03 crore and Operation and Maintenance Cost of `222.35 crore
for 5 Years). As per approval accorded, BSNL will be the implementing agency and TCIL will be the
technical consultant agency. BSNL Corporate office had floated global tender on 7th July, 2017 inviting
bids for selection of executing agency for the project. In response to the tender, only one bid has been
received. BSNL has completed the bid process management and submitted to Universal Service Obligation
Fund (USOF) for obtaining approval of competent authority. The proposal will now be placed before the
Telecom Commission, Government of India for approval. As per time lines indicated, the project will be
completed by March, 2019.
Further Recommendation
3.13.4 The Committee notes the Ministry's reply and is apprehensive about the timely completion
of project to lay the sub-marine optical fiber cable between Chennai and A & N Islands by March,
2019 as it is still at the stage of obtaining necessary approvals. The Committee desires that the
Ministry may review the project timeline and furnish a realistic timeframe and accordingly chalk
out a course of action to complete the projects.
3.14 Delegation of Powers for Primary Education, Primary Health, Water Supply and Sanitation
Recommendation
3.14.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Home Secretary that the Ministry has devolved
financial power up to 
`100 crore to the Administrator and some powers must further be devolved to the
PRIs as they should have the power to sanction money for its effective functioning. The Committee also

30
takes note of the submission of the Ministry that in the sectors like primary education, primary health,
water supply and sanitation, power will be devolved to the PRIs in a month's time. The Committee desires
that the UT Administration may submit a report and apprise the Committee after the devolution of
financial power. (Para 5.9.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.14.2 As per the decision of MHA upon the recommendations of 4th Finance Commission, the UT
Administration has submitted a proposal to the Zilla Parishads for taking over of the functions such as
Primary Education, Primary Health, Water Supply and Sanitation in full shape with funds and functionaries.
The modalities are being developed by the UT Administration in coordination with the concerned Zilla
Parishads for transfer of the functions. The committee will be apprised of after devolution of financial
power to Panchayat Raj Institutions.
Further Recommendation
3.14.3 The Committee is disappointed to note that despite giving an assurance of devolving
powers to the PRIs in a month's time, the Ministry is still waiting for the modalities to be worked
out. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the transfer of functions in sectors
like Primary Education, Primary Health, Water Supply and Sanitation may be expedited and done
at the earliest.
3.15 Bank Erosion
Recommendation
3.15.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the problem of bank erosion needs
to be looked on priority basis and cost-effective measures must be taken for checking the bank erosion
into starting with Diglipur Tehsil. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Ministries
concerned must be pursued for expediting the finalisation of the proposal forwarded by the UT
Administration and additional requirement of funds for the projects must be taken up with the Ministry
of Finance at RE stage. (Para 5.10.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.15.2 There are many nallahs including few rivers such as Rangat river and Kalpong river in the North
& Middle Andaman which carry huge discharge during monsoon and banks get eroded. It is also a usual
phenomenon that these nallahs and river change their course which ultimately erodes new areas on its
bank. Due to this erosion of bank over the years, a considerable quantum of agricultural land belonging
to farmers/ settlers of the area has been lost besides posing danger to many of the structures such as
buildings, roads and bridges, etc.
3.15.3 In order to save some of the buildings, road and bridges which were vulnerable to these bank
erosions in the past, CC/RCC walls were provided apart crates of gabions filled with stone boulders on
those places, which are most needed due to fund constraints. However, there is a growing demand from
PRI members of the area and also from the Hon'ble MP to provide protective measures along the banks

31
which passes through agricultural lands and habitat area to protect the land and other structures situated
along the bank.
3.15.4 The CWPRS who has expertise in dealing with such works has been consulted and it was
concluded that gabion crates filled with stone boulder is the best way to protect bank erosion. Protection
measure would cost around `9.17 crore per kilometre.
3.15.5 As regarding ascertaining the quantum of protective measures, the Agriculture Department has
already undertaken a survey of agricultural land requires such protective measures. The outcome of the
survey duly verified by the Revenue Department have been received only for Diglipur Tehsil and the
report with regards to Mayabunder and Rangat Tehsil is yet to be received.
3.15.6 The MHA has advised Ministries which implement schemes to address flood protection, soil
erosion, watershed activities and land development to address these issues in the UT. Besides, MoF
would also be requested for providing additional funds at the RE/supplementary stage.
Further Recommendation
3.15.7 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has advised the Ministries
concerned to address flood protection, soil erosion, watershed activities, and land development
issues in the UT of A&N Islands. The Committee, however, feels that instead of advising the
concerned Ministries, the recommendations of the Committee should have been brought to their
notice and an action taken report should have been obtained from them. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Ministries concerned must be pursued for
expediting the finalisation of the proposal forwarded by the UT Administration.
3.16 Environment
Recommendation
3.16.1 The Committee observes that the pollution emanating from the Vapi Chemical factory has become
a cause of concern for the people and is hazardous to the environment. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that keeping in view the interest of the people, and damage caused to the environment, the
Vapi Chemical factory should be asked to treat the effluents coming out of the factory by adhering to
the strict norms of pollution control failing which the matter should be reported to the Green Tribunal
having jurisdiction over the area. The Ministry must request the State Government of Gujarat to undertake
urgent measures to control the pollution caused by the Vapi Chemical factory. (Para 5.23.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.16.2 The U.T. Administration of Daman & Diu has taken up the matter with the NEERI and State
Government of Gujarat.
3.16.3 The UT Administration of Daman & Diu has carried out a study with the NEERI on pollution
status of River Daman Ganga and development of pollution abetment strategies for river system in the
entire river stretch from Madhuban Dam to its confluence with Arabian Sea at Moti Daman. Water
samples at 22 discharge points and 30 locations in the river stream were collected and analysed.

32
3.16.4 UT Administration of Daman & Diu has taken up the matter with Chairman, Gujarat Pollution
Control Board (GPCB), Govt. of Gujarat regarding the common discharge of waste water into Daman
Ganga River. The Chairman, GPCB along with his team of officials and representatives from GPCB
Regional Office, Vadodara held a meeting with the Administrator, UT Administration of Daman & Diu on
10th February, 2018 on issues related to water pollution in River Daman Ganga flowing from Vapi to
Daman and decided to:-
(i) Have regular meeting of the task force constituted for the purpose as per Govt. constitution
dated 10th December, 2014.
(ii) Regular collection of water samples at discharge points of Daman Ganga River shall bearried
out jointly by GPCB and Pollution Control Committee (PCC), D&D and DNH.
(iii) Separate joint sampling shall be carried out by GPCB, PCC, DD & DNH and Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at discharge points or locations. The samples shall be sent
for analysis to the laboratories of GPCB, Central Pollution Control Board & National
Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI).
3.16.5 Viability of laying an underground pipeline carrying out the effluent to the deep sea entirely through
Gujarat territory shall be got examined by Gujarat Government. However, MHA has requested the State
Government of Gujarat undertake urgent measures to control the pollution caused by the V API Chemical
Factory.
Further Recommendation
3.16.6 The Committee may be apprised of the result of water samples at 22 discharge points and
30 locations in the river stream collected during the study conducted by NEERI on pollution
status of River Daman Ganga, The Committee also notes that the measures cited above had been
taken prior to the Committee's recommendations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation that the MHA should consider appr oaching the Green Tribunal for addressing
these issues.

33
CHAPTER -IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 ALLOCATIONS, PROJECTIONS AND VARIATIONS
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee also notes that the allocation, under the capital heads of some UT s viz. A&N
Islands, Chandigarh and Daman & Diu, have been reduced considerably in BE 2018-19 as compared
to the allocation that was granted in RE 2017-18. The Committee is concerned that this reduction can
potentially hamper the developmental activities in these UTs. The representatives of the UTs have time
and again lamented the inadequacy of funds allocated to them. The Committee wonders what the
rationale of this decline in allocation could be. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
must review the capital requirements of these UTs in the first half of the next fiscal year and project a
higher demand for allocation to the Ministry of Finance at RE stage. (Para 2.2.8 of 209th Report)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The Ministry will review
the capital requirements of UTs in the first half of the fiscal year 2018-19 and project the demand for
allocation based on the expenditure incurred by them during that period and keeping in view the key
sectors of the concerned UTs. The climatic conditions that reduce the working period in both the UTs
i.e. Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep will also be taken care of.
Further Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry had planned to review the capital requirements of
UTs in the first half of the fiscal year 2018-19. The Committee, therefore, desires that the
Ministry should furnish the capital expenditure pattern of the UTs and outcome of review of their
capital requirements to this Committee. The Committee also desires to be apprised about the
details of allocation made to all UTs against the demand projected by them at the stage of RE
2018-19.
Recommendation
4.1.4 The Committee observes that there was a significant reduction in capital allocation under the
Demands 51 (Dadra and Nagar Haveli) and 53 (Lakshadweep) at the RE stage in 2017-18. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should undertake measure to improve the capital expenditure
of the UTs and ensure an optimal utilization of funds. (Para 2.2.9 ibid)
Action Taken
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
4.1.5 The U.T. Administration had taken up certain Major works for 2017-18, however the projects
were delayed or dropped due to administrative reasons resulting in reduction under capital allocation at
33

34
R.E. Stage. However, U.T. Administration will take due care to improve the capital expenditure. Further,
UT Administration will also review & monitor the Utilization of fund under Capital head from time to
time.
Lakshadweep
4.1.6 Under Capital section BE 2017-18 was `165.65 crore and in RE 2017-18 it was reduced to
`140.13 crore Reduction of `25.61 crore was accommodated under MH 5052 Shipping under the
component from Ship acquisition ( `20 crore) and establishment of Dedicated Berths at mainland ports
(`5.61 crore). Reason for reduction in both heads are explained as follows:
(i) Ship Acquisition:  Approval for 15 year perspective plan for shipping (2015-2030), which
was approved only in 2017-18 and after that SFC approval is to be obtained for each ship
and acquisition process is to be executed through Shipping Corporation of India (SCI).
Hence, the funds earmarked could not be utilized.
(ii) Dedicated Berth: As the establishment of Dedicated berths at various mainland ports (Beypore
in Kelara and Mangalore in Karnataka) has been delayed due to various bottlenecks like
environment clearance, etc. fund earmarked could not be utilized fully.
4.1.7 This Ministry has also noted the recommendation of the Committee to improve the capital expenditure
of the UTs.
Further Recommendation
4.1.8 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry that the UT Administration will
take due care to improve the capital expenditure and also review & monitor the utilization of
fund. The Committee finds the reply to be routine without any concrete measures that will
inspire confidence. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures.
4.2 Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Ministry that out of 3000 additional State
Government jobs for Kashmiri migrants at the cost of 
` 1020 crore under the Prime Minister's package,
2,865 posts have been referred to the recruiting agencies and the recruitment process will be completed
in 2018-19. The Committee feels that the 2,865 posts must be filled within the stipulated timeframe. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable steps must be taken to ensure that the recruitment process
for all these posts should be fast-tracked and the appointment letters be issued to the selected candidates
during 2018-19 itself. (Para 3.4.11  ibid )
Action Taken
4.2.2 The State Government of Jammu & Kashmir has been recently requested to accelerate the process
and apprise this Ministry regarding the latest position of the recruitment process undertaken so far.

35
Further Recommendation
4.2.3 The Committee may be apprised about the latest status of recruitment process under the
Prime Minister's Package in J&K.
4.3 Infrastructure for Disaster Management
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee takes note of the newly approved infrastructure projects for NDRF Academy in
Nagpur and 11 Bn NDRF, Hollangi in Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should sanction adequate funds for building the infrastructural facilities of these projects during the year
2018-19. (Para 3.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 Recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
4.3.3 The Committee may be apprised as and when adequate funds for building infrastructure
facilities for NDRF Academy in Nagpur and 11 Bn NDRF, Hollangi in Arunachal Pradesh are
sanctioned.
4.4 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP)
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee observes that against the planned 353 Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters (MPCS),
only 22 have been completed, till 31st December, 2017, and 158 are under execution. The Committee
is displeased to note that 173 MPCS are yet to be taken up for construction. The Committee, takes into
account the slow pace of construction, and apprehends that the Ministry may not be able to complete
the construction of 353 MPCS as per the timeline by March, 2020. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the construction work of 158 MPCS must be expedited and the remaining 173 MPCS
must be taken up for construction at the earliest. (Para 3.6.15 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 22 MPCS have been completed under NCRMP Phase-II, 195 MPCS are under execution, out of
which 59 are likely to be completed soon. Remaining MPCS (136 Nos) are at various stages of planning
viz., design/Detailed Project Report finalisation, seeking environment clearance etc. and are being taken
up by states in a phased manner. Time period of completion of MPCS is 15 to 18 months. The Physical
progress is monitored through monthly outcome budget and at the apex level through quarterly Project
Steering Committee meetings and the Project Oversight committee meetings. All efforts are being made
to adhere to the timeline of March, 2020.
Further Recommendation
4.4.3 The Committee notes the slow progress in the execution of Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters
(MPCS) and observes that during the first half of 2018, construction of not a single MPCS has

36
been completed. The Committee feels that such a slow pace is not acceptable and the Ministry
of Home Affairs seriously needs to fast-track the construction. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Project Steering Committee and the Project Oversight committee should
meet on a monthly basis to strengthen the monitoring of projects.
4.4.4 The Committee also observes the time period of completion of Multipurpose Cyclone
Shelters (MPCS) i.e. 15 to 18 months and feels that the Ministry may not be able to complete
all the MPCS by March, 2020, even if the construction of all the remaining shelters has been
taken up by the end of December, 2018. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the
States may be advised about this aspect and may be urged to complete the construction process.
The Committee desires to be apprised about the number of MPCS that have been completed.
4.5 Special Industry Initiative for Jammu and Kashmir
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee takes note of the progress of the UDAAN scheme. The Committee feels that by
providing training and employment to the youth of J&K, the Government can help them immensely in
their capacity development. This will also enable the corporate sector to tap the potential of the youth
of J&K. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the implementation of this scheme may be continued
beyond December , 2018 till 2020. (Para 3.7.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.5.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted for consideration/compliance.
Further Recommendation
4.5.3 The Committee desires to be apprised whether the UDAAN scheme has been granted
extension from December 2018 till 2020.
4.6 Home Guards
Recommendation
4.6.1 The Committee notes that most of the States have failed to implement the judgment of the Supreme
Court on increasing the duty allowance of Home Guards to the minimum pay which police personnel are
entitled to. Moreover, some of the States have even failed to furnish a reply to the Ministry's attempts
to seek the status of implementation. The Committee is anguished to note such a casual attitude of the
State Governments. The Committee is further displeased to note that even the UTs, which are under the
administrative control of the MHA, have failed to implement the judgment, with the exception of the
NCT of Delhi. The Committee feels that this points to a serious lack of administrative accountability.
The Committee also observes that some of the states such as Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Tripura are paying
paltry rates of duty allowance that may not be even equal to the minimum wages in these states. The
Committee is of the view that this is an extremely sorry state of affairs and recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs must take urgent steps to ensure that all states implement the Supreme Court judgment
in letter and spirit so as to bring uniformity in the rates of duty allowance paid to Home Guards across

37
the country. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should write to the State Governments,
which have not furnished a reply on the issue, seeking an explanation from them for not responding to
the repeated reminders of the Ministry. (Para 3.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.6.2 Home Guard is a State Subject and Home Guards in States/UTs are governed, employed and
administered under the State Home Guards Acts and Rules. Directorate General, Fire Service, Civil
Defence and Home Guards, MHA has been pursuing the matter since 2015 and issued several letters
dated 4th June, 2015, 16th September, 2016, 6th March, 2017, 24th April, 2017 and 11th April, 2018.
Only 5 States/UTs have implemented the orders. 18 States/UTs have informed that the case is under
active consideration in the States/UTs. DM Division of MHA is also taking up the matter with the
concerned States/UTs from where reply is still awaited.
Recommendation
4.6.3 The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that the State Governments/UTs are blatantly and
willfully not implementing the Supreme Court judgment and despite repeated reminders by the Ministry
of Home Affairs, only five States/UTs have implemented the judgment. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue a reminder to those States/UTs, which are
yet to implement the judgment of the Supreme Court, and direct them to implement the judgment without
any further delay. The Committee also recommends that if the States/UTs fail to implement the judgment
within six months, the Minister may convene a meeting of all the State Ministers concerned to discuss
this issue with them . (Para 3.8.5 ibid)
Action Taken
4.6.4 Home Guard is a State Subject and Home Guards in States/UTs are governed, employed and
administered under the State Home Guards Acts and Rules. Directorate General, Fire Service, Civil
Defence and Home Guards has been pursuing the matter with all States/UTs implementing the Supreme
Court judgment since June, 2015 and issued several letters dated 4th June, 2015, 16th September, 2016,
6th March, 2017, 24th April, 2017 and 1 1th April, 2018. Only 5 States/UTs viz. NCT of Delhi, Nagaland,
Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have implemented the orders.
4.6.5 18 S tates/UTs (A&N island, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, J&K, Karnataka,
Lakshadweep, Maharashtra, , Manipur, Mizoram, Odisha, Puducherry, Rajasthan, UP and West Bengal)
have informed the case under consideration. Information from remaining States/UTs is awaited.
Further Recommendation
4.6.6 The Committee takes note of the statement of the Ministry that Home Guards is a state
subject. But the Committee feels that MHA should continue pursuing state governments for
implementing the Supreme Court's order and lead by example by implementing it in all the UTs.
The Ministry should convene a meeting of all the States/UTs under the Chairmanship of Home
Secretary to discuss the pitiable condition of the Home Guards and seek reasons for not
implementing Supreme Court's order. The Committee also recommends that the division concerned

38
of MHA may send a monthly reminder on this issue and obtain regular status of action taken
in this matter.
4.7 Allocation, Projections, Variations and Expenditure Trend
Recommendation
4.7.1 The Committee notes that the capital allocation of 
`11178.36 crore, granted in BE 2017-18, was
reduced by `573.58 crore at the RE stage. This indicates poor utilization of capital funds by the Ministry
under Demand No. 48 (Police). The Committee is aware that the Central Armed Police Forces have huge
capital requirements and several projects such as border fencing and floodlighting also require adequate
amount of capital funds. However, poor utilization of funds by the Ministry leads to a reduction in these
funds at RE stage. The Committee expresses its displeasure on this reduction and recommends that the
Ministry must undertake necessary measures to improve its capital expenditure in the upcoming fiscal
year . (Para 4.2.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.7.2 Ma jor portion of the Capital Section of the Grant of the Grant No.48-Police has been allocated
for Border Infrastructure & Management, Infrastructure of CAPFs & Delhi Police and Provisioning
Heads of CAPFs.
4.7.3 Ministry had constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of former Home Secretary
Shri Madhukar Gupta to suggest ways to strengthen border protection and address the issue of gaps and
vulnerability in border fencing along the India-Pakistan border. Less expenditure was incurred under
Indo-Pak Border as some of the projects were reviewed and re-prioritized.
4.7.4 In order to achieve better utilization of funds under Border Management and Infrastructure, regular
review meetings to monitor the expenditure on the ongoing projects in Indo-Pak and Indo-Bangladesh
borders are held with various executing agencies.
4.7.5 Further, fund of Coastal Security section was mainly for procurement of 225 boats sanctioned
under Phase-II of Coastal Security Scheme (CSS). However, the boats could not be procured during the
financial year 2017-18. Police Modernization (PM) Division of the Ministry is at an advanced stage for
award of contract for procurement of 225 boats sanctioned under Phase-II of the CSS. Fund of Coastal
Security section shall be utilized mainly for procurement of aforementioned boats in the FY 2018-19.
4.7.6 To enhance the capabilities of CAPFs to incur capital expenditure, the Ministry has recently
delegated enhanced financial powers and has streamlined the procurement process. The details could be
perused in the reply to Para No. 2.2.7.
4.7.7 In addition, as explained in the reply to Para No. 2.2.7, further financial powers have been
delegated to CAPFs/CPOs for executing Works.
4.7.8 It is submitted that in order to expedite the expenditure, the Ministry regularly conducts expenditure
review meetings at the highest level ( viz. Home Minister/ Home Secretary/ Financial Advisor). All the
Budget Controlling Authorities of organizations / Divisions are given opportunity to come up with any

39
issues, relating to the expenditure that they may be facing, and then efforts are made to sort out the
issues, remove all bottlenecks and simplify the procedure.
4.7.9 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. Sincere efforts will be made
to remove the bottlenecks and procedural delays that have led to reduction in allocations.
Further Recommendation
4.7.10 The Committee recalls that the Ministry has been planning to procure 225 boats under
Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme since 2015 and for the last two financial years, it has
been forfeiting funds meant for procurement of these boats. The Committee expresses it deep
disappointment and reiterates its recommendation and asks the Ministry to furnish details of
progress made in the procurement of boats.
4.8 Police Infrastructure
Recommendation
4.8.1 The Committee recognizes the paramount need for good infrastructure and facilities for police
forces to enhance the quality of policing. It observes that given the massive infrastructural requirements
of Police as elaborated above by the Ministry, the increase of 
` 260.37 crore in the allocation of
` 4750.00 crore in BE 2018-19 over ` 4489.63 crore in RE 2017-18 will not be sufficient to meet the
same. The Committee recommends that the Ministry must impress upon the Ministry of Finance for higher
allocations under this head in RE 2018-19. The Committee also recommends that the proposed target of
20,000 houses and 200 barracks must be completed during 2018-19. (Para 4.4.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.8.2 It is submitted that the total allocation for Police Infrastructure has been increasing at a steady
pace every year. The momentum has been sustained in the allocations for the FY 2018-19. Budget
allocations for Police Infrastructure in the FY 2015-16 was `3410.69 crore which has been increased
to ` 4750 crore in BE 2018-19.
4.8.3 The Ministry is reviewing the progress of fund utilization under Police Infrastructure regularly.
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Based on the expenditure trend
and absorptive capacity of the various organizations, Ministry will impress upon the Ministry of Finance
for higher allocations under the heads in RE 2018-19.
Further Recommendation
4.8.4 The Committee notes that the status of proposed construction of 20,000 houses and 200
barracks, that were to be completed during 2018-19, has not been furnished. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation in this regard and desires to be apprised about the status of
construction.
4.9 National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID)
Recommendation
4.9.1 The Committee also observes that the construction of Bengaluru building is held up due to certain
issues and the executing agency will now be able to complete the construction work by September, 2018.

40
The Committee takes a strong exception to the fact that the Ministry has been unable to ensure the
completion of construction of NATGRID infrastructure and the deadline has now been extended to
September, 2018. The Committee strongly recommends that the construction work of NATGRID must be
completed by this deadline at all costs and no further delay should occur. (Para 4.5.5  ibid )
Action Taken
4.9.2 100% civil construction work in DR Centre, Bengaluru has been completed. 85% of civil
infrastructure work has been completed in Administrative Building and DC /BCP at Andheria Mod site,
New Delhi as on 31st March, 2018. In respect of pending work of furnishing of Data Centre, NBCC
has issued letter of award (LOA) on 3rd April, 2018 to the successful bidder for designing, building,
testing, commissioning of Data Centres at Bengaluru and New Delhi.
4.9.3 As per LOA, issued by NBCC, the time lines for completion of Data Centre is four months for
Bengaluru and six months for Delhi. NBCC has assured to complete the work by September/October,
2018. The progress of work will be monitored on a regular basis to ensure its completion as per the
timelines.
Further Recommendation
4.9.4 The Committee may be apprised whether NBCC has completed the work of Data Centres
at Delhi and Bengaluru.
4.10 Border Infrastructure & Management
Recommendation
4.10.1 The Committee is displeased to note that the allocations made for Border Infrastructure and
Management have been constantly decreasing over the years
. The Committee observes that the funds
under this head were significantly decreased by `560.16 crore at RE stage in FY 2017-18 mostly due
to delayed construction of infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry
should seriously go into the reasons for slow pace of work and poor utilization of funds under this head.
The Committee also recommends that the allocations made in BE 2018-19 to the tune of `1750.00 crore
should be optimally utilised. (Para 4.8.10 ibid)
Action Taken
4.10.2 The funds under Border Infrastructure and Management have been allocated for Coastal Security
(CS) section.
4.10.3 The allocation of funds at BE 2017-18 & RE 2017-18 stage and their utilization for the aforementioned
section is as follows:-
(in ` Crore)
Sl Section BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18 Funds utilized
1. CS 261.31 16.31 16.31

41
4.10.4 The reasons for reduction of allocation at RE stage are as follows:-
"Fund of CS Section was mainly for procurement of 225 boats sanctioned under Phase-II of
Coastal Security Section (CSS). However, the boats could not be procured during the financial year
2017-18. The non-utilization of budget head is attributed to the procedural complexities involved
in procurement of 225 boats for coastal States/UTs."
4.10.5 The allocation of funds in BE 2018-19 is as follows:-
(in ` Crore)
Sl. Section BE 2017-18
1. CS 175.88
4.10.6 The measures being taken to utilize funds during FY 2018-19 optimally are as follows:-
(i) Proposal for award of contract for procurement of 225 boats sanctioned under Phase-II of
the CSS is at an advanced stage. Fund allocation of CS Section shall be utilized mainly for
procurement of aforementioned boats.
(ii) Indo-China and Indo-Nepal border:- Budget allocation has been fully utilized. Constant
efforts will be made to utilize the entire budget allocation of the upcoming fiscal year also.
Suggestions noted.
(iii) Indo-Myanmar Border:- Funds of `15.00 crore allocated for FY 2017-18 for construction
of border roads and helipads along IMB had been reduced to zero at RE stage itself as the
proposal of construction of roads & helipads could not be finalized and approved. No funds
have been projected and earmarked in BE 2018-19 for construction of border roads and
helipads along IMB. `1.27 crore has been allocated under BOP head of Assam Rifles in BE
2018-19. Recommendation of the committee has been noted.
(iv) Indo-Bangladesh Border:- During 2017-18, the allocation of funds of capital component
along Indo-Bangladesh Border was enhanced from ` 900.00 crore (at BE stage) to ` 1003
crore (at RE stage). Thus in this border there was no reduction in allocation of funds at
RE stage.
(v) Indo-Pak Border:- During 2017-18, the allocation of funds of capital component along Indo-
Pakistan Border (IPB) fund allocation was reduced from ` 400 crore (at BE stage) to
` 110.66 crore at RE stage. This was done in the light of Recommendations of Madhukar
Gupta Committee Report, as a result of which some projects were reviewed and re-
prioritized."
4.10.7 The progress in expenditure of funds on Border Infrastructure Works is adversely affected due
to various factors, viz, difficult terrain, non-availability of site due to pending land acquisition, public
protests, objection by Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB), etc. However, suggestions of Committee have
been noted. Constant efforts will be made to utilize the entire budget allocation in this fiscal year.

42
Further Recommendation
4.10.8 The Committee, while taking note of the review and re-prioritizing of projects done in the
light of recommendation of Madhukar Gupta Committee Report, reiterates its recommendation
given in response to para 4.2.3 (pages 55-56) of the 209th Report regarding procurements of
boats. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry chalk out strategy to implement those
projects in this fiscal year itself and apprise the Committee of the progress made.
4.11 Border Area Development Programme
Recommendation
4.11.1 The Committee observes that the allocation made for Border Area Development Programme has
seen a cut of 
` 329.03 crore in the BE 2018-19 over the BE of 2017-18. The Committee is unable to
understand the reasons for this significant reduction in allocation for a programme that is important for
the border security of the country. The Committee wishes to emphasize that the funds allocated under
this program are for meeting the special developmental needs and well being of the people living in
remote and inaccessible areas situated near the international border and to provide the border areas with
the essential infrastructure. The Committee is displeased that instead of further strengthening this programme,
the even the usual allocation has been reduced. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry
should make a strong case for additional allocation for this program at RE stage and seek more funds
to strengthen this program. (Para 4.10.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.11.2 BADP Section has utilized the entire amount of ` 1100.00 crore allocated to it under BE
2017-18. It had raised a demand of ` 1210.00 crore for BE 2018-19 though it has been allocated only
` 770.97 crore under BE 2018-19. The recommendation of the Committee to make a strong case for
additional allocation at RE stage shall be referred while furnishing the RE proposal under BADP for the
year 2018-19.
Further Recommendation
4.11.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance may be requested to furnish the
reasons for granting inadequate funds under Border Area Development Programme (BADP) for
the year 2018-19. The Committee desires to be apprised about the reasons along with the
allocation granted at RE stage of FY 2018-19.
4.12 Medical and Public Health
Recommendation
4.12.1 The Committee is surprised to find that only an amount of 
` 1.00 crore has been allocated under
BE 2018-19 for the construction of Medical College in Andaman & Nicobar Islands on the ground that
during the Financial Year 2017-18, an amount of `20.00 crore was allocated towards the construction
of Medical College and the same could not be utilized, and the amount received earlier through Central
Grants and UT budget was already available with the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Institute of Medical

43
Sciences (ANIMERS). The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that, if the funds are indeed
available as stated, the construction of the Medical College must be expedited for catering and serving
the health care needs of the local population of the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
(Para 5.6.3  ibid )
Action Taken
4.12.2 The Andaman Public Works Department has been directed to expedite the construction work of
Medical College. The details of ongoing projects in the Phase-I are as under:-
(i) 2 Nos. Hostel for Boys & 2 Nos. Hostel for Girls- `1502.34 lakh
(ii) Dining Hall Kitchen Block & Hostel for Asst. Prof/Lecturers - ` 475.22 lakh.
(iii) 12 Nos. type III Qtr. 12 Nos. Type IV , 12 Nos, Type V & 6 Nos. Type VI Qtr. - ` 1864.45
lakh.
(iv) 01 No. RCC surface tank, 1 No sump tank capacity 2,45,000 ltrs laying of pumping line
from sump to surface tank, providing & installation of 2 Nos. water pumps & laying of
distribution line from surface tank to Girls & Boys Hostel, Dining hall cum kitchen and
residential quarters to girls and boys hostel - `83.44 lakh.
4.12.3 Construction work of Medical College at main campus (Phase-II) has also be initiated as detailed
below:
(i) Administrative and Library Block.
(ii) Lecture Theatre (05 Nos.) and Examination Hall (02 Nos.)
(iii) Science Block
(a) Pre- Clinical Block
(b) Para-clinical Block
(iv) Hostel for Assistant Professors
(v) Residential Quarters
(a) Type IV Qtr - 24 Nos.
(b) Type V Qtr - 12 Nos.
(c) Type VI Qtr - 12 Nos.
4.12.4 Further, the construction work at the main campus was delayed due to the topographical condition
and during rainy season, which is very long in the island, it is difficult to continue the construction
activities. Moreover, seasonings of the earmarked area, like earth cutting, leveling of land, CRZ clearance
was also factors for delay in undertaking construction activities at the earmarked site of Medical College
at New Corbyns Cove.

44
Further Recommendation
4.12.5 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry and desires to be
apprised about the physical and financial progress achieved with respect the construction of
Medical College in the UT of A&N Islands along with the timeline for completion.
4.13 Rural Roads under PRIs
Recommendation
4.13.1 The Committee takes a serious note of the deteriorating conditions of the roads in the UT and
recommends that the MHA must take up with the Ministry concerned for the approval of the proposal
for a one-time package of 
`350 crore for the Andaman & Nicobar Islands before projecting funds
requirement at the RE stage. (Para 5.8.3  ibid )
Action Taken
4.13.2 A proposal for additional grant of `333.16 crore for repair of roads in the Andaman & Nicobar
Islands has been received from the UT of A&N Administration. The UT Administration has been asked
to provide details of roads viz. total length of roads, number of roads and category of roads for proper
examination of the proposal. The issue is under active consideration.
Further Recommendation
4.13.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry must furnish the details of additional
grants disbursed for repair of roads to the A&N Islands' administration before the upcoming fair
weather season.
4.14 Other Developmental Issues Pertaining to the UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Recommendation
4.14.1 The Committee notes that the Member of Parliament representing the UT has been writing and
conveying the concerns of the people of the Islands at different platforms for years together but hardly
any tangible progress has been made towards redressal of the issues raised. The Committee takes note
of the fact that most of these issues are pending for long. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs and the UT Administration must take up these issues raised by the
Member for redressal on a priority basis. (Para 5.12.1 ibid)
Action Taken
4.14.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. Status on the issues is at
Annexure-V.
Further Recommendation
4.14.3 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Ministry in pursuance of addressing
the issues raised by the Member of Parliament representing the UT of A&N Islands and observes
that most of the projects are still under implementation. The Committee, therefore, desires to
be apprised about the detailed status of the projects that are still pending.

45
4.15 Demand No. 50 - Chandigarh
Recommendation
4.15.1 The Committee observes that the UT of Chandigarh has been allocated `4511.91 crore only in BE
2018-19 as against the projected demand of `5908.22 crore, which is a matter of concern to the
Committee. The Committee is of the firm view that this significant shortfall would adversely affect the
undertaken activities viz. by the Municipal Corporations and purchase of power, etc. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter of higher
allocation to the UT of Chandigarh with the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage to meet the fund
requirement as per originally conceived plan. (Para 5.13.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.15.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
4.15.3 The Committee may be apprised of the action taken to increase the allocation at RE stage
for Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh.
4.16 Road and Transport Head
Recommendation
4.16.1 The Committee takes note of the submission made by the Advisor, UT Administration of Chandigarh
regarding better traffic management in and around Chandigarh and improving connectivity to the City.
The Committee was given to understand that the UT Administration, in coordination with NHAI, is
working on a new project from Zirakpur to Tribune Chowk road section for better traffic management
in and around Chandigarh. Since the said project is a completely NHAI-funded project it is not reflected
in BE 2018-19. The Committee, however, recommends that all projects undertaken during 2017-18 and
the new project undertaken with NHAI funds must be completed/taken up for early completion for
improving traffic in and around Chandigarh. (Para 5.14.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.16.2 The Chandigarh Administration is following up the matter with National Highway Authority of India
(NHAI) to speed up the project.
Further Recommendation
4.16.3  The Committee may be apprised about the progress made and latest status of the
Zirakpur -Tribune Chowk road project.
4.17 Urban Development
Recommendation
4.17.1 The Committee expresses its anguish over the issue of shortfall of approximately 
`682 crore in the
allocation offunds for the Municipal Corporations i.e. allocation of ` 317 crore against the demand of
`1001 crore. The Committee takes note of the pathetic financial condition of Municipal Corporation

46
which is not able to pay even the salaries of their employees. Adding to the financial woes is the fact
that Municipal Corporation has a committed liability of ` 45 crore per month and ` 540 crore annually
which does not include any developmental work. The Committee is of the considered view that the local
bodies cannot be ignored and, therefore, their functioning needs to be strengthened by allocating higher
amount of funds. The Committee, however, is of the view that excessive dependence of Municipal
Corporations on the UT Administration for funds is not desirable as the same would impair the autonomy
that has been granted to them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT Administration should
chalk out a long term strategy, in consultation with the local bodies concerned, to enable them to achieve
financial autonomy. The Committee also recommends that the UT Administration must impress upon the
local bodies to explore possibilities for making their finances sustainable in the long run. The local
bodies must use the powers of taxation given to them under the law and collect the taxes that are levied.
(Para 5.15.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.17.2 The strategies to raise the funds for the Municipal Corporation is under consideration. It is further
informed that being a U.T. without legislature, all the revenue generated by the Chandigarh Administration
is deposited into Consolidated Fund of India. Hence, the requirement of funds for Municipal Corporation
will be projected in Revised Estimates 2018-19.
Further Recommendation
4.17.3 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee while
reiterating its recommendation that a long-term strategy for financial autonomy of Municipal
bodies may be chalked out at the earliest and expects the Ministry to apprise it of the long-term
strategy.
Recommendation
4.17.4 At the same time, the Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry should not leave the local
bodies in the lurch when it comes to allocation of funds. Therefore, adequate funds must be provided
to enable the local bodies to function properly. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry
of Finance must be persuaded to give more funds for the Municipal Corporation. (Para 5.15.5 ibid)
Action Taken
4.17.5 The funds will be demanded at the stage of Revised Estimates 2018-19 along with the recommendation
of Standing Parliamentary Committee to strengthen the case.
Further Recommendation
4.17.6 The Committee desires to be apprised whether the Ministry of Home Affairs was able to
get sufficient funds allocated from the Ministry of Finance for the Municipal Corporation.
4.18 Demand No. 51 - Dadra & Nagar Haveli
Recommendation
4.18.1 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Advisor, UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli
that out of the allocation of 
` 1,018.00 crore made at the RE stage, an expenditure to the tune of
` 700.00 crore till 20thFebruary 2018 could be incurred. The Committee also takes note of the fact that

47
main reasons for the same were duplication of schemes and delay in finalization of the designs of the
infrastructure projects. The Committee is of the view that the issue of duplication ought not to crop up
once the funds have been allocated as the same is an admission of failure on the part of the UT
Administration of Dadra & Nagar Haveli while appraising and approving the projects. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that UT Administration of Dadra & Nagar Haveli must formulate pragmatic
policies/schemes which can be implemented without any stumbling block. The Committee also recommends
that all infrastructure projects like beautification of roads and bridges must be finalized and executed
without any further delay. (Para 5.16.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.18.2 The U.T. takes note of the recommendation of the committee and will take all measures to
formulate pragmatic policies/schemes and execution of infrastructure projects like beautification of roads
and building without any delay.
Further Recommendation
4.18.3 The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the UT of D&NH Islands to execute
all infrastructure projects without any delay. The Committee desires to be apprised of the
execution of infrastructure projects.
4.19 Roads and Bridges
Recommendation
4.19.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the UT Administration Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and directs that all the phases of on-going construction work for the Silvassa ring road must be
completed by the end of the FY 2018-19. The Committee is of the considered view that the undertaken
project is pivotal in managing the traffic at Silvassa as the heavy vehicles can bypass the city thereby
reducing the volume of traffic in the city. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction
of Ring road around Silvassa must be completed without any time and cost over runs.
(Para 5.19.3  ibid )
Action Taken
4.19.2 The view of the committee is noted and proper measures will be taken up to construct the ring
road around Silvassa without any time and cost over runs.
Further Recommendation
4.19.3 The Committee desires to be apprised about the present status of construction of Ring
Road around Silvassa and the progress made during the Financial Year 2018-19.
4.20 Other Developmental Issues Pertaining to the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli
Recommendation
4.20.1 The Committee takes into account several developmental projects pertaining to the UT of Dadra
& Nagar Haveli. However, the Committee expresses its concern that most of the developmental projects
are pending. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in
tandem with the UT Administration, must ensure that all projects must be undertaken on priority basis
and be completed without time and cost over runs. (Para 5.21.1 ibid)

48
Action Taken
4.20.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The UT Administration has been asked
to undertake all projects on priority basis and be completed in a time bound manner.
Further Recommendation
4.20.3 The Committee desires to be apprised about the detailed status of implementation of
developmental projects pertaining to UT of D&NH Islands and the measures that have been
taken to implement the recommendation of the Committee.
4.21 Demand No. 54 - Transfers to Delhi
Recommendation
4.21.1 The Committee observes that under the Sub-Head 'Contribution to Delhi Disaster Response Fund'
the Expenditure for the FY 2017-18 upto 31st January, 2018 has remained Nil and the reason given for
the same is that the accounting procedure for Delhi Disaster Response Fund is under finalization with
CAG . The Committee is surprised over the delay in finalization of accounting procedure and therefore,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry must pursue with the CAG to finalize the accounting
procedure before the end of March, 2018. (Para 5.25.4  ibid )
Action Taken
4.21.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Controller General of Accounts has been
requested to finalize the accounting procedure of Delhi Disaster Response Fund (DDRF) on priority.
Further Recommendation
4.21.3 The Committee may be apprised once the accounting procedure of Delhi Disaster Response
Fund (DDRF) is finalized.
4.22 Demand No.55 — Transfer to Puducherry
Recommendation
4.22.1 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the fact that against the projected demand of
` 72 crore under the Sub-Head 'Loans to cover-gap in resources' no fund has been allocated for the FY
2018-19. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that MHA must pursue with the Ministry of
Finance for allocation of adequate fund as per the projected demand of the Government of Puducherry.
(Para 5.26.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.22.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. Ministry of Finance will
be approached at RE stage based on the projections and utilization level by the UT Administration.
Further Recommendation
4.22.3 The Committee notes the interim reply of the Ministry and desires to be apprised about
the fund allocated under the sub-head 'Loan to cover gap in resources' at RE stage of Financial
Year 2018-19.

49
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A  GLANCE
ALLOCATIONS, PROJECTIONS AND VARIATION
The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry to reduce the time in processing
of procurement related cases and to enhance the capabilities of CAPFs to incur capital expenditure.
The Committee, however, feels that specific measures need to be taken for different projects of
national importance such as border infrastructure, police modernisation, and NATGRID to reduce
procedural delays and improve fund utilization. The Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised
about any such specific measures taken under these projects. (Para 1.1.11)
UNDER-UTILISATION OF FUNDS
The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to achieve significant fund utilization at
the end of fiscal year 2017-18. However, the Committee feels that the Ministry needs to obviate
the uneven distribution of fund utilization pattern during the fiscal year and achieve near-
uniform utilization pattern throughout the year so that the necessary funds are not surrendered
at RE stage. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Ministry must undertake
proactive measures to achieve optimum utilization of funds during all four quarters of a fiscal
year. (Para 1.2.9)
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee while taking note of the reply hopes that the construction of NIDM would
be completed within the time frame. (Para 1.3.3)
NATIONAL CYCLONE RISK MITIGATION PROJECT (NCRMP)
The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) is likely to be commissioned soon in Odisha and
was to be commissioned in Andhra Pradesh by July/August, 2018. The Committee desires to be
apprised whether or not the EWDS has been commissioned in both the States. (Para 1.4.6)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the timeline for the projects
undertaken would be adhered to while executing them. The Committee, however, desires to be
apprised about the completion status of the remaining ten bridges and two saline embankments.
(Para 1.4.11)
CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES
The Committee notes the steps the Ministry has undertaken regarding delegation of
financial powers to forces that may enhance capital expenditure. (Para 1.5.9)
MEDICAL AND HEALTH
The Committee wishes to be apprised of the decision taken on the above matters as early
as possible. (Para 1.8.4)
49

50
DEMAND NO. 53 - LAKSHADWEEP
The Committee takes note of the interim measures undertaken by the UTLA for providing
compensation to land owners as lease rent and hopes that all the cases of land compensation
would be settled at the earliest to the satisfaction of all land owners. The Committee desires to
be apprised as and when the procedural formalities of land acquisition as per new Land Acquisition
Act are finally completed. (Para 1.9.3)
SOURCES OF ENERGY
The Committee notes the progress made in projects pertaining to installation of rooftop
solar power plants in private domestic residences and in Government buildings. (Para 2.1.4)
UNDERUTILISATION OF FUNDS
The Committee feels that the MHA has failed to grasp the intent of the recommendation.
The action taken by MHA is to strongly advise the UT Administrations to follow the direction for
strict compliance. But the recommendations of the Committee was for the MHA to ensure that
the fund utilization status of every UT be reviewed on a monthly basis and corrective measures
are taken in proactive manner. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation.
(Para 3.1.3)
DEMAND NO. 46 - MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
The Committee observes that the Ministry was not able to fully utilize the funds allotted
under several heads such as Other Disaster Management Projects and National Institute for
Disaster Management (Estt.) despite the fact that allocation was slashed at RE stage. The
Committee feels that such underutilization is inexplicable. The Committee had recommended
that close monitoring of expenditure needs to be undertaken but there is no action on that.
Therefore, the Committee again recommends that necessary measures may be taken to achieve
full utilization of funds under various heads of Other Disaster Management Schemes.
(Para 3.2.3)
The Committee also observes that an amount of ````` 2.02 crore was allocated for National
Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) in B.E. 2017-18 that got increased to ````` 6.66 crore, out of
which only 40.24% utilization could be achieved. The Committee is not satisfied with the
explanation given by the Ministry that due to non-receipt of utilisation certificate from the State
Government, the allocation could not be utilised. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) may take up the matter with the State Governments and
supervise the situation. The Committee desires to be apprised about the steps taken in this
regard. (Para 3.2.4)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee observes that
the data pertaining to Home Guards pertains to Financial Year 2017-18 while the committee had
pointed out the shortfall in allocation in the year BE 2018-19 vis-a-vis the amount projected by
the Ministry. The Committee finds that the Ministry has not furnished any details of utilisation

51
of funds during the first quarter of 2018-19 under the head 'Infrastructure for Disaster
Management', which could have helped the Committee to understand whether or not the shortfall
in the allocation would affect the implementation of various projects. The Ministry has also not
indicated anything about its plan/proposal to seek any additional funds at RE stage. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should furnish complete details with respect to utilisation
of funds. (Para 3.2.7)
NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE (NDRF)
The Committee feels that noting Committee's recommendation for compliance without any
action taken thereon tantamounts to no action. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation and desires that the Ministry furnish the details of action taken regarding the
operational efficiency of NDRF in the short term and capacity of the forces in the long-term and
also on action taken on the proposals of NDRF. (Para 3.3.3)
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION FOR MIGRANTS AND REPATRIATES
The Committee observes that the progress of implementation of rehabilitation package for
returnees and up-gradation of infrastructure of the Bangladeshi Enclaves and Cooch Behar
District is quite unsatisfactory. The Committee also observes JS (FFR) had made the visit to
assess the status of implementation in November, 2017, however, it has been a year since then.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the officers concerned must undertake a fresh visit
and submit a detailed status report on implementation of various components and projects of the
rehabilitation package. (Para 3.4.3)
The Committee takes note of the progress report on rehabilitation package for the returnees
and upgradation of infrastructure of Cooch Behar District and erstwhile Bangladeshi enclaves in
India. The Committee, however, observes that the progress furnished is only till 30th November,
2017 and updated progress has not been furnished. The Committee also observes that the
progress with respect to several projects is dismal and is doubtful that the Ministry would have
been able to complete the projects within the stated date of completion, i.e., September, 2018.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite the implementation
of all the projects that are being implemented under the rehabilitation package and furnish latest
status on the same. (Para 3.4.7)
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry but is not convinced as to how the
Ministry plans to utilize the remaining amount out of the ````` 2,000 crore package. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should provide a detailed plan of action for implementation
of Prime Minister's Development Package, 2015 for J&K along with a timeframe for
implementation of various components and utilization of funds under the package. The Committee
also desires to know the number of families out of the total 27,517 families that are yet to
receive financial assistance and the number of families that have received full amount that was
promised under the package. (Para 3.4.11)

52
ALLOCATION, PROJECTIONS, VARIATIONS AND EXPENDITURE TREND
The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry to enable the States to expedite
their procurement process, however, the Committee feels that the actual implementation of
these measures depends on the States concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should regularly take stock of the situation and over a period of time identify the
States that are prone to procurement delays. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
should establish an inter-state forum for interaction between the heads of State Level Empowered
Committees of different States under the guidance of the Ministry of Home Affairs so as to allow
them to share best practices for enhancing their absorption capacity and reduce procurement
bottlenecks. (Para 3.5.10)
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE GRID (NATGRID)
The Committee is surprised that even though an amount of `````21.60 crore was allocated
under Capital Head, the same was initially reduced to ````` 2 crore at RE stage and finally had to
be surrendered. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it only reaffirms
the fact that NATGRID's (National Intelligence Grid) operationalization has suffered due to
procedural delays and as a result the capital funds have been underutilized. The Committee also
notes that the technical specifications of the items to be procured have not been finalized yet.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process
of procurement of Hardware and Software for Proof of Technology and complete the procurement
at the earliest. (Para 3.6.6)
The Committee also notes that a majority of Consultants are yet to be hired despite
passage of a long time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite
the procurement process and hiring of Consultants so as to achieve early operationalisation of
NATGRID. (Para 3.6.7)
CENTRAL POLICE ORGANISATIONS
The Committee feels that by conducting the regular review meetings the Ministry should
have identified the reasons as to why the proposals under the head 'Machinery and Equipments'
were not materializing within stipulated time. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating its
recommendation to the Ministry to rethink to cut procedural delays expects that the Ministry
would furnish the status of proposals with respect to DCPW and TSU, along with specific reasons
for delay in procurement. (Para 3.7.7)
SCHEMES FOR SAFETY OF WOMEN
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry that the decreased allocation made
for 'Schemes of Safety of Women' was primarily because most of the expenditure out of the
approved outlay for Emergency Response Support System had already been incurred upto
2017-18. The Committee, however, feels that the Ministry should have been more proactive in
finding new technology-driven projects that could have been implemented during the current
fiscal year. The Committee feels that Ministry should identify such innovative projects for

53
funding and implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
undertake sincere efforts to identify innovative technology-driven projects that can enhance the
safety of women, and seek additional funds for their implementation. (Para 3.8.9)
The Committee also observes that ````` 200 crore have been sanctioned as one-time grant for
Central Victim Compensation Fund (CVCF) Scheme for compensating women victims of acid
attacks, rape, trafficking, etc. The Committee appreciates the necessity and significance of the
CVCF Scheme, however, the Committee feels that this Scheme could have been funded from
sources other than Nirbhaya Fund, which was meant for funding initiatives aimed at enhancing
the safety and security for women in the country. The Committee feels that sanctioning funds
from Nirbhaya Fund for schemes pertaining to compensation would render the entire fund as a
fund for merely disbursal and would not have a desired impact at the ground level in enhancing
the security scenario for the women. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry should desist from sanctioning funds for such Schemes from Nirbhaya Fund and adhere
to the original purpose of Nirbhaya Fund. The Committee is also of the firm view that Nirbhaya
Fund should not be used for construction of buildings. Funds for construction of buildings should
come from other sources and not from the Nirbhaya Fund. Such allocations virtually defeat the
purpose of the Nirbhaya Fund. (Para 3.8.10)
DEMAND NO. 49 - ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS
The Committee takes note of the Ministry's reply and observes that the final facts and
figures pertaining to fund utilization during the fiscal year 2017-18 have not been furnished. The
Committee desires to be apprised about the same so as to get a comprehensive assessment of
fund utilization by UT Administration of A&N Islands. (Para 3.9.7)
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee notes the progress made towards setting up of GPS observatories and
further recommends that the construction work of the remaining observatories may be expedited
so as to achieve timely completion. The Committee also desires to be apprised as and when all
the 35 observatories are set up and become functional. (Para 3.10.4)
SOURCES OF ENERGY
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and finds that no action seems to
have been taken on the Committee's recommendation to replace all the conventional bulbs with
LED bulbs throughout the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Committee, therefore, reiterates
its recommendation. (Para 3.11.4)
MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH
The Committee is aware that the Prime Minister recently announced free insurance cover
under PMJJBY and PMSBY for Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) but no increase in the
monthly honorarium. The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendation. (Para 3.12.3)

54
HIRING OF TRANSPONDERS
The Committee notes the Ministry's reply and is apprehensive about the timely completion
of project to lay the sub-marine optical fiber cable between Chennai and A & N Islands by March,
2019 as it is still at the stage of obtaining necessary approvals. The Committee desires that the
Ministry may review the project timeline and furnish a realistic timeframe and accordingly chalk
out a course of action to complete the projects. (Para 3.13.4)
DELEGATION OF POWERS FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION, PRIMARY HEALTH, WATER SUPPLY
AND SANITATION
The Committee is disappointed to note that despite giving an assurance of devolving
powers to the PRIs in a month's time, the Ministry is still waiting for the modalities to be worked
out. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the transfer of functions in sectors
like Primary Education, Primary Health, Water Supply and Sanitation may be expedited and done
at the earliest. (Para 3.14.3)
BANK EROSION
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has advised the Ministries
concerned to address flood protection, soil erosion, watershed activities, and land development
issues in the UT of A&N Islands. The Committee, however, feels that instead of advising the
concerned Ministries, the recommendations of the Committee should have been brought to their
notice and an action taken report should have been obtained from them. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Ministries concerned must be pursued for
expediting the finalisation of the proposal forwarded by the UT Administration. (Para 3.15.7)
ENVIRONMENT
The Committee may be apprised of the result of water samples at 22 discharge points and
30 locations in the river stream collected during the study conducted by NEERI on pollution
status of River Daman Ganga, The Committee also notes that the measures cited above had been
taken prior to the Committee's recommendations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation that the MHA should consider appr oaching the Green Tribunal for addressing
these issues. (Para 3.16.6)
ALLOCATIONS, PROJECTIONS AND VARIATIONS
The Committee notes that the Ministry had planned to review the capital requirements of
UTs in the first half of the fiscal year 2018-19. The Committee, therefore, desires that the
Ministry should furnish the capital expenditure pattern of the UTs and outcome of review of their
capital requirements to this Committee. The Committee also desires to be apprised about the
details of allocation made to all UTs against the demand projected by them at the stage of RE
2018-19. (Para 4.1.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry that the UT Administration will
take due care to improve the capital expenditure and also review & monitor the utilization of

55
fund. The Committee finds the reply to be routine without any concrete measures that will
inspire confidence. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures. (Para 4.1.8)
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION FOR MIGRANTS AND REPATRIATES
The Committee may be apprised about the latest status of recruitment process under the
Prime Minister's Package in J & K. (Para 4.2.3)
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee may be apprised as and when adequate funds for building infrastructure
facilities for NDRF Academy in Nagpur and 11 Bn NDRF, Hollangi in Arunachal Pradesh are
sanctioned. (Para 4.3.3)
NATIONAL CYCLONE RISK MITIGATION PROJECT (NCRMP)
The Committee notes the slow progress in the execution of Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters
(MPCS) and observes that during the first half of 2018, construction of not a single MPCS has
been completed. The Committee feels that such a slow pace is not acceptable and the Ministry
of Home Affairs seriously needs to fast-track the construction. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Project Steering Committee and the Project Oversight committee should
meet on a monthly basis to strengthen the monitoring of projects. (Para 4.4.3)
The Committee also observes the time period of completion of Multipurpose Cyclone
Shelters (MPCS) i.e. 15 to 18 months and feels that the Ministry may not be able to complete
all the MPCS by March, 2020, even if the construction of all the remaining shelters has been
taken up by the end of December, 2018. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the
States may be advised about this aspect and may be urged to complete the construction process.
The Committee desires to be apprised about the number of MPCS that have been completed.
(Para 4.4.4)
SPECIAL INDUSTRY INITIATIVE FOR JAMMU AND KASHMIR
The Committee desires to be apprised whether the UDAAN scheme has been granted
extension from December 2018 till 2020. (Para 4.5.3)
HOME GUARDS
The Committee takes note of the statement of the Ministry that Home Guards is a state
subject. But the Committee feels that MHA should continue pursuing state governments for
implementing the Supreme Court's order and lead by example by implementing it in all the UTs.
The Ministry should convene a meeting of all the States/UTs under the Chairmanship of Home
Secretary to discuss the pitiable condition of the Home Guards and seek reasons for not
implementing Supreme Court's order. The Committee also recommends that the division concerned
of MHA may send a monthly reminder on this issue and obtain regular status of action taken
in this matter. (Para 4.6.6)

56
ALLOCATION, PROJECTIONS, VARIATIONS AND EXPENDITURE TREND
The Committee recalls that the Ministry has been planning to procure 225 boats under
Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme since 2015 and for the last two financial years, it has
been forfeiting funds meant for procurement of these boats. The Committee expresses it deep
disappointment and reiterates its recommendation and asks the Ministry to furnish details of
progress made in the procurement of boats. (Para 4.7.10)
POLICE INFRASTRUCTURE
The Committee notes that the status of proposed construction of 20,000 houses and 200
barracks, that were to be completed during 2018-19, has not been furnished. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation in this regard and desires to be apprised about the status of
construction. (Para 4.8.4)
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE GRID (NATGRID)
The Committee may be apprised whether NBCC has completed the work of Data Centres
at Delhi and Bengaluru. (Para 4.9.4)
BORDER INFRASTRUCTURE & MANAGEMENT
The Committee, while taking note of the review and re-prioritizing of projects done in the
light of recommendation of Madhukar Gupta Committee Report, reiterates its recommendation
given in response to para 4.2.3 (pages 55-56) of the 209th Report regarding procurements of
boats. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry chalk out strategy to implement those
projects in this fiscal year itself and apprise the Committee of the progress made.
(Para 4.10.8)
BORDER AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance may be requested to furnish the
reasons for granting inadequate funds under Border Area Development Programme (BADP) for
the year 2018-19. The Committee desires to be apprised about the reasons along with the
allocation granted at RE stage of FY 2018-19. (Para 4.11.3)
MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry and desires to be
apprised about the physical and financial progress achieved with respect the construction of
Medical College in the UT of A&N Islands along with the timeline for completion.
(Para 4.12.5)
RURAL ROADS UNDER PRIs
The Committee recommends that the Ministry must furnish the details of additional
grants disbursed for repair of roads to the A&N Islands' administration before the upcoming fair
weather season. (Para 4.13.3)

57
OTHER DEVELOPMENTAL ISSUES PERTAINING TO THE UT OF ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR
ISLANDS
The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Ministry in pursuance of addressing
the issues raised by the Member of Parliament representing the UT of A&N Islands and observes
that most of the projects are still under implementation. The Committee, therefore, desires to
be apprised about the detailed status of the projects that are still pending. (Para 4.14.3)
DEMAND NO. 50 - CHANDIGARH
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken to increase the allocation at RE stage
for Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh. (Para 4.15.3)
ROAD AND TRANSPORT HEAD
The Committee may be apprised about the progress made and latest status of the Zirakpur
-Tribune Chowk road project. (Para 4.16.3)
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee while
reiterating its recommendation that a long-term strategy for financial autonomy of Municipal
bodies may be chalked out at the earliest and expects the Ministry to apprise it of the long term
strategy. (Para 4.17.3)
The Committee desires to be apprised whether the Ministry of Home Affairs was able to
get sufficient funds allocated from the Ministry of Finance for the Municipal Corporation.
(Para 4.17.6)
DEMAND NO. 51 - DADRA AND NAGAR HA VELI
The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the UT of D&NH Islands to execute
all infrastructure projects without any delay. The Committee desires to be apprised of the
execution of infrastructure projects. (Para 4.18.3)
ROADS AND BRIDGES
The Committee desires to be apprised about the present status of construction of Ring
Road around Silvassa and the progress made during the Financial Year 2018-19. (Para 4.19.3)
Other Developmental Issues Pertaining to the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli
The Committee desires to be apprised about the detailed status of implementation of
developmental projects pertaining to UT of D&NH Islands and the measures that have been
taken to implement the recommendation of the Committee. (Para 4.20.3)
DEMAND NO. 54 - TRANSFERS TO DELHI
The Committee may be apprised once the accounting procedure of Delhi Disaster Response
Fund (DDRF) is finalized. (Para 4.21.3)
DEMAND NO.55 — TRANSFER TO PUDUCHERRY
The Committee notes the interim reply of the Ministry and desires to be apprised about
the fund allocated under the sub-head 'Loan to cover gap in resources' at RE stage of Financial
Year 2018-19. (Para 4.22.3)

MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M on Tuesday, the 5th February, 2019 in Room No.63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
8. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
9. Shri Nagarajan P.
10. Shri Jagdambika Pal
11. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinayan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following four draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) * * *
(ii) Draft 217th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs;
61
*** Relates to other matter.

62
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
3. * * *
4. The Committee, then, took up the draft 217th Report for consideration and adopted the same
without any change.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament in the current session
itself.
8. * * *
9. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

63
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
North Block New Delhi
Dated the 5th Sep. 2017
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Sub.: Delecetion of financial powers for work to DsG/Dirs. CAPFs/AP/NSG/Ib & NIA - reg.
In partial modification of this Ministry's earlier order of even number dated 16.07.2015 on the
subject approval of competent authorityi conveyed on the following enhancement of delegation of
financial powers to the DsG/Dir. of CAPFs/AP/NSG/IB & NIA as below:
Items Existing delegation vide Order Revised delegation
dated 16.07.2015
Major Work ` 10 Crore; Executing agencies to ` 15 crore; Work to be executed
be selected by the DGs/Dirs. in by CPWD/PWOs as per Rule 133
consultation with their IFAs, as (2)  &  (3) of GFR 2017, In
per GFR 126 and CVC guidelines consultation with IFAs.
dated 11.12.2012
These power may only be exercised
w.r.t. projects appraised and
approved by MHA as per MoF O.M.
No. 24(35)/PF-II/2002 dated
05.08.2016.
Minor Works ` 50 Lac ` 1.00 Crore
(Patty works & repair) Executing agencies to be selected (Residential & Non Residential)
Non-Residential Building by the DGs/Dirs. in consultation subject to following conditions:
with their IFAs, as per GFR 126
and CVC guidelines dated 11.12.2012. (a) Organization may execute
Organisation may execute Minor 'Repair Works' Departmentally up
Works Departmentally up to `30.00 to ` 30 lakh following the provisions
lac as per GFR 126(2). of Rule 133(1) of GFR 2017.
Residential Building ` 50 Lac (b) For 'Repair Work' costing
Executing agencies to be selected above ` 30 lakh and 'Minor Work'
by the DGs/Dirs. In consultation of any value, the provisions of Rule
with their IFAs, as per GFR 126 133(2) & (3) of GFR 2017 may be
and CVC guidelines dated followed.
11.12.2012. Organization may
execute Minor Work Departmentally
up to ` 30.00 lac as per GFR 126(2)
Note: (i) All the above mentioned delegated powers may be exercised in consultation with the IFA.
(ii) These powers may only be exercised w.r.t. projects appraised and approved by MHA as per MoF O.M. No. 24(35)/
PF-II/2012 dated 06.06.2016.
65
No. II-27012/24/CF-3274157/2014-PF I
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar
Ministry of Home Affairs/Grih Mantralaya
Police-II Division

66
The other terms and conditions of the delegated powers will be as per the provisions laid down
in Ministry's order No. II-27012/24/CF.3274157/2014-PF.I dated 16.07.2016.
These delegated powers will be effective from the date of issue of this order.
This issue with concurrence of IFD vide their diary No. 3274157 dated 05.09.2017
(Sreyasi Chaudhuri)
Director (Police Finance)
To
DGs/Director: BSF/CISF/ITBP/SSS/NSG/IB/NIVAR (through LOAR)
FAs: BSF/CISF/CRPF/ITBP/SSS/NSG/IB/NIVAR (through LOAR)
Copy to:
(i) PS to Home Minister
(ii) PPS to Home Secretary
(iii) PPS to SS (IB)
(iv) PPS to AS&FA (Home)
(v) PS to JS (P-II) (PM), (IS-I), (BM)
(vi) Director (PF), Pers, Pers-I, Fin&Home
(vii) P AO, MHA
(viii) PF-II/III/IV/V&VI
(Mukesh)
Section Officer (PFI)

67
ANNEXURE-II
Two officers from FFR Division lead by Joint Secretary (FFR) visited Cooch Behar from 9th
November, 2017 to 12th November, 2017 to take stock of condition of enclave dwellers and review
overall implementation of the package.
Out of 51 erstwhile Bangladeshi enclaves that integrated in mainland, officers randomly visited
JyotNizam enclave settlement falling under jurisdiction of Mekhligang along with Block Development
Officer and their field units.
As per provision of the scheme up-gradation of infrastructure such as Pucca road, kutcha road,
drain, culverts, bridges, mark II tubewell, piped water supply, deep tubewell, primary school, high
school, health sub centre, anganwari centre, household electricity etc are to be developed in 51 former
Bangladeshi enclaves in India that have been integrated into mainland.
A meeting was arranged with BDO, Mekhligang to discuss development work in their jurisdiction.
Site visit reveal that the District authority has so far completed work of electrification, water supply,
drainage, playground, construction of toilet and upgraded school namely no. 1 Dwarikamari Government
Primary School falling under their jurisdiction. The people are feeling comfortable in terms of facilities
and safely being provided by the State Government after exchange of enclaves. The officials also visited
the Ratanpur Boarder Out Post (BOP) to know security situations posts exchange of enclaves between
India and Bangladesh. The Wire fencing has been done in the area and BSF officials expressed their ease
to guard this augmented.
Out of three resettlement camp in Cooch Bihar District, 104 dwelling units each covering 750 sqft
area are being built for returnees from erstwhile Indian enclaves in Bangladesh falling under jurisdiction
of Haldibari. Three blocks each having 8 flats in doubled storied buildings have been completed and work
in remaining blocks is in progress. These resettlement camps are to be equipped with basic common
infrastructure like school with play-ground, aganwadi centre, health centre, community shelter etc. in
totality. The district authority assured to complete the work within stipulated time.
Temporary settlement camp situated in Haldibari provides accommodation of 96 returnees from
erstwhile Indian enclaves in Bangladesh. The returnees were initially given gruel kitchen for 30 days.
Thereafter, dry ration such as rice, dal, salt, milk powder, mustard oil, kerosene oil are being provided
to them. These returnees have also been covered under Khadya Sathi Scheme for making provisions in
coming days. These people have been provided Indian citizenship, MNREGA card, EPIC card, Aadhaar
card, Bank Accounts etc. to facilitate their living in the country. State Government is also imparting skill
development training to these people to enable them to earn livelihood and ameliorate their financial
conditions.
Site visit of construction of bridge on river Teesta connecting Haldibari to Mekhliganj divulges very
sluggish progress of work. Out of total 60 pillars, embankment and culverts proposed to be constructed
over river, work on 10 pillars have started. The undertaking agency and state officials explained difficulties
being faced by them in construction of bridge over river. The encompassing area remains inundated
almost half of a year. Authority concerned assured that all difficulties have been sidelined and work will
be completed within stipulated time.
67

68
A meeting was also convened in DM's office with all concerned authorities to review overall
implementation of the scheme. Each item-wise works were reviewed with corresponding entrusted
authorities/ agencies and were advised to expedite the work. District authority has been directed to
complete the work in time bound frame as specified by the Central Government simultaneously maintaining
the standard quality of materials. Specific directions were given to line departments to give them year-
wise timeline target to complete the work and furnish the same to controlling authority so as same could
be reviewed again.

69
69
ANNEXURE-III
Progress Report for rehabilitation package
Progress report for rehabilitation package for (he returnees and npgradation of infrastructure of Cooch Bchar District and erst while
Bangladeshi enclaves in Imiisi till 30.11.2017
Sl. No. Components of the scheme Component Amount of Physical progress of the scheme
wise cost administrative (Details of present stage of
as per CCS approval construction/implementation/
approval ( ` in crore) percentage of work done)
(` in crore)
12 3 4 5
1. Construction of bridge on River Teesta: (i) Construction of 401.00 414.9940 W ork is in progress under EPC mode of
long spun High Level Bridge over River Tccsta with contract. Viaduct portion of work at
approaches near Haldibari, connecting Sub-Divisional Head Haldibari is in progress. Other relevant
Quarter at Mekhliganj with Par Mekhliganj/Haldibari in the design drawing work is in progress.
District of Cooch Behar, Utility/shifting is in progress. Progress is
20%.
(ii) Direct purchase of land measuring 24.548 acres of land 13.99 Direct purchase of land is completed.
in different Mouzas under P.S. Haldibari and Mekhliganj in (Addilional Progress in 98% ` 45 lakh has been
connection with construction of bug span High level Bridge amount of sanctioned vide Memo No. 84 (sanction)
over River Teesta. connecting Mekhliganj with Parmekhliganj/ ` 45 lakh dated 17.07.2017 of PW Department to
Haldibari in the District of Cooch Behar . sanctioned meet up the pending bills.
during
2017-18)
(iii) Bridge over River Rangapani & Buri Teesta 9.1857 Pile Cap is in progress. Progress - 40%.

70
12 3 4 5
(iv) Widening & Strengthening of Mckhliganj-Changrabandha 5.703 Expenditure towards utility shifting and
Road (0.0 Km to 2.0 Km) and Mekliliganj-Dhaprahal Road contingency works. Percentage is 80%.
(0.00 km to 0.425 km.)
2. Puccu houses for returnees: (i) Construction of permanent 88.50 19.7183 Work progress 45%. Completion dale
rehabilitation cluster and allied works at Mekhliganj, District September, 2018.
Cooch Behar, for the returnees from erstwhile Indian
Enclaves in Bangladesh.
(ii) Purchase of land for construction of permanent 2.39 Land Purchase is complete.
rehabilitation Housing, Mekhliganj.
(iii) Construction of permanent rehabilitation cluster and 30.3977 Work progress 50%. Completion date
allied works at Haldibari, District Cooch Behar, for the September, 2018.
returnees from erstwhile Indian enclaves in Bangladesh.
(iv) Purchase of land for construction of permanent 3.37 Land purchase is complete.
rehabilitation Housing, Haldibari.
(v) Construction of permanent rehabilitation cluster and 36.9604 Work Progress- 12%
allied works al Dinhala. Dist. Cooch Behar.
(vi) Purchase of land for construction of Permanent 11.26 Land purchase is complete.
Rehabilitation Housing, Dinhala.
3. Construction of bus terminus: (i) Construclion of Composit 40.00 7.6412 Work progrcss-45%. Completion date-
Bus Terminus at Mekhliganj District of Cooch Behar lor the June, 2018
returnees from erstwhile Indian Enclaves in Bangladeshi.
(ii) Construction of Composit Bus Terminus at Haldibari 7.1125 Work progress 35%. Completion date-
District of Cooch Behar for the returnees from erstwhile September, 2018.

71
Indian Enclaves in Bangladeshi.
(iii) Purchase of land for construction of composite Bus 5.44087 Land purchase is complete.
Terminus at Haldibari.
(iv) Purchase of land for construction of composit Bus 4.77 Work is complete.
Terminus at Dinhala. District of Cooch Behar.
(v) Construction of composit Bus Terminus al Dinhala. 7.739191 Work Progress- 32%
District of Cooch Behar.
(vi) Construction of composit Bus Terminus at Mathabhanua. 3.836 Work progress- 19%.
District of Cooch Behar.
4. Up-gradation of Hospitals:
(i) Upgradation of Haldibari Rural Hospital. 20.00 9.0463 Progress - 85%.
(ii) Infrastructure of Dhinhata Sub-Divisional Hospital 4.9897 Renovation work is in progress. Progress
from 230 bed to 250 bed. is 88%
(iii) Upgradation of Dinhala Sub-Divisional Hospital from 2.9524 Tender is under process. Estimated amount
250 bed to 300 bed. of ` 296.14 lakh. Technical evaluation is
running.
(iv) Upgradation of infrastructure in the District of Cooch 3.2555 Casting of first floor slab completed.
Behar for Malhabhanga Sub-Divisional Hospital from 170 Progress is 65%.
bed to 250 bed.
(v) Upgradalion of Dinhata S.D. Hospital (Electrical works) 0.8764 Work has started.
(vi) Upgradation of Hospital infrastructure (Electrical works) 3.9034 W ork Progress- 90%.
5. Upgradation to 2-laning with paved shoulder strengthening 120.00 126.2535 Work Just started.
of Cooch Bchar-Dinhatu-Gitaldah road.

72
12 3 4 5
6. Up-gradation of infrastructure in 51 former Bangladeshi 298.50 29.77 Rural electrification works in all the 33
enclaves in India: inhabited/ erstwhile Bangladeshi enclaves have
(i) Household Electricity . been completed. Household connection has
been provided. One enclave namclv Chill Tilai
is being electrified through solar power.
14.27 Work is about to start.
(ii) Construction of roads and culverts. 61.33 Progress is 90%. Out of 15 roads 7 roads
has been completed. Rest will be completed
very soon.
(iii) Installation of Hybrid Lights Duty Tubewell. 20.99 W ork is complete.
(iv) Development of RLI (River Lift Irrigation). 23.20 90% work is complete.
(v) Installation of Mark II tubewell (DWP), spot 3.20 290 number installation completed and
source of water. running.
(vi) Piped water supply . 69.52 T otal project-16. project started- 15. Work
progress-40%. Tentative date of completion-
December. 2018.
(vii) Upgradation of school infrastructure, ACR, extra toilets. 2.14 17 nos. of additional class room, 26 nos. of
additional toilets with water. 11 nos. of
additional girls' toilet has been completed.
(viii) Construction of 5 no. Anganwadi Centres. 2.54 18 nos. of units completed. Remaining 7 units
has been undertaken for completion.
(ix) Construction of 7 nos. Community Halls. 9.40 2 community halls completed. Work is in
progress for rest 5 community halls.

73
7. Police Infrastructure 19.00 - -
8. Temporary rehabilitation
(i) Providing temporary shelters (Construction, addition/ 15.11 18.1535 100% work completed.
alteration and development work) for the returnees families
from erstwhile Indian enclaves in Bangladeshi.
(ii) Distribution of ration (rice, milk powder, dal, salt, 3.88 10.00 Supply of dry ration is still in progress.
mustard oil and kerosene oil)/ gruel kitchen (for 3(1 days) Dry ration includes rice, kerosene oil, sail,
for temporary settlement in the 3 temporary enclaves mustard oil, masur dal and milk powder
settlement camps (January 20In to December 201 7) which are being provided to each enclave
dweller every month.
Total 1005.99 1000.299561
* Utilization Certificate for the amount of ` 280 crore has been received from Stale Govt. of West Bengal for the releases during 2015-16 & 2016-17. The Utilization Certifi cate
of ` 225 crore released during 2017-18 will be made by State Govt during the current FY 2018-19.

74
74
ANNEXURE-IV
[To be published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 3, Sub-section (i)]
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
New Delhi, the 12th October, 2015
Notification
S.O - (E). - Whereas, India has acquired certain Bangladeshi Enclaves pursuant to ratification of the agreement between the Gov ernment
of Republic of India and People's Republic of Bangladesh;
And Whereas, fourteen thousand eight hundred sixty four persons who were citizens of Bangladesh living in those enclaves which have
now become part of Cooch Behar District of West Bengal in India, have expressed their intention to acquire Indian Citizenship a nd
have renounced their citizenship of Bangladesh;
Now, Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 7 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), the Central Governm ent
hereby specifies that as from the 1st day of August, 2015, the following persons slall be citizens of India, namely:-
MISS MATTER
1 CBR MTB SLK Baro Kolmari SLK 736146 66 Chhit Nalgram 1 2 Harish M 74 Lt. Khuku Lt. Mitha
Fragment Chandra Barman Ram
Barman Barman
2 CBR MTB SLK Baro Kolmari SLK 736146 66 Chhit Nalgram 2 1 Haresh Ch. M 49 Lt. Haresh
Fragment Barman Parmeshwari Chandra
Barman Barman

75
3 CBR MTB SLK Baro Kolmari SLK 736146 66 Chhit Nalgram 2 2 Ranjit M 29 Lt. Basanti Haresh
Fragment Barman Barman Chandra
Barman
14864 CBR DIN DIN 2 Bamanhat II DIN 736176 40 Puba Bakalir 11 11 Ritika F 1 Kanika Umakant
Chara Barman Barman Barman
(G.K. Dwivedi)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
No. 26030/145/2015-IC-II
To
The Manager
Press

76
ANNEXURE-V
Status of other Development issues referred to in respect of Para 5.12.1
Sl. No. Issues Status
1. Port Blair Municipal Council Additional grants were released for the 6 newly created
(PBMC) area has been extended wards as detailed below:
from 18-24 wards but not ( ` in lakh)
additional funds has been Sector 2015-16 2016-17
allocated for 6 new Urban Development 1085.41 150.31
wards. Urban Roads 633.78 -
Urban Water Supply 134.34 -
Grants allocated to the PBMC are released based on the
utilization certificate of the previous grants. Additional grants
to PBMC can be proposed in revised estimate subject to release
of grant allocated in budget estimate, as during 2016-17, the
PBMC could not get complete release of grant allocated in
budget estimate under urban development sector as detailed
below:
(` in lakh)
Sectors          2016-17           2017-18
Budget Release Budget Release
Estimate Estimate
Urban 2966.00 2042.69 3200.00 12199.99
Development
Urban Roads 419.00 600.00 600.00 673.00
Urban Water 260.00 260.00 260.00 260.00
Supply
2. Implementation of The decision of the Government of India for
recommendation of 4th Finance implementation of the recommendations of the 4th Finance
Commission for the UT granting Commission of UTs has been conveyed, vide letter No. 15039/
sufficient fund to PRIs from 59/2016-Plg.Cell dated 4th October, 2017, to UTs Administration
financial year 2017-18 onwards; with the approval of the competent authority. Keeping in view
of the rigidity/committed liability of the UT Administration, the
recommendations have been approved with suitable
modifications.
76

77
Sl. No. Issues Status
3. Medical facilities like Ultra sound Ultra Sound facilities for pregnant Mothers are available at
machine for pregnant mother in Dr. R.P. Hospital, Mayabunder, CHC Diglipur, BJR Hospital,
areas such as Little Andaman, Car Nicobar, CHC Nancowry and PHC Campbell Bay.
Long Islands, Niel, Havelock, Inspection for installation of Ultra Sound Machine at Primary
Diglipur, Campbell Bay etc, Health Centre, Hut Bay has been done for which action has
Dialysis unit to be opened in already been initiated. The installation of Ultra Sound Machine
far-flung areas; at PHC Long Island, PHC Neil Island and PHC Havelock etc.
will be initiated after required specialists are available.
As per the guidelines laid by Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare every District Hospital should have a Dialysis
unit for management of patients suffering from Acute and
Chronic Kidney diseases. In Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
out of three District Hospitals, two District Hospitals are
equipped with Dialysis units. In GB Pant Hospital in South
Andaman, it was set up in 2002 and in Dr. R.P . Hospital in
North and Middle Andaman District, the dialysis unit was set
up in 2015. However, BJR Hospital, Car Nicobar does not
possess a Dialysis Unit. There is a proposal for setting up of
Dialysis unit in BJR Hospital Car Nicobar in Action Plan 2017-
2020.
4.i Progress of 02 Nos. Creek National Highways and Infrastructure Development
Bridge (Middle Strait and Corporation (NHIDCL) is executing the both the bridge projects:
Humphrey Strait) sanctioned Humphrey Strait Creek Bridge:-
by the Ministry of Road The project has been awarded to M/s MBZ-RDS (JV), vide
Transport and Highways: Letter of Award (LoA) dated 15.02.2017 and appointed date
has been finalized as 26.04.2017. Work has been stated and
has a progress of 22% as per financial expenditure. As per the
timeline, project will be completed by April, 2020.
Middle Strait Bridges:-
Forest clearance and NOC from the Hon'ble Supreme Court
has been obtained. Applied for stage-II clearance to the
Divisional Forest Officer, Baratang for further process.
5. Status of PMGSY-II Hon'ble MP A&N Islands proposal for improvement of road
(A&N Islands) under PMGSY -II was given due attention and DPR for 40
Nos roads was prepared and submitted to National Rural Roads
Development Agency(NRRDA). NRRDA after examination
informed that considering traffic volume, proposed roads are
not eligible for consideration under the scheme However
proposal can be considered under PMGSY-I up gradation
scheme.

78
Sl. No. Issues Status
Accordingly MoRD has already sanctioned 28 Schemes of
about 42.889 Km length in North and Middle Andaman and
South Andaman Districts with estimated cost of `11.69 Cr.
under Batch -I.
All these schemes are at tendering stage and planned to be
completed by end of financial year 2018-19.
Under Batch -II schemes for another 32 Nos. Proposals with
road length of about 39 Km has been prepared and online
submission of these proposal almost completed. DPR is also
being submitted to NRRDA in next week for appraisal and
consideration for sanction.
Hon'ble Member of Parliament has also sent proposal for
improvement of road for a length of 238 Km. in different part
of island. Considering volume of work, EOI is being called for
engagement of consultant so that DPR for these proposals can
be prepared in standard format for onward submission to
Ministry for sanction.
6. Status of Sub-Marine Optical Department of Telecommunication is anchoring the project
Fibre cable between Chennai sub-Marine Optical Fibre cable between Chennai to A&N Islands
to A&N Islands (Port Blair and 5 Islands viz: Havelock, Little Andaman, Car
Nicobar, Kamorta and Campbell Bay.
The Government of India has approved the DPR of the project
at a total estimated cost of `1102.38 Crs (Capital Cost of
`880.03 Crores and Operation and Maintenance Cost of `222.35
core for 5 Years). As per approval accorded, BSNL will be the
implementing agency and TCIL will be the technical consultant
agency. BSNL Corporate office has floated global tender on
07.07.2017 inviting bids for selection of executing agency for
the project. In response to the tender, only one bid has been
received. BSNL has completed the bid process management
and submitted to USOF for obtaining approval of competent
authority. The proposal will now be placed before the Telecom
Commission, Government of India for approval. As per time
lines indicated, the project will be completed by March, 2019.
7. Extension of service benefit to The implementation of court's order was pending for want of
495 Electricity Mazdoors as per clarification from the Ministry of Power. Clarification has been
Court orders received from the Ministry of Power vide letter dated
06.03.2018 to implement the Hon'ble High Court, Kolkata
Judgment dated 09.04.2013.

79
Sl. No. Issues Status
Accordingly, 495 Regular mazdoors will get retirement and
pensionary benefits from the date of actual engagement, which
is under process of implementation.
8. One month compensatory The Government of India has accepted the recommendation
payment to Fire service of 7th CPC on allowances vide Ministry of Finance Resolution
personnel; and No. 11-1/2016-IC dated 06.07.2017, wherein Risk & Hardship
Allowance for firefighting staff of Central Government and
UTs has been accepted. The UT Administration was requested
to take necessary action accordingly. All the fire service
personnel are receiving Risk & Hardship Allowance with effect
from 01.07.2017.
9. Resolution of following long The report of the Committee constituted under the
pending issues on Submerged chairmanship of Shri Vivek Rae, Ex. Chief Secretary,
land :- Andaman   &  Nicobar  Islands  to  examine  and  make
1. Farmers be released recommendation on land matters of Andaman & Nicobar
compensation amount of Islands has been received which is under examination in
`9.39 lakh per hectare by the MHA.
treating the same as relief
package without insisting of
surrendering of their land
submerged after Tsunami.
2. The affected farmers who
have surrendered their land and
taken the compensation may be
reconsiders for releasing the
surrendered land by treating
the compensation amount as a
relief package.