Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Jyaishtha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
REPORT NO. 
171
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2013)
The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 30th May, 2013)
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 30th May, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

C.S.(H.A.)-334
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 30th May, 2013)
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 30th May, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Jyaishtha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—7
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ... 8
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 9—16
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 17— 24
The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 ............................................ 19—24

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
2. Shri D. Raja^
3. Vacant
*
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Vacant
**
10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
16. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home  Affairs in
the vacancy caused by the appointment of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet.
* Due to the resignation of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on
Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
** Due to the appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One-Hundred and Seventy First Report on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2013.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the North-Eastern Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2013 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 11
th March, 2013 and pending therein, to the
Committee on 12 th March, 2013 for examination and report within three months.
3. The Bill seeks to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 for inclusion of (a) one
Member of the Planning Commission of India, being in charge of the North-Eastern Region
ex-officio; (b) two non-official Members nominated by the Presidnet for three years extendable for
a further period not exceeding two years, and restoring function of the Council to discuss issues
of mutual interest to two or more States in the Region and to advise State Government(s) and
Central Government thereon. The Bill also seeks replacement of words “the Department of
Development of North-Eastern Region” with “Development of North-Eastern Region” in Section 6
of the Act.
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 22
nd April, 2013 heard the presentation of the
Secretary, Ministry of DoNER on the Bill.
5. The Committee in its meeting held on 8 th May, 2013 took up clause-by-clause consideration
of the Bill.
6. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 8 th May, 2013 and adopted
the same.
7. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has relied mainly upon the
following papers received from the Ministry of DoNER:–
(i) The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013;
(ii) The North-Eastern Council Act, 1971;
(iii) The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002;
(iv) Background note on the Bill as received from the Ministry of DoNER; and
(v) Verbatim proceedings of the meeting of the Committee held on 22
nd April, 2013.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI Department-related Parliamentary
8th May,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
* See Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 50750 dated 12 th March, 2013.

ACRONYMS
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission
CGAR Core Group on Administrative Reforms
DoNER Development of North-Eastern Region
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs
NEC North Eastern Council
NLCPR Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
UTs Union Territories
(iv)

1
REPORT
1.0 Background and objective of the Bill
1.1 The North–Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to insert Section 3A after Section
3 and to amend Sections 4 and 6 of the North–Eastern Council Act, 1971 (herein after called
‘Principal Act’) which pertains to “Setting up and the composition of the North Eastern Council”,
‘Functions of the Council’ and “Nomination of certain officers to attend the meetings of the
Council” respectively. The proposed Section 3A to be inserted after Section 3 in the Act stipulates
that the term of office of two nominated members shall be three years which may be extended
for a further period not exceeding two years, while the allowances or remuneration payable to the
nominated members shall be such as may be determined by the Central Government. A new sub-
Section (1A) is proposed to be inserted in Section 4 of the Act to enable the Council to restore
the function of the Council to discuss any matter in which some or all of the States represented
in that Council, or the Union and one or more of the States represented in that Council, have a
common interest and advise the Central Government and the Government of each State concerned
as to the action to be taken on any such matter, and, in particular, may discuss and make
recommendations with regard to (i) any matter of common interest in the field of economic and
social planning; (ii) any matter concerning inter-State transport and communications; and (iii) any
matter relating to power or flood control projects of common interest. Further the proposed
amendment in Section 6 seeks to substitute the words ‘Development of North Eastern Region’ in
place of words ‘the Department of Development of North Eastern Region’.
1.2 The Statement of Object and Reason of the Bill spells out the details of the background and
objective as under:–
“The North-Eastern Council (NEC) was set up in 1972 by the North-Eastern Council
Act, 1971 for securing balanced and coordinated development and effecting coordination
among States of the north-eastern area viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. The Governors and Chief Ministers of constituent States are
members of the Council. The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002, inter alia, added
Sikkim as the eighth member-State of the Council; envisaged functioning of the Council as
a regional planning body for the north-eastern area and provisioned for three members and
Chairman of the Council to be nominated by the President.
The nominated Union Minister, Governors and Chief Ministers of the constituent
States are members of the Council as long as they hold the office. Since establishment of
NEC, being a statutory body, is of permanent nature, therefore, tenure of nominated
members of the Council should be specified in the Act. Therefore, the Bill, inter alia, seeks
inclusion of (a) one member of the Planning Commission of India, being in charge of the
north-eastern region; (b) two non-official members nominated by the President for three
years period extendable for a further period not exceeding two years.
Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its 7
th Report on ‘Capacity Building for
Conflict Resolution,’ inter alia, recommended for suitable amendment in the Act of 1971, to
restore the original ‘conflict resolution provision’ requiring the Council to discuss issues of
mutual interest of two or more States in the region and to advise the Central Government
thereon. This recommendation was in-principle approved by the Group of Ministers headed by
the then Finance Minister in the meeting held on 8
th December, 2009, NEC should be used as
forum for discussion on matters of common interest to the Region and make recommendations.
The Bill seeks amendment in the Act that will enable the Council to perform this function.

2
Department of Development of North-Eastern Region was formed in 2001 within
Ministry of Home Affairs and subsequently upgraded to full-fledged Ministry in 2004. The
Bill also seeks amendment in the Act to that effect.”
1.3 The Ministry of DoNER in  its background note giving the background and justification for
each amendment proposed, stated that as per Section 3(1) of NEC Act, 1971, North Eastern
Council comprises of Governors and Chief Ministers of eight North Eastern States and three
members to be nominated by the President of India. In response to decision taken by Union Cabinet
in July, 2003 to revitalize NEC, Committee on Revitalization of NEC was constituted by the
Ministry in October 2003. The Committee submitted its Report to the Government on 30
th July,
2004 and recommendations of the Committee were examined in the Ministry and accordingly
decision of Cabinet was sought on the following:
(i) Appointment of Minister DoNER, as Chairman NEC
(ii) Equation of 3 nominated Members of NEC with Members of Planning Commission in
terms of rank, status (status of Minister of State of the Union Government), tenure
and emoluments and having them as full-time functionaries, headquartered at NEC
Secretariat, Shillong.
1.4 The Committee was further informed that the Cabinet approved the proposal of the Ministry
on 1
st December, 2004 with the modification that out of three nominated Members of the NEC,
one will be Member-in-charge of North East in Planning Commission. Through the proposed
amendment in Section 3, it is sought to specify that the Council shall, inter-alia , have (i) two non-
official members to be nominated by the President; (ii) one member of the Planning Commission
of India being in charge of the North-Eastern Region - ex officio. The Section 3A proposed to be
inserted after Section 3 in the principal Act stipulates that the term of office of two nominated
members shall be three years which may be extended for a further period not exceeding two years,
and the allowances or remuneration payable to the nominated members shall be such as may be
determined by the Central Government.
1.5 The Ministry of DoNER stated that an anomaly exists since tenure of Members of a statutory
body (NEC) was equated with tenure of a member of Planning Commission which is a non-statutory
and extra constitutional body set up by an executive order. According to the Ministry, this anomaly
has created a situation where, on expiry of the term of previous Government on the 18
th May, 2009,
all members of Planning Commission tendered their resignations, but non-official members of NEC
were not required to do so as per condition of their nomination. The current non-official members
(barring Member-NE, Planning Commission, who is an ex-officio non-official member) have now put
in around eight years. A statutory body must necessarily define tenure and conditions for their
removal (other than resignation and/or death), prior to their appointment as members, since life of
statutory body is independent of tenure of any Government formed by party/parties having majority
in Parliament. Committee on Revitalisation of NEC had recommended tenure of nominated members
as 3-5 years so as to have benefit of a cross section of experts drawn from different disciplines.
1.6 Pertaining to amendment in Section 4 of the Principal Act which is regarding ‘Functions of
the Council’, the Ministry of DoNER put forth before the Committee that the Second Administrative
Reforms Commission (ARC) in their 7
th Report titled ‘Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution’ has
made following recommendation:
“(12.6.4.3.a) The NEC Act, 1971 may be suitably amended to restore the original ‘conflict
resolution provision’ requiring the Council to ‘discuss issues of mutual interest to two or
more states in the region and to advise the Central Government thereon.”
1.7 The Committee was further informed that while the Ministry of Home Affairs and Core
Group on Administrative Reforms (CGAR) set up by Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances did not accept above recommendation, the Group of Ministers constituted to

3
consider Second ARC Report under chairmanship of the then Finance Minister accepted it
in-principle in meeting held on 8 th December, 2009. As per decision of the Group of Ministers, the
principal Act is to be suitably amended to restore the function of the Council to discuss issues of
mutual interest to two or more States in the region and to advise State Government and Central
Government thereon. A new sub-Section (1A) in Section 4 of principal Act is proposed to be
inserted to enable the Council to perform this function. This provision contained in Section 4 (1)
in original NEC Act was replaced by NEC (Amendment) Act, 2002 to make the NEC the regional
planning body for North Eastern Region. Thus the NEC will also continue to be the regional
planning body for NER as per existing sub-Section (1) of Section 4 of the NEC Act.
1.8 The Ministry further apprised the Committee with the relevant observations and
recommendations of Administrative Reforms Commission’s 7
th Report titled “Capacity Building For
Conflict Resolution” and Government’s decision thereon which is reproduced as below:–
“12.6.4.1.1 The most significant ‘supra State’ institution of the region is the North Eastern
Council (NEC) set up in 1972, following the enactment of the North Eastern Council
Act,1971. Its creation was necessitated by the reorganisation of the region into five States
and two Union Territories and in response to the twin needs of effecting better inter-State/
UT coordination, for maintenance of internal security and for facilitating planned,
integrated development of the North East. While the aspect of security coordination received
adequate consideration by the NEC in its initial phases – the Inspector General of the
Assam Rifles acted as ex-officio Security Adviser – this responsibility was subsequently
resumed by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the NEC is now primarily an agency to
prepare and finance development schemes of inter-State importance. It also runs a number
of educational and training institutions catering to the requirements of the region.
12.6.4.1.2 NEC initially consisted of the ‘common Governor’ of the North Eastern States as
its Chairman with the Lieutenant Governors of the UTs and all the Chief Ministers as
members. After the appointment of separate Governors (1981), the practice of either the
Governor of Assam or the senior-most Governor acting as its head was followed. Following
an amendment in the NEC Act in 2002, Sikkim has been added as a member and, due to
its non-contiguity with other member-States, ‘stand alone’ schemes can be sanctioned for this
State. Through this amendment, provision was also made for nomination of the Chairperson
of the NEC by the President and for positioning some full-time members. In pursuance of that
provision and on the recommendations of an expert Committee (2003), it was decided that
normally, the Union Minister for Development of the North Eastern Region shall preside over
the NEC. Two full-time members have also been inducted to the Council.
12.6.4.1.3 In the absence of a systematic overall organisational appraisal of the NEC so far,
it is difficult to be categorical about its successes and failures. It is, however, a fact that like
many other high level bodies, transaction of purposive business by the NEC has been
hampered, as its proceedings tend to be dominated by rhetoric with limited time devoted to
deliberations. Similarly, increasing State plan outlays, coupled with ever increasing central
subventions through statutory transfers, centrally sponsored schemes and ad hoc allocations
have resulted in a ‘shift of attention’ of the member-States from this regional institution. It
must however be acknowledged that NEC sponsored schemes have contributed significantly to
improve inter-State road and air connectivity, substantially augment power distribution and
harmonious regional cooperation. It is agreed by all that the inter-State institutions of
medical, dental, technical and paramedical education established and maintained by it in
different parts of the region have not only added to the development of human resources but
have also enhanced better understanding between different areas within the region.
12.6.4.1.4 To review the role of the NEC in conflict reduction, reference may first be made
to the mandate given to it originally under Section 4 of its Act, and the present position.

4
Initially, the Council had a three-fold mandate of (a) considering issues in which two or
more States of the region had an interest and to advise the Central Government in the
matter; (b) preparation of regional plans and (c) security coordination in the region.
Following the amendments, its present charter is:
(a) To function as a regional planning body;
(b) To finance and implement projects of benefit to two or more States (except
Sikkim);
(c) To review the pace of development in the region particularly in the context of
the regional development plans; and
(d) To review measures taken by the States to maintain security and public order
in the region.
12.6.4.1.5 For the purposes of this Report, the role of the NEC in conflict resolution may
be studied in three contexts – NEC as an inter-State coordinating body; NEC as a Regional
Planning body and role in ensuring maintenance of Public order. These aspects are briefly
considered in the succeeding paragraphs.
12.6.4.1.6 One of the primary functions of the Council is to act as a forum to review the
pace of development in the region. The amendment in the mandate of the Council which
withdrew the power to discuss ‘issues of common interest to two or more States and to advise
the Union Government thereon’ has already been referred to. The ‘withdrawn responsibility’
was identical to the mandate given to the Zonal Councils under the States Reorganisation Act,
1956. While the Commission is not recommending the rejuvenation of the Zonal Councils in
other regions for the reasons mentioned in Chapter 14, it is clear that in matters like
movement of supplies, including food-grains and passengers, local taxation policies and
border disputes etc, a coordinating and problem solving forum is still highly relevant for the
North Eastern Region. It is, therefore, imperative that the original provisions for inter-State
coordination with its direct nexus with conflict resolution is restored.
12.6.4.1.7 The amendments to the NEC Act of 2002, as noted earlier, while somewhat
narrowing the scope of the advisory jurisdiction of the Council more explicitly states its
responsibility to review maintenance of security and public order. Earlier, this responsibility
devolved only indirectly as part of the coordinating and advisory role of the NEC, it
nevertheless found adequate reflection in the agenda of the Council. Explicit introduction of
this responsibility through the 2002 amendment, creates problems for the DoNER, as the
‘administrative Ministry’ for the NEC. DoNER has been assigned no role in the sphere of
security in the region. NEC, therefore, has to directly deal with the Ministry of Home Affairs
in discharging this responsibility. The larger issue is how to work out the modalities of
discharging this responsibility. It is clear that if the ambit of ‘internal security reviews’ has
to extend even a little beyond holding meetings, the NEC secretariat will need to be more
actively involved in security coordination issues. To facilitate meaningful reviews, the Council
secretariat must involve itself with the emerging developments in the field. Ministry of Home
Affairs (MHA) also needs to take a view whether ‘security and public order reviews’ under
the aegis of the NEC offer benefits which cannot be had by the MHA’ s own reviews. MHA
must further consider whether special empowerment of the NEC entailed by this responsibility
will result in increased administrative burden on the agencies normally involved in monitoring
the law and order scenario in the region. To effectively coordinate or even assist in
deliberations on internal security related issues, the Council secretariat would need suitable
augmentation. In short, adequate preparatory arrangements are necessary if the renewed
mandate of the NEC for internal security reviews is to be meaningfully discharged.”

5
1.9 The Committee was further apprised of the recommendations contained in the 7th Report
of Second ARC which are enumerated below:
(a) The NEC Act, 1971 may be suitably amended to restore the original ‘conflict resolution
provision’ requiring the Council to ‘discuss issues of mutual interest to two or more states
in the region and to advise the Central Government thereon’.
(b) To enable the Council to assist effectively in the discharge of its responsibilities for
reviewing the measures taken by the member-States for maintenance of security in the
region, Ministry of Home Affairs should keep the Council Secretariat regularly within its
‘security coordination loop’. The Council Secretariat would also need to be suitably
strengthened to effectively assist in security coordination.
(c) The Planning Commission needs to lay down a framework for preparation of integrated
regional plans, with priorities and not as an assortment of schemes by the NEC. The
regional plan should focus on areas with a bearing on intra-regional, inter-State priorities
which have the potential of avoiding conflicts and promoting regional integration.
(d) Planning Commission should ensure the association of the NEC in the State plan
formulation exercise by suitably amending their guidelines.
(e) The responsibility of sanctioning funds from the ‘Non Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources’ (NLCPR) should be entrusted to the North Eastern Council (NEC). NEC should
work out mechanisms for scrutinising proposals for funding from the ‘pool’ and their
funding in coordination with the Ministries concerned.
(f) It is desirable that a 10-year perspective plan is prepared for the entire region
encompassing areas like development of human resources and infrastructure. A governance
reform agenda should also form part of this plan. This comprehensive plan needs to be
reviewed by the Prime Minister regularly with the Chief Ministers for speedy follow-up.
(g) The Ministry for Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) may be abolished and
the responsibility for the development of the region, including the infrastructure sectors, and
utilisation of the non-lapsable fund should be restored to the subject matter Ministries, with
the MHA acting as the nodal Ministry.
1.10 Explaining about the action taken on the recommendations of the 7
th Report of ARC, it was
stated that the Government accepted in principle empowering NEC with the conflict resolution
provisions and it was decided that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this matter with
NEC. The Government also accepted in principle that Ministry of Home Affairs should keep the
Council Secretariat regularly within its ‘security coordination loop’ and MHA should examine the
issue in consultation with NEC. The Government accepted the role of Planning Commission in
laying guidelines for formulation of integrated regional plans and ensuring the association of the
NEC in the State plan formulation. The responsibility of sanctioning funds from the ‘Non Lapsable
Central Pool of Resources by NEC was not accepted on the ground that NEC is a planning body.
Recommendation regarding Ten-year perspective plan was accepted by the Government. The
recommendation regarding the abolition of the Ministry of DoNER and restoration of responsibility
for Development of region to the concerned line Department/Ministry has not been accepted on the
plea that Ministry of DoNER provided undivided attention to development of North East. However,
it was decided that a review of functioning of NEC and DoNER could be undertaken to make these
bodies more effective.
1.11 The Committee was further informed that Ministry of Home Affairs vide its communication
dated 13
th July 2010, requested the Ministry of DoNER to take further action to amend NEC Act.
Intention of ARC and GoM was that NEC as a body comprising Governors and Chief Ministers

6
of North Eastern States should be used as forum for discussion on matters of common interest
to the Region.
1.12 Regarding the proposed amendment in Section 6 of the Principle Act, the Ministry of
DoNER informed the Committee that the Department of Development of North Eastern Region was
upgraded to Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, in May, 2004 and therefore,
proposed amendment in Section 6 intends to substitute the words ‘the Department of Development
of North Eastern Region’ with the words ‘Development of North Eastern Region’.
2.0 Mandate and Working of Ministry of DoNER
2.1 The Committee took into cognizance the recommendations of Seventh Report of Second
Administrative Reforms Commission regarding the abolition of the Ministry of DoNER and
restoration of responsibility for development of the region to the concerned line Department/
Ministry. The Committee noted that the Government has not accepted this recommendation on the
plea that Ministry of DoNER provides undivided attention to development of North East and that
a review of functioning of NEC and DoNER could be undertaken to make these bodies more effective.
2.2 It would be worthwhile to mention that the Committee, in its 170
th Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Ministry of DoNER, as presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25 th April,
2013 commented on the dismal achievements of the Ministry. The Committee noted the Ministry’s
confession about its weakness in advocacy and coordination role, inadequate technical support,
inadequate over all staff support, inadequate space and absence of field offices. The Committee was
of the strong view that the purpose for which the Ministry was set up, has not been fulfilled and
it seems that the implementing ministries do not pay heed to the requests or suggestions of the
Ministry of DoNER. The Committee, therefore, strongly, recommended that Government should
consider the handicaps of the Ministry of DoNER in a very serious manner and devise way out either
by placing the Ministry of DoNER under PMO directly or evolve some other mechanism so that the
Ministry of DoNER could get its decisions implemented by the line Ministries/Departments/agencies.
2.3 In regard to the working and the mandate of the Ministry of DoNER, the Committee in the said
report felt that it failed to understand that a Ministry, which was carved out to focus and expedite
development in the North East Region, after more than a decade of its existence, has realized that it
lacks sufficient power and necessary infrastructure to carry out its mandate, and is completely
dependent on various Line Ministries/Departments for execution of projects. The Committee took a
serious view of the situation and felt that a holistic view at the functioning and powers of the Ministry
should be taken. The Committee not being impressed with the functioning of the Ministry felt that the
line ministries are not supporting or paying heed to the suggestions/ requests of the Ministry.
2.4 The Committee, while reiterating its recommendations as made in its 170
th Report,
feels that it is the high time the Government review the functioning of the Ministry and
devise a mechanism to strengthen Ministry of DoNER for its effective functioning so that
the projects and schemes meant for NER are completed in time and the line agencies/
Ministries/Departments while implementing those projects co-ordinate with the Ministry of
DoNER. The Committee also reiterates its decision as indicated in its 170
th Report that it
would hold discussions with the Cabinet Secretary, Planning Commission and other
stakeholders in the matter.
3.0 Presentation by the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER
3.1 The Secretary, Ministry of DoNER during the course of presentation before the Committee
in its sitting held on 22 nd April, 2013 dwelt upon the background and provisions of the Bill as under:–
“there are three nominated Members of the North-Eastern Council, but, unfortunately, their
tenure has not been fixed. So, the present incumbents are there for around last eight years,
since March, 2005. So, it is considered necessary to restrict their tenure to three years,

7
which can be extended to a maximum of five years so that new blood is infused into the
Council. This is one point. The second point is, most of the Member States of the North-
Eastern Council have issues relating to each other, like boundary disputes. This Bill seeks
to empower the Council to discuss those kinds of issues among themselves and try to sort
them out without the interference of the Government of India. That is the main purpose.
The third one is, if the emoluments are fixed in the Act itself, it will be difficult to change
it and every time when the emoluments need to be changed, we will have to amend the Act.
So, we are seeking to empower the Government through a subordinate legislation to fix the
emoluments... earlier DoNER was a Department under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Now
it is a full-fledged Ministry. Now we just want to change the nomenclature. ”
4.0 Clause–by–Clause consideration of the Bill
4.1 The Committee took up the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on
8
th May, 2013. The clause-by-clause consideration is given in the following paragraphs.
Clause 2
4.2 Clause 2 proposes to amend Section 3 to provide for nomination of two non-official
Members by the President; and one member of the Planning Commission of India being in charge
of the north eastern region, ex officio .
4.2.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3
4.3 Clause 3 proposes insertion of a new Section 3A after Section 3 stipulating that the term
of office of the two nominated non-official Members shall be three years which may be extended
for a further period not exceeding two years and the allowance and remuneration payable to the
nominated Members would be such as may be determined by the Central Government.
4.3.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 4
4.4 The clause 4 seeks amendment in Section 4 of the principle Act, by inserting sub-
Section (1A) for empowering NEC to discuss matters in which some or all of the States
represented in that Council, or the Union and one or more of the States represented in that Council,
have a common interest and advise the Central Government and the Government of each State
concerned as to the action to be taken on any such matter, and, in particular, may discuss and
make recommendations with regard to any matter of common interest in the field of economic  and
social planning; matter concerning inter-State transport and communications; and any matter
relating to power or flood control projects of common interest.
4.4.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 5
4.5 The Clause 5 seeks amendment in Section 6 of the Act to effect change in nomenclature
i.e., from Department of DoNER to a full-fledged Ministry of DoNER .
4.5.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
CLAUSE 1, Short Title and Enacting formula
4.6 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted without any change.
5.0 The Committee adopts the Bill and commends for being passed at the earliest subject
to the observations and recommendations made in Para No 2.4 of this Report.

OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
The Committee, while reiterating its recommendations as made in its 170 th Report,
feels that it is the high time the Governemnt review the functioning of the Ministry and
devise a mechanism to strengthen Ministry of DoNER for its effective functioning so that
the projects and schemes meant for NER are completed in time and the line agencies/
Ministries/Departments while implementing those projects co-ordinate with the Ministry of
DoNER. The Committee also reiterates its decision as indicated in its 170
th Report that it
would hold discussions with the Cabinet Secretary, Planning Commission and other
stakeholders in the matter. (Para 2.4)
The Committee adopts the Bill and commends for being passed at the earliest subject
to the observations and recommendations made in Para No 2.4 of this Report. (Para 5.0)
8

MINUTES

10

11
XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 22 nd April, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
7. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
8. Shri Datta Meghe
9. Shri Sanjya Dina Patil
10. Shri Rathod Ramesh
11. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
12. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
13. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of DoNER
1. Shri U.K. Sangma, Secretary
2. Shrimati K. Damayanthi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brajesh Mishra, Director
4. Shri S.V. Patil, Deputy Director
5. Shri S.P. Singh, Deputy Secretary
11

12
Representatives of North Eastern Council
1. Shri J. Lhungdim, Planning Adviser
2. Shri P.K.H. Singh, Adviser (T&C)
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Dr. M.C. Mehanathan, Joint Secretary (NE)
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shrimati Sharda Jain, Joint Secretary and LC
Representatives of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. S.S. Chahar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Inder Kumar, Joint Secretary and LA
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day which is as under:–
(ii) To hear the presentation of Secretary, Ministry of Development of North-Eastern
Region on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013;
(ii) * * *
2.1 The Chairman informed the Committee that Rajya Sabha Secretariat has received a
communication from Law Secretary expressing his inability to attend the meeting of the Committee
due to his other official engagement.
II. Consideration and adoption of Draft Reports
3.0-3.2 * * *
III. Presentation on North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
4. The Committee then took up the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 for
examination and the Chairman apprised the Members about the provisions of the Bill which inter-
alia seeks following amendments in the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971:–
(i) Specifying term of office of non-official members of the Council;
(ii) Restoring functions of the Council to discuss issues of mutual interest to two or more
States in the region and to advise State Government and Central Government thereon;
(iii) Substitution of words ‘the Department of Development of North-Eastern Region’ with
“Development of North-Eastern Region” in Section 6 of the Act.
{At this State, witnesses were called in}
4.1 The Chairman, then, welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER and representatives of
Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) and other
officers to the meeting. He asked the Secretary to underline the main features of the Bill.
4.2 The Secretary, Ministry of DoNER, then, deliberating before the Committee regarding the
necessity for the proposed amendment, apprised the Committee as under:–
*** Relates to other matters.

13
(i) there are three nominated Members of the North-Eastern Council, but, their tenure not
being fixed, the present incumbents are there for around eight years, since March,
2005. So, it was considered necessary to restrict their tenure to three years, which
can be extended to a maximum of five years so that new blood is infused into the
Council.
(ii) Most of the Member States of the North-Eastern Council have issues relating to each
other, like boundary disputes etc. The Bill seeks to empower the Council to discuss
those kinds of issues among themselves and try to sort out those issues.
(iii) If the emoluments are fixed in the Act itself it would be difficult to change it every
time when the emoluments need to be changed, Government has to amend the Act,
therefore, the bill seeks to empower the Government through a subordinate legislation
to fix the emoluments.
(iv) Earlier DoNER was a Department under the Ministry of Home Affairs but now it is
a full-fledged Ministry and the proposed amendment seeks to change the
nomenclature.
4.3 The Chairman then raised some queries which were responded by the Secretary, Ministry
of DoNER.
5. A verbatim records of the oral evidence was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.

14
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th May, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Adsul
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Aaron Rashid J. M.
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e., consideration and adoption of draft 171
st Report on the
North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013. He recalled that the Committee heard the
presentation of the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER on 22
nd April, 2013.
14

15
II. Adoption of 171 st Report
3. The Chairman, then drew the attention of the members on para 2.0 of the report which
related to the Mandate and Working of Ministry of DoNER, in which, the Committee took
cognizance of the recommendations of Seventh Report of Second Administrative Reforms
Commission regarding the abolition of the Ministry of DoNER and restoration of responsibility for
Development of region to the concerned line Department/Ministry. The Committee noted that the
Government had not accepted the recommendation on the plea that Ministry of DoNER provided
undivided attention to development of North East. The Government, however, decided that a review
of functioning of NEC and DoNER could be undertaken to make these bodies more effective.
3.1 The Chairman, thereafter, recapitulated that the Committee, in its 170
th Report on Demands
for Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Ministry of DoNER, presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25 1h April,
2013 commented on the dismal achievements of the Ministry. The Chairman then read out the
recommendations as contained in para 2.4 of the 171 st report Committee which is as under:–
“The Committee, while reiterating its recommendations as made in its 170 th Report, feels
that it is the high time the Government review the functioning of the Ministry and devise
a mechanism to strengthen Ministry of DoNER for its effective functioning so that the
projects and schemes meant for NER be completed in time and the line agencies/Ministries/
Departments while implementing those projects must co-ordinate with the Ministry of
DoNER. The Committee also reiterates its decision to hold discussions with the Cabinet
Secretary, Planning Commission and other stakeholders in the matter.”
4.0 The Committee, then, took up the clause-by clause consideration of the bill. The details  of
the deliberations are as under:–
Clause 2
4.1 Clause 2 provides for amendment of section 3 of the Act providing for nomination of two
non-official members by the President; and one member of the Planning Commission of India being
in charge of the north eastern region, ex officio .”
4.1.1 The Committee adopted clause 2 without any change.
Clause 3
4.2 Clause 3 proposes to insert a new Section 3A after Section 3 stipulating that the term of
office of two nominated Members shall be three years which can be extended for two years. It
also provides that the allowance and remuneration payable to the two nominated Members would
be such as may be determined by the Central Government.
4.2.1 The Committee adopted clause 3 without any change.
Clause 4
4.3 Clause 4 seeks amendment in Section 4 of the principle Act, by inserting sub-Section (lA)
for empowering NEC to discuss any matter in which some or all of the States represented in that
Council, or the Union and one or more of the States represented in that Council, have a common
interest and advise the Central Government and the Government of each State concerned as to the
action to be taken on any such matter, and, in particular, may discuss and make recommendations
with regard to (i) any matter of common interest in the field of economic and social planning;
(ii) any matter concerning inter-State transport and communications; and (iii) any matter relating
to power or flood control projects of common interest.

16
4.3.1 The Committee adopted clause 4 without any change.
Clause 5
4.4 The Clause 5 seeks amendment of Section 6 of the Act to effect change in nomenclature
i.e., from Department of DoNER to Ministry of DoNER.
4.4.1 The Committee adopted clause 5 without any change.
Clause 1 Short Title and Enacting formula
4.5 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title was adopted without any change.
5.0 The Committee then adopted the Bill and commended for being passed at the earliest subject
to the observations made in Para No 2.4 of this Report.
6.0 The Committee, then, adopted the draft report on the Bill and authorised the Chairman to
carry out any typographical errors.
7.0 The Committee, thereafter, nominated the Chairman and in his absence Shri D. Raja, M.P.,
Rajya Sabha and in their absence, Dr. V . Maitreyan, M.P. Rajya Sabha to present the Report to
the Rajya Sabha and Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence
Shri Anandrao Adsul, M.P., Lok Sabha to lay the report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on
Thursday, the 9
th May, 2013.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 10.15 A.M.

17
ANNEXURE

[AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA]
11 Mar., 2013
04 Dec., 2012
Bill No. XVII of 2013
THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Council
(Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, in sub-section ( 1), for
clause ( iii), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(iii) two non-official members to be nominated by the
President;
19
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 3.
84 of 1971.

20
(iv) one member of the Planning Commission of India
being in charge of the north-eastern region, ex officio .”.
3. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. ( 1) The term of office of members nominated
under clause ( iii) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be
three years:
Provided that the term of office of such members may
be extended for a further period not exceeding two years.
(2) The allowances or remuneration payable to the
members nominated under clause ( iii) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 shall be such as may be determined by the Central
Government.”.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The Council may discuss any matter in which
some or all of the States represented in that Council, or the
Union and one or more of the States represented in that
Council, have a common interest and advise the Central
Government and the Government of each State concerned as
to the action to be taken on any such matter, and, in
particular, may discuss and make recommendations with
regard to,—
(i) any matter of common interest in the field of
economic and social planning;
(ii) any matter concerning inter-State transport
and communications; and
(iii) any matter relating to power or flood control
projects of common interest.”.
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the words “the
Department of Development of North-Eastern Region”, the words
“Development of North-Eastern Region” shall be substituted.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Term of
office and
other
conditions of
service of
non-official
members.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 6.

21
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The North-Eastern Council (NEC) was set up in 1972 by the
North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 for securing balanced and
coordinated development and effecting coordination among States of
the north-eastern area viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. The Governors and
Chief Ministers of constituent States are members of the Council.
2. The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002, inter-
alia, added Sikkim as the eighth member-State of the Council;
envisaged functioning of the Council as a regional planning body for
the north-eastern area and provisioned for three members and
Chairman of the Council to be nominated by the President.
3. The nominated Union Minister, Governors and Chief
Ministers of the constituent States are members of the Council as
long as they hold the office. Since establishment of NEC, being a
statutory body, is of permanent nature, therefore, tenure of
nominated members of the Council should be specified in the Act.
Therefore, the Bill, inter alia, seeks inclusion of (a) one member of
the Planning Commission of India, being in charge of the north-
eastern region; (b) two non-official members nominated by the
President for three years period extendable for a further period not
exceeding two years.
4. Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its
7th Report on ‘Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution,’ inter alia,
recommended for suitable amendment in the Act of 1971, to restore
the original ‘conflict resolution provision’ requiring the Council to
discuss issues of mutual interest of two or more States in the
region and to advise the Central Government thereon. This
recommendation was in-principle approved by the Group of
Ministers headed by the then Finance Minister in the meeting held
on 8th December, 2009, NEC should be used as forum for
discussion on matters of common interest to the Region and make
recommendations. The Bill seeks amendment in the Act that will
enable the Council to perform this function.
5. Department of Development of North-Eastern Region was
formed in 2001 within Ministry of Home Affairs and subsequently
upgraded to full-fledged Ministry in 2004. The Bill also seeks
amendment in the Act to that effect.
6. The Bill seeks to acheive the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; PABAN SINGH GHATOWAR
The 21 st February, 2013.
21

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 3A after
section 3 of the Act; sub-section ( 2) of which empowers the
Central Government to determine the allowances or remuneration
payable to the members nominated under clause (iii) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 3.
The matters in respect of which the Central Government may
determine are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it
is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
22

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE N ORTHS-EASTERN C OUNCIL A CT, 1971
(84 OF 1971)
* *** *
3. ( 1) There shall be a Council to be called the North-Eastern
Council which shall consist of the following members, namely:—
* *** *
  ( iii) three members to be nominated by the President.
* *** *
6. In order to assist the Council in the discharge of its
functions, each of the Ministries of the Central Government dealing
with matters relating to Defence, Finance, Home Affairs, Planning
and the Department of Development of North-Eastern region shall
nominate an officer to attend the meetings of the Council.
* *** *
23
Setting up and
composition
of the North-
Eastern
Council.
Nomination
of certain
officers to
attend the
meetings of
the Council.

24
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
(Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar, MoS {I/C} in the Ministry of Development of North-
Eastern Region and MoS in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.