PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 110
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2004)
RD
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2004)
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2004)
RD
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2004)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-05) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT 
OF NORTH EASTERN REGION

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT
ON
DEMENDS FOR GRANTS (2004-05)
OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT
OF NORTH EASTERN REGION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 RD AUGUST, 2004)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-211

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—13
4. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS  O F T HE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 14—17
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 19—27

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj— Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
7. Shri N. Jothi
8. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
14. Shri Biren Singh Engti
15. Shri Rahul Gandhi
16. Shri Tapir Gao
17. Shri T.K. Hamza
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Ajit Jogi
20. Shri Tek Lal Mahato
21. Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
22. Shri Sachin Pilot
23. Shri Ashok Pradhan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
26. Shri Bajuban Riyan
27. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
28. Shri Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Tenth Report on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) relating to the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region.
2. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary of the Ministry in its sitting held on
10 August, 2004.
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has mainly relied upon the
following:—
(i) Presentation made by the Secretary of the Ministry;
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2004-05;
(iii) Explanatory Notes on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) received from the Ministry;
(iv) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 2003-04;
(v) Written replies furnished by the Ministry to the Questionnaires sent to it by the
Secretariat; and
(vi) Oral and written clarifications to the points/issues raised by the Members in the
meetings of the Committee.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held on 18 August, 2004.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
August, 18, 2004 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs

1
REPORT
The Department of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) was constituted in
September, 2001 to sharply focus on the development of the North Eastern Region and upgraded
to a full-fledged Ministry on 27 May, 2004. As per the Government of India (Allocation of
Business) Rules, 1961, the work allocation to the Ministry is as follows:
• Planning, execution and monitoring of developmental schemes and projects of North
Eastern Region including those in the sectors of power, irrigation, roads and
communications.
• Hill Areas Development Programme (HADP) and Border Areas Development Programme
(BADP) in North Eastern region States.
• Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR).
• North Eastern Council (NEC).
• North Eastern Development Finance Corporation (NEDFi).
• North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation (NERAMAC).
• Sikkim Mining Corporation Limited (SMCL).
• North Eastern Handlooms and Handicrafts Development Corporation (NEHHDC).
• Road works financed in whole or in part by the Central Government in the North
Eastern region.
• Planning of road and inland waterways transport in the North Eastern region.
2. The thrust of the Ministry in the development of North Eastern Region consists of
improving infrastructure, providing greater access to basic social services like education, health,
drinking water and sanitation, etc., expanding economic and social opportunities for all, building
capacities aimed at increased efficiency, creating an environment for private participation conducive
to growth and providing a policy frame to influence in a positive manner, wide ranging economic
activities having employment/income generation potential.
3. On behalf of the Ministry, one Demand, namely, Demand No. 29 – Ministry of Development
of North Eastern Region has been presented to Parliament. Given below is a Table ‘Budget—At A
Glance’ of the Demand of the Ministry:
TABLE – I
Budget Estimate
At A Glance
♣
(Rs. in crore)
Demand No. Total Plan Non-Plan Revenue Capital Charged V oted
29 – Ministry of
Development of 1194.7 1185 9.7 1038.56 156.14 98.5 1096.2
North Eastern (99.19%) (0.81%)
Region
♣ Source: Document on detailed Demands for Grants (2004-05) supplied by the Ministry of Development of
North Eastern Region, Government of India.

2
3.1 It may be observed that over 99% of the budgetary allocation is meant for Plan Schemes
while a mere 0.81% approximately of the projection is meant for Non-Plan Schemes.
4. A Table indicating the Actuals for 2002-03, BE 2003-04, RE 2003-04 and BE 2004-2005 in
respect of Demand No. 29 along with expenditure in the last financial year and percentage of
utilization is given below:
TABLE – II
Detailed Budgetary Allocation
♣
(Rs. in crore)
Actuals BE RE Expenditure % Utilization BE
2002-03 2003-04 2003-04 2003-04 2004-05
Plan (prov.)
NLCPR 550.00 550.00 550.00 550.00 100.00 650.00*
NEC 441.45 500.00 500.00 499.90 99.98 500.00
NEDFi 15.40 15.40 15.40 15.40 100.00 24.50
Advocacy 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 100.00 5.00
Capacity 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 100.00 5.00
Building
SMC 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 100.00 0.50
T
OTAL: 1011.35 1069.90 1069.90 1069.80 100.00 1185.00
Non-Plan
NEC’s 3.63 4.41 4.79 4.44 100.00 4.79
Establishment (4.44)**
DoNER’s 1.59 3.17 2.77 2.43 92.40 2.77
Establishment (2.63)***
Loan to 1.50 0.00 0.02 0.02 100.00 2.14
NEHHDC
T
OTAL: 6.72 7.58 7.58 6.89 97.18 9.70
(7.09)****
♣ Compiled from detailed Demands for Grants (2004-05) and explanatory notes supplied by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region, Government of India
* Includes Rs. 100 crore for Bodo-Land Territorial Areas District (BTAD)
** After surrender of Rs. 35.11 lakh.
*** After surrender of Rs. 13.95 lakh.
**** After surrender of Rs. 49.06 lakh.
5. The Secretary (DoNER), while deposing before the Committee on 10 August, 2004 presented
the highlights of the organisational set-up of the Ministry and the North-eastern Council. He also
made a brief mention of their role and activities and apprised the Committee that the channels of
resource flow from Ministry of DoNER to NE States were:

3
(i) Project based support through Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR); and
(ii) Funding of North Eastern Council (NEC) projects.
6. Drawing the attention of the Committee to the Plan Schemes’ budgetary projections in BE
(2004-05) of the Ministry, the Secretary submitted that there has been a mere 10.75% increase as
against RE (2003-04) as reflected in the table below:
TABLE – III
Plan Schemes
(Rs. in crore)
RE 2003-04 BE 2004-05 % Increase
NLCPR 550.00 650.00* 18.20
NEC 500.00 500.00 Nil
NEDFi 15.40 24.50 59.00
Advocacy 2.00 5.00 150.00
Capacity Building 2.00 5.00 150.00
SMC 0.50 0.50 Nil
T
OTAL: 1069.90 1 185.00 10.75
* Includes Rs. 100 crore for Bodo-land Territorial Areas District (BTAD).
6.1 It may be observed that the increase has primarily been due to the projection of
Rs.650 crore under the Plan Scheme NLCPR as against Rs.550 crore in RE (2003-04). The
increase of Rs.100 crore has been made exclusively for Bodo-land Territorial Council consequent
upon the Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) signed between the Government of India and State
Government of Assam with the Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) on 10 February, 2003.
7. As regards the Non-Plan Schemes, the Secretary informed the Committee that there has
been a small increase to the tune of Rs.2.12 crore in BE 2004-05 over RE 2003-04 as shown in
the table below.
TABLE – IV
Non-Plan Schemes
(Rs. in crore)
RE 2003-04 BE 2004-05
NEC’s Establishment 4.79 4.79
DoNER’s Establishment 2.77 2.77
Loan to NEHHDC 0.02 2.14
T
OTAL: 7.58 9.70
7.1 The Ministry, in its explanatory notes had justified that the slight increase in respect of the
Non-Plan schemes has been to accommodate the increase in expenditure in salaries, office

4
expenses, expenses on Ministers’ establishment, etc. However, the Committee notes that the
increase has primarily been due to enhancement in allocation of loan to NEHHDC to the tune of
Rs.2 crore.
8. The Secretary drew the attention of the Members of the Committee on utilization of funds
in 2002-03 and 2003-04, and informed that in the case of funds routed through NLCPR, the
utilisation has been 100%.
8.1 In the case of NEC, as reflected in the explanatory notes on Demands for Grants
(2004-05), the non-utilization of funds to the tune of Rs. 8.55 crore accrued due to the difficulty
in re-appropriation of funds to sectors where funds were required and in 2003-04, the
under-utilization of Rs.14 lakh was due to the Ministry of Finance reducing allocation to
Rs.395.29 crore which was later restored to Rs. 500 crore only during the second half of March
2004, and therefore, resulting in the under-utilization of the stated amount.
9. The Secretary, while advocating the performance of the Ministry, impressed upon the
Committee of the need for enhancement of budgetary allocation of the Ministry. In support of his
claim, he furnished the following details for consideration of the Committee:
NLCPR’S REQUIREMENTS 2004-05
(Rs. in crore)
Committed liabilities for ongoing projects 600
Funding for retained projects of 2003-04 172
New projects for 2004-05 148
Earmarked projects for BTC area 100
T
OTAL: 1020
NEC’S REQUIREMENTS 2004-05
(Rs. in crore)
Improving infrastructure in NEC funded institutions 141.70
PM’s package on roads,  power projects 641.30
Air connectivity, upgradation of roads, power projects 121.00
TOTAL: 904.00
9.1 In this context, the Ministry had mentioned in its explanatory notes on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) submitted to the Committee that DoNER had proposed to the Ministry of Finance, with
a copy to the Planning Commission, for enhancement of the Annual Plan 2004-05 outlay for
NLCPR to Rs.1020 crore and NEC to Rs.904 crore, essentially for completion of old projects,
including those covered under PM’s package. This has not yet been agreed to. In the case of NEC,
an enhanced outlay is essential for utilizing the Rs.3500 crore approved outlay for the Tenth Plan.
In this case also, Ministry of Finance are yet to agree to the enhancement. The Secretary, during
his oral evidence further explained that at the existing level of Budgetary Allocation for NEC, total
allocation in Tenth Plan will be less than Rs.3500 crore as shown below:
Tenth Plan Outlay – Rs. 3500 crore
Total outlay for 2002-04 – Rs. 950 crore
Outlay required for 2004-07 – Rs. 2550 crore

5
11. The Secretary also informed the Committee that a total number of 579 projects were
sanctioned under NLCPR costing to the tune of Rs.3484.76 crore. As on 31 March, 2004, funds
to the tune of Rs.2417.12 crore has been released out of which utilization for the amount of
Rs.1611.86 crore (70.3%) have been received from the States. The balance of Rs.679.69 crore has
also been released to the States and utilization for that amount are awaited.
12. With regard to Advocacy and Publicity Plan Scheme, the Secretary informed the Committee
that the allocation and expenditure during the previous two years of the Tenth Plan has been as
follows:
Year Allocation Expenditure
(Rs. in lakh)
2002-03 200 200
2003-04 200 200
12.1 He apprised the Committee that the following major events were organised during the last
financial year:
– 2nd North Eastern Business Summit organized in New Delhi on 20 and 21 January, 2004;
– North East Trade Expo 2004, was organised in association with India Trade Promotion
Organisation (ITPO) during 18-21 March, 2004; and
– Photo Exhibition organised on “Governmental initiatives for the Development of the
North Eastern Region” in Parliament House Annexe.
12.1.1 He also informed the Committee, that, much beyond their expectation, the response to the
North-East Trade Expo 2004 was overwhelming. In 2004-05, the allocation has been enhanced to
Rs.500 lakh.
13. With regard to the Plan Scheme Capacity Building, the Secretary informed the Committee
that during the first two years of the Tenth Plan, Rs.200 lakh annually was allocated and the entire
amount was utilized. Considering the need for expanding the scope and coverage of the activities
under the Plan Scheme, Planning Commission has agreed to enhance the budgetary allocation to
Rs.500 lakh in 2004-05.
13.1 He highlighted that under this Plan scheme, the following major programmes have been
completed in the last financial year:
– 60 officers received special training courses through IIPS;
– 67 Officers underwent training on Project Planning, Evaluation and Management through
IIM, Calcutta;
– 175 officers underwent IT training through NIC, Delhi;
– 111 officers underwent Design and Planning of Highways and Roads through CRRI, Delhi;
– 94 officers underwent Special Courses through TERI, Delhi;
– 74 youth underwent certificate courses in fashion technology through NIFT;
– 310 youth underwent training in ITES for unemployed youth; and
– 80 youth underwent special courses in Entrepreneurship Development in Plastics
Engineering and Technology through CIPET, Guwahati.

6
13.2 He further informed the Committee that more than 50% of the students who underwent
training in fashion technology and 150 students trained in ITES have already been gainfully
employed.
13. The Secretary further informed the Committee that, in order to enhance resource flow to
NE Region, the Ministry has initiated a programme of ‘International Co-operation for Development’
and identified six core sectors for external funding, namely, road network, water resource
management, energy, urban development, tourism infrastructure development and strategy for
integrated development.
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
14. The Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) became operational in April, 1998.
It came into existence due to the fact that there were shortfalls in the stipulated expenditure norm
of 10% by each Ministry/Department for the development of North Eastern Region.
14.1 The Committee was apprised that the funds accruing into NLCPR have only notional value.
These are merely book entries. These funds do not become automatically available to the Ministry
of DoNER for funding projects in the North-Eastern Region. Rather this Ministry, like any other
Ministry or Department of the Government of India, gets its allocations in the Budgets on annual
basis without any priority or special status.
14.2 The Committee, in its 100th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Ministry had
pointed out that the yearly release of funds out of this pool had been less than 50% of its actual
size. It had observed that on an yearly average of Rs.1400 crore accrual to this pool, the annual
release had hovered around a mere Rs.300 crore and therefore, the purpose behind setting up of
NLCPR is getting defeated as adequate funds are not flowing out of it. The Committee had, thus
recommended that the Government should not only release the backlog amount out of NLCPR but
also ensure pro rata release of funds out of total accruals to NLCPR
14.3 The Committee was informed that the opening balance of NLCPR as on 01.04.2003 was
Rs.3643.67 crore. However, the expenditure by the Central Ministries of 10% of their Gross
Budgetary Support has appreciably improved from 6.61% in 1998-99 to 8.54% in 2002-03 as
indicated in the Table given below:
TABLE – V
Expenditure on NE States by Central Ministries/Departments under 10% allocation
Year Expenditure NER % of GBS
1998-1999 2123.28 6.61
1999-2000 2228.57 6.25
2000-2001 2920.49 6.88
2001-2002 3802.93 7.29
2002-2003 5134.59 8.54
14.4 The Committee was also informed that the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region had approached the Ministry of Finance to provide additional fund of Rs.500 crore over and
above the budgetary allocation of Rs.550 crore for NLCPR in 2003-04. However, there was no
enhancement of budget through Supplementary Demands for NLCPR allocation.

7
14.5 W ith regard to the funding of projects under NLCPR during 2003-04, the Ministry informed
the Committee that State Governments had proposed 314 priority projects at an estimated cost of
Rs.4928.19 crore for consideration under NLCPR and 154 projects with a tentative cost of
Rs.1738.40 crore were retained for detailed techno-economic examination. Considering the
availability of funds and the requirement of funds for ongoing projects under NLCPR, only 33
projects costing Rs.440.48 crore could be sanctioned during 2003-04.
14.6 The Committee was also informed that a number of economically viable projects, which
were also socially relevant, got rejected due to non-availability of funds.
14.7 It may be mentioned here that the Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the
Government, inter-alia, states, “All North Eastern States will be given special assistance to
upgrade and expand infrastructure”
14.8 However, in the budgetary allocation for 2004-05, it has been observed that there has been
only Rs.100 crore step up under NLCPR made exclusively for Bodo-land Territorial Areas District
(BTAD) over and above the budgetary allocation for 2003-04.
15. In view of the circumstances explained in the preceding paras, the Committee
expresses its concern at the indifferent attitude of the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance and also for not paying any attention to the recommendation of this
Committee contained in its One-hundredth Report to release the backlog amount of NLCPR
and release more funds out of the total accruals to NLCPR. The Committee also expresses
its disappointment that although the Government had, in its Common Minimum Programme
(CMP), assured special assistance to upgrade and expand infrastructure in the North Eastern
Region, yet it had failed to meet the very basic, immediate and foremost need of the region
by way of enhancing the budgetary allocation for this region under the NLCPR.
15.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue with the Ministry of
Finance and the Planning Commission for enhancement of the budgetary allocation under
the NLCPR to enable justified developmental activities as projected by it for the North
Eastern Region at the RE (2004-05) stage.
15.2 The Committee came to know that one of the important reasons for shortfall in 10 per cent
utilisation of Gross Budgetary Support by some of the Ministries is due to the norms prescribed
in the Central Sector Schemes by the Planning Commission. The Committee was informed that the
Ministry of DoNER have prepared a note for the consideration of the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) which has directed all the Ministries to examine their scheme in the perspective of the
North-east situation and obtain approval for the relaxation in these norms wherever required. The
Committee, recommends that instead of individual Ministries/Departments approaching the
Planning Commission for relaxation of these norms, the Ministry of DoNER may take this
work upon itself as it is the coordinating Ministry for monitoring the ten per cent
expenditure by all the Ministries. It should itself approach the Planning Commission for
relaxation of these norms to enable the Ministries to spend the compulsory funding for
projects/schemes in North-Eastern Region for its proper development.
16. Taking a look at the activities under the NLCPR, the Committee notices that the Ministry
has been more involved in the funding of projects as compared to their implementation. The works
of the inspection teams have only been an eyewash as they have been merely completing the
routine formalities and the physical and the qualitative aspects of implementation of the projects
have not been properly monitored. It appears that the Ministry is merely interested in meeting the
financial targets rather than physical achievements. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should devise ways of involving the concerned agencies and general public in
addition to officials in the process of inspection and evaluation in a more effective manner.

8
The Committee further stresses that with regard to utilization of funds, the Ministry cannot
claim that it has done its job after ‘committing’ the funds for projects. It urges upon the
Ministry, that, after releasing the funds for projects to State Governments, the Ministry
should pursue with the concerned State Governments for proper implementation of the
projects so as to avoid time-overrun and thereby cost overrun.
17. Upon close examination, the Committee notices that the role being played by the
Ministry appears to be inadequate, in that the Ministry has been playing the role of a mere
funding agency for State proposed projects and schemes. The Committee is of the
considered view that the Ministry should also conceptualise and initiate developmental
programme on its own in the region within the overall Perspective Developmental Plan for
the NE Region. Considering that some parts of the NE region are extremely backward while
other regions are relatively better placed a proactive role by Ministry of Development of
North Eastern Region in conceptualising and initiating developmental projects and schemes
will result in equitable, balanced and comprehensive development in the region. In this
context, it may be pointed out that the allocation assigned to the Ministry in the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules which states-“matters related to the
planning, execution and monitoring of developmental schemes and projects of North Eastern
Regions including those in the sectors of powers, irrigation, roads and communication” does not
restrict the Ministry to envisage developmental programmes in the region on its own. The
Committee in this regard suggests that  the Ministry may, to begin with, select/review
projects which have already been approved by the respective State Governments in the
region but could not be sanctioned due to one reason or the other for their implementation
and execution in consultation with them. The Committee feels that this would bring about
an equitable development in the region due to proper and effective implementation of
projects. It is hoped that if Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region initiates
projects of its own not only the absorptive capacity of the Ministry to spend more for the
implementation of the developmental projects will improve but will also enable the Ministry
of Finance/Planning Commission to allocate more funds to it. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the matter may be explored by the Ministry in the light of its
observations/recommendations.
18. The Committee further expresses its deep concern with regard to the impact of the
schemes taken up by the Government in the North East Region, in terms of objectives
vis-a-vis achievements and concrete social and economic indicators. It recommends that the
Ministry should focus its programmes and schemes to those that will have a direct bearing
on the increase in Gross Domestic Product, increase in human development indices on
account of expenditure on education, health and infrastructure, improved literacy in terms
of higher percentage of retention in school, employability and reduction in poverty, etc.
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC)
19. The North Eastern Council (NEC) is a statutory body created under an Act of Parliament,
under the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region. The Members of the Council include
Governors and Chief Ministers of eight North Eastern States. With the recent amendment of the
NEC Act in 2002, NEC has become a regional planning body. North Eastern Council is mandated
to plan, implement and manage regional projects. It is also mandated to review measures taken by
North Eastern States for maintenance of security and public order and make its recommendations
in this regard. Thus, the role of NEC is to promote regional coordination and planning for
development. The Five-Year and Annual Plans and the Projects and Schemes of NEC under such
plans and the release of funds are approved by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region.

9
20. The Committee had, in its One-Hundredth Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry expressed the view that the NEC should play a proactive role in the development of the
North Eastern Region while focusing its attention on regional planning.
21. The Committee was informed that there has been curtailment of NEC budget in 2003-04
to Rs.395.29 crore from Rs.500 crore. The same was, however, restored in March, 2004. The
Ministry informed that the curtailment by the Ministry of Finance was on the ground of low
expenditure during the early quarter of that financial year. Later, on the basis of the representations
from the Ministry and the Chief Ministers of the North Eastern States and the Resolution passed
by NEC, the then Prime Minister intervened and the budget was restored.
21.1 In view of the circumstances mentioned above, the Committee suggests that the NEC
should immediately commence work from the beginning of the financial year so as to avoid
the inconvenience of curtailment of budget due to low performance and expenditure in
future. It should make planned strategy for utilization of funds for its various proposed
schemes and projects. It should put in place a mechanism for continuous monitoring of the
progress of all the schemes and projects for their effective implementation.
22. During the oral evidence before the Committee on 10 August, 2004, the Secretary (NEC)
made a submission that a ‘Road Map’ for the Development of North Eastern Region was
considered at the 48th NEC Meeting held at Gangtok on 11 September, 2003. This is based on the
existing resources and identified potential of the Region and has inter-alia the following main
components:
Construction of North East Express Highway
It proposes to link all the State Capitals of the North Eastern States through all weather
4-lane roads in the valley and 2 lane in the hill areas.
Generation of Power
It will strive to facilitate generation of more power by exploiting the rich hydropower
potential of the region. For the purpose, it will monitor implementation of Power projects within
a particular time-frame as formulated by the Power Ministry or other Implementing Agencies.
Introduction of Commercial Horticulture
It will strive to introduce “Commercial Horticulture” in an organized and planned manner to
enhance production, productivity and to facilitate marketing and processing.
Bamboo Mission Project
North Eastern Region has an estimated 64% of the total national bamboo resources. NEC
proposes to take up Bamboo Mission Project as priority industrial project. Centre for Bamboo and
Cane Technology (CBTC) established by the Department of Science and Technology (DST) at
Guwahati would be the Nodal Agency for implementation of the Bamboo Mission Project.
Promotion of Tourism
In order to take advantage of the scenic beauty, diverse rich cultural heritage, exotic
wildlife, etc., NEC will seek to promote Eco-Tourism with the involvement of community. A
separate Task Force drawn from the Tour Operators, experts in the field, and members from the
constituent States has been set up.

10
23. In view of the “Road Map’ for the Development of North Eastern Region, the
Committee is of the opinion that the NEC will have to actively work on regional
coordination and also with the concerned Ministries/Departments and agencies of the
Central as well as the State Governments. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the NEC
to draw up its action plan along with financial implications thereon in this regard for the
current financial year and submit the same to the Committee for its consideration while
submitting its Action Taken Replies indicating the progress achieved in this regard.
23.1 The Committee, considering that the budgetary projection for NEC has not been
enhanced in 2004-05 as compared to BE 2003-04, is doubtful of the feasibility of the ‘Road
Map’ in the absence of parallel budgetary allocations. It, therefore, recommends that the
NEC may, after working out the financial implications for the ‘Road Map’ may submit a
fresh proposal to the Planning Commission for making supplementary budgetary allocation
for the purpose.
23.2 The Committee further takes note of the fact that, in order to implement the ‘Road
Map’, the NEC will have to seriously look into its technical and strategic planning
competency and therefore, consider this aspect while planning for implementation of the
‘Road Map’.
23.3 In addition to construction of North-East Express Highway as proposed in the ‘Road
Map’ of NEC, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should prepare a
comprehensive plan to connect every region by all-weather motorable roads within a given
time-frame.
23.4 The Committee further stresses upon the point that roads are the foremost
indicators of development of a region and, therefore, should be given topmost priority. In
the light of this, the Committee recommends that the NEC may formulate pilot projects to
connect all the villages in the region, particularly those in the border areas. The Committee
also recommends that NEC may come out with schemes for 100 per cent road connectivity
with all district headquarters of the States of North East.
REVITALISATION OF NEC
24. The Committee has been informed that~pursuant to identification of revitalization of
NEC as a ‘Thrust Area’ by the Union Cabinet. A Committee on Revitalisation of NEC set up in
October, 2003 under the Chairmanship of Shri P.P. Shrivastava has submitted its report on
30th July, 2004. The major recommendations, inter alia, relates to composition of the Council,
organisational set up, regional planning for sustainable growth and development of NER, financing
and implementation of Regional Plans and other issues vital to the development for NER. The
Government is examining the recommendations of the Committee but no time frame has been fixed
for its implementation.
25. The Committee is of the view that revitalisation of NEC is an imperative need for
achieving the desired level of growth and development in the region. The Committee is
dismayed to note that no time frame has been fixed to implement the report on the
revitalisation of NEC. It, therefore, recommends that the Government should take
necessary measures immediately and implement the report at the earliest.
ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY
26. The Plan Scheme of Advocacy and Publicity of DoNER has been formulated essentially to
project the inherent potentials and achievements of the North Eastern Region and effect a better

11
understanding of its unique and distinctive features. It also seeks to highlight the role of the
Government in facilitating development processes through appropriate strategies in the Region.
27. During the previous financial year, the eight States of NE Region have received 419
business delegations as a direct result of the summit and 11 MoUs have been signed.
28. The Committee notes the progress made by the Ministry as a result of its advocacy
and publicity campaigns. It, however, desires to point out that the beneficiaries of these
campaigns have been mostly those living outside the North-Eastern States and the genuine
artisans and artists in the remote corners of the North East do not have access to display
their wares in these campaigns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the artists and
artisans of the region may be given technical/financial assistance to enable them to market
their products at remunerative prices. Towards that end the Ministry should also organize
cultural exchange programmes and expo within the North Eastern Region itself.
CAPACITY BUILDING
29. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance to the North Eastern States is the key mandate
of the Ministry. The Capacity Building plan scheme was formulated with a view to filling the gap
in the Technical & Managerial skill requirements for the development of the Region.
30. The Committee was informed that although the literacy rate is normally higher than
the national average in most parts of the States but it lags behind in the sphere of
vocational education and acquisition of skills. The Committee, however, recommends that
the Ministry should make special efforts in the sphere of promoting vocational education
and acquisition of skills by the local populace as it would go a long way in enhancing their
capacity to handle various schemes and projects which in turn would help the region in
proper implementation and execution of projects and schemes in an efficacious way.
31. The Committee notes the enhancement of budgetary allocation in 2004-05 for the
purpose, and therefore, hopes that this aspect of development will be better looked after as
compared to the years gone by . It, however, suggests that due representation of women
should be stressed upon while chalking out schemes for Capacity Building. The Committee
also feels that the focus of these schemes should be the youth, who are the future of the
nation.
VRS PACKAGE FOR SIKKIM MINING CORPORATION
32. The Committee was informed that the Sikkim Mining Corporation (SMC) was set up in
1960 which has been a loss making organisation since its inception. The Committee was further
infonned that the corporation has begun implementation of a VRS scheme as the Government of
Sikkim, the majority shareholder had decided to close it as it had no prospects for revival. The
Ministry had concurred with the decision, as advised by the Planning Commission and as of
30 June, 2004, 51 out of 115 workers have availed VRS and that whatever work is there in SMC
will be given to some other organisations.
33. The Committee takes note of the VRS package given to the workers in SMC and
urges upon the Ministry to pursue with the Planning Commission to make parallel
budgetary allocations for the same. The Committee desires that the cases of workers who
are still awaiting the VRS package should be cleared within the current financial year.
PROMOTION OF TOURISM
34. The North Eastern Region has been resplendent with natural beauty, diverse culture and a

12
history of its own but it is beyond the reach of people not only of the country but as well as
foreigners. The sad part is that its tourism potential has not been properly exposed in the domestic
as well as the foreign circuit.
35. The Committee, in its One Hundredth Report had recommended that a comprehensive plan
should be prepared and implemented to give the much-needed boost to tourism industry in the region.
36. The Committee, now recommends that the Ministry should tie-up with the Ministry
of Tourism to formulate perspective plan for development of tourism infrastructure. It has
been informed that there has been a slight increase in the member of foreign tourists
visiting the NE states except Arunachal Pradesh. However, the number of domestic tourists
has shown an overall decline. The Committee feels that the uncertain law and order
situation combined with some other factors like lack of adequate rail, road and air services
and that of availability of proper accommodation prevent tourists to come to the region. The
Ministry of DoNER should pursue it with the respective State Governments in the North
Eastern Region as well as with the concerned Central Ministries for developing better
tourism related infrastructure so as to attract more tourists which would give a fillip to the
sagging economy of this region.
AIR CONNECTIVITY IN THE NORTH-EAST
37. The North-Eastern Region is plagued with excessive rainfall which does not favour efficient
upkeep of surface road. This affect the smooth movement of road traffic to and fro from the
North-Eastern Region. The lack of proper transportation system coupled with its tricky terrain
makes air connectivity as the best option for communication and linkage of the region with the rest
of the country.
38. The Committee was informed that M/s Alliance Air had acquired four 50 seater aircrafts in
2002-03 with support of NEC and in 2003-04, an amount of Rs.35.00 crore was released to the
Alliance Air. In the Tenth Plan, Rs.175 crore has been provided for the purpose.
38.1 The Committee was further informed that due to introduction of these aircrafts, all the
States in the North-East, except Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim are connected by air and frequency
of flights has increased to 139 per week from 76. There are also proposals in the pipeline to
construct Airports in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.
39. While taking note of the progress made in air connectivity of the NE region, the
Committee is of the view that still lot more needs to be done to improve the infrastructure
for developing better air connectivity. The frequency of flights connecting the state capitals
of the NE regions with at least four metropolitan cities of the country, namely, Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai needs enhancement.  The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all the projects concerning development of civil aviation in this region should be taken
up on priority basis and more funds should be allocated for the early completion of those
projects.
NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETING CORPORATION LTD.
(NERAMAC)
40. North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Ltd. was created by an executive
order and incorporated under the Companies Act 1956 as a Government of India Enterprise. It has
been incurring losses every year since inception. Recently initiatives have been taken to revive the
corporation so as to support the marketing needs of agricultural and horticultural produce. No
allocation in the 2004-05 budget has been made for NERAMAC.

13
40.1 The Committee was informed that for development of storage, preservation, transportation
and marketing of the agricultural produce of the region, was entrusted to some NGOs. These
NGOs failed to achieve the desired results in the matter of developing these facilities. It has,
therefore, been decided to revive and involve the NERAMAC for the development of these facilities
for the benefit of the farmers.
41. The Committee fails to understand how the Ministry proposes to carry out its
intended revival of NERAMAC for development of storage, transportation and marketing
facilities in the absence of any budgetary allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry may take necessary steps to revive and strengthen NERAMAC and also
make the required funds available to it during the current year itself so that it undertakes
these activities to help the farmers in the marketing of their produce. It further
recommends that both the Ministry and NEC should draw up a plan for developing
infrastructure for storage, transportation, marketing etc. so that farmers could sell their
commodities at a remunerative price.
41.1 While noting the fact that a good number of agricultural and horticultural products
are being produced in the NE States, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should
take major steps for development of agro-based food-processing industries in the region
which will provide them a captive market.

14
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
In view of the circumstances explained in the preceding paras, the Committee
expresses its concern at the indifferent attitude of the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance and also for not paying any attention to the recommendation of this
Committee contained in its One-hundredth Report to release the backlog amount of NLCPR
and release more funds out of the total accruals to NLCPR. The Committee also expresses
its disappointment that although the Government had, in its Common Minimum Programme
(CMP), assured special assistance to upgrade and expand infrastructure in the North Eastern
Region, yet it had failed to meet the very basic, immediate and foremost need of the region
by way of enhancing the budgetary allocation for this region under the NLCPR. (Para 15)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue with the Ministry of
Finance and the Planning Commission, for enhancement of the budgetary allocation under
the NLCPR to enable justified developmental activities as projected by it for the North
Eastern Region at the RE (2004-05) stage. (Para 15.1)
The Committee, recommends that instead of individual Ministries/Departments
approaching the Planning Commission for relaxation of these norms, the Ministry of DoNER
may take this work upon itself as it is the coordinating Ministry for monitoring the ten per-
cent expenditure by all the Ministries. It should itself approach the Planning Commission
for relaxation of these norms to enable the Ministries to spend the compulsory funding for
projects/schemes in North-Eastern Region for its proper development. (Para 15.2)
Taking a look at the activities under the NLCPR, the Committee notices that the
Ministry has been more involved in the funding of projects as compared to their
implementation. The works of the inspection teams have only been an eyewash as they have
been merely completing the routine formalities and the physical and the qualitative aspects
of implementation of the projects have not been properly monitored. It appears that the
Ministry is merely interested in meeting the financial targets rather than physical
achievements. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should devise ways of
involving the concerned agencies and general public in addition to officials in the process
of inspection and evaluation in a more effective manner. The Committee further stresses
that with regard to utilization of funds, the Ministry cannot claim that it has done its job
after ‘committing’ the funds for projects. It urges upon the Ministry, that, after releasing
the funds for projects to State Governments, the Ministry should pursue with the concerned
State Governments for proper implementation of the projects so as to avoid time-over run
and thereby cost overrun. (Para 16)
Upon close examination, the Committee notices that the role being played by the
Ministry appears to be inadequate, in that the Ministry has been playing the role of a mere
funding agency for State proposed projects and schemes. The Committee is of the
considered view that the Ministry should also conceptualise and initiate developmental
programme on its own in the region within the overall Perspective Developmental Plan for
the NE Region. Considering that some parts of the NE region are extremely backward while
14

15
other regions are relatively better placed a proactive role by Ministry of Development of
North Eastern Region in conceptualising and initiating developmental projects and schemes
will result in equitable, balanced and comprehensive development in the region. In this
context, it may be pointed out that the allocation assigned to the Ministry in the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules which states-”matters related to the
planning, execution and monitoring of developmental schemes and projects of North Eastern
Regions including those in the sectors of powers, irrigation, roads and communication” does not
restrict the Ministry to envisage developmental programmes in the region on its own. The
Committee in this regard suggests that the Ministry may, to begin with, select/review
projects which have already been approved by the respective State Governments in the
region but could not be sanctioned due to one reason or the other for their implementation
and execution in consultation with them. The Committee feels that this would bring about
an equitable development in the region due to proper and effective implementation of
projects. It is hoped that if Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region initiates
projects of its own not only the absorptive capacity of the Ministry to spend more for the
implementation of the developmental projects will improve but will also enable the Ministry
of Finance/Planning Commission to allocate more funds to it. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the matter may be explored by the Ministry in the light of its
observations/recommendations. (Para 17)
The Committee further expresses its deep concern with regard to the impact of the
schemes taken up by the Government in the North-East Region, in terms of objectives vis-
a-vis achievements and concrete social and economic indicators. It recommends that the
Ministry should focus its programmes and schemes to those that will have a direct bearing
on the increase in Gross Domestic Product, increase in human development indices on
account of expenditure on education, health and infrastructure, improved literacy in terms
of higher percentage of retention in school, employability and reduction in poverty, etc.
(Para 18)
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC)
The Committee suggests that the NEG should immediately commence work from the
beginning of the financial year so as to avoid the inconvenience of curtailment of budget
due to low performance and expenditure in future. It should make planned strategy for
utilization of funds for its various proposed schemes and projects. It should put in place a
mechanism for continuous monitoring of the progress of all the schemes and projects for
their effective implementation. (Para 21.1)
In view of the “Road Map’ for the Development of North Eastern Region, the
Committee is of the opinion that the NEC will have to actively work on regional
coordination and also with the concerned Ministries/Departments and agencies of the
Central as well as the State Governments. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the NEC
to draw up its action plan along with financial implications thereon in this regard for the
current financial year and submit the same to the Committee for its consideration while
submitting its Action Taken Replies indicating the progress achieved in this regard.
(Para 23)
The Committee, considering that the budgetary projection for NEC has not been
enhanced in 2004-05 as compared to BE 2003-04, is doubtful of the feasibility of the ‘Road
Map’ in the absence of parallel budgetary allocations. It, therefore, recommends that the
NEC may, after working out the financial implications for the ‘Road Map’ may submit a
fresh proposal to the Planning Commission for making supplementary budgetary allocation
for the purpose. (Para 23.1)

16
The Committee further takes note of the fact that, in order to implement the ‘Road
Map’, the NEC will have to seriously look into its technical and strategic planning
competency and therefore, consider this aspect while planning for implementation of the
‘Road Map’. (Para 23.2)
In addition to construction of North-East Express Highway as proposed in the ‘Road
Map’ of NEC, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should prepare a
comprehensive plan to connect every region by all-weather motorable roads within a given
time-frame. (Para 23.3)
The Committee further stresses upon the point that roads are the foremost
indicators of development of a region and, therefore, should be given topmost priority. In
the light of this, the Committee recommends that the NEC may formulate pilot projects to
connect all the villages in the region, particularly those in the border areas. The Committee
also recommends that NEC may come out with schemes for 100 per cent road connectivity
with all district headquarters of the States of North East. (Para 23.4)
REVITALISATION OF NEC
The Committee is of the view that revitalisation of NEC is an imperative need for
achieving the desired level of growth and development in the region. The Committee is
dismayed to note that no time frame has been fixed to implement the report on the
revitalisation of NEC. It, therefore, recommends that the Government should take
necessary measures immediately and implement the report at the earliest. (Para 25)
ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY
The Committee notes the progress made by the Ministry as a result of its advocacy
and publicity campaigns. It, however, desires to point out that the beneficiaries of these
campaigns have been mostly those living outside the North-Eastern States and the genuine
artisans and artists in the remote corners of the North East do not have access to display
their wares in these campaigns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the artists and
artisans of the region may be given technical/financial assistance to enable them to market
their products at remunerative prices. Towards that end the Ministry should also organize
cultural exchange programmes and expo within the North Eastern Region itself.
(Para 28)
CAPACITY BUILDING
The Committee was informed that although the literacy rate is normally higher than
the national average in most parts of the States but it lags behind in the sphere of
vocational education and acquisition of skills. The Committee, however, recommends that
the Ministry should make special efforts in the sphere of promoting vocational education
and acquisition of skills by the local populace as it would go a long way in enhancing
their capacity to handle various schemes and projects which in turn would help the region
in proper implementation and execution of projects and schemes in an efficacious way.
(Para 30)
The Committee notes the enhancement of budgetary allocation in 2004-05 for the
purpose, and therefore, hopes that this aspect of development will be better looked after as
compared to the years gone by . It, however, suggests that due representation of women
should be stressed upon while chalking out schemes for Capacity Building. The Committee
also feels that the focus of these schemes should be the youth, who are the future of the
nation. (Para 31)

17
VRS PACKAGE FOR SIKKIM MINING CORPORATION
The Committee takes note of the VRS package given to the workers in SMC and
urges upon the Ministry to pursue with the Planning Commission to make parallel
budgetary allocations for the same. The Committee desires that the cases of workers who
are still awaiting the VRS package should be cleared within the current financial year.
(Para 33)
PROMOTION OF TOURISM
The Committee, now recommends that the Ministry should tie-up with the Ministry
of Tourism to formulate perspective plan for development of tourism infrastructure. It has
been informed that there has been a slight increase in the number of foreign tourists
visiting the NE states except Arunachal Pradesh. However, the number of domestic tourists
has shown an overall decline. The Committee feels that the uncertain law and order
situation combined with some other factors like lack of adequate rail, road and air services
and that of availability of proper accommodation prevent tourists to come to the region. The
Ministry of DoNER should pursue it with the respective State Governments in the North
Eastern Region as well as with the concerned Central Ministries for developing better
tourism related infrastructure so as to attract more tourists which would give a fillip to the
sagging economy of this region. (Para 36)
AIR CONNECTIVITY IN THE NORTH-EAST
While taking note of the progress made in air connectivity of the NE region, the
Committee is of the view that still lot more needs to be done to improve the infrastructure
for developing better air connectivity. The frequency of flights connecting the state capitals
of the NE regions with at least four metropolitan cities of the country, namely, Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai needs enhancement. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all the projects concerning development of civil aviation in this region should be taken
up on priority basis and more funds should be allocated for the early completion of those
projects. (Para 39)
NORTHEASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL  MARKETING CORPORATION LTD.
(NERAMAC)
The Committee fails to understand how the Ministry proposes to carry out its
intended revival of NERAMAC for development of storage, transportation and marketing
facilities in the absence of any budgetary allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry may take necessary steps to revive and strengthen NERAMAC and also
make the required funds available to it during the current year itself so that it undertakes
these activities to help the farmers in the marketing of their produce. It further
recommends that both the Ministry and NEC should draw up a plan for developing
infrastructure for storage, transportation, marketing etc. so that farmers could sell their
commodities at a remunerative price. (Para 41)
While noting the fact that a good number of agricultural and horticultural products
are being produced in the NE States, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should
take major steps for development of agro-based food-processing industries in the region
which will provide them a captive market. (Para 41.1)

MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, 10 August, 2004 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
6. Shri N. Jothi
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
8. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
9. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
10. Shri Biren Singh Engti
11. Shri Rahul Gandhi
12. Shri T.K. Hamza
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Tek Lal Mahato
15. Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
16. Shri Sachin Pilot
17. Prof. M. Ramadass
18. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
19. Shri Bajuban Riyan
20. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
21. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
22. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
23. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
21

22
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Ashoka Kumar Rastogi, Secretary (Border Management)
2. Shri Kanwar Pratap Singh, Additional Secretary (Border Management)
3. Dr. P.K. Mishra, Additional Secretary
4. Shri N.A. Viswanathan, Additional Secretary and FA (H)
5. Shri Rajiv Aggarwal, Joint Secretary
6. Shri H.S. Brahma, Joint Secretary
7. Shri S.K. Chattopadhyay, Joint Secretary
8. Shri Akhil Kumar Jain, Joint Secretary
9. Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
10. Shri Yashwant Raj, Joint Secretary
11. Shri Rakesh, Joint Secretary
12. Shri K.S. Ramasubban, Joint Secretary
13. Shri Harminder Raj Singh, Joint Secretary
14. Shri R.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
15. Dr. K.S. Sugathan, Joint Secretary
16. Shri A. Purkayastha, Joint Secretary
17. Shri M.L. Gupta, Joint Secretary
18. Shri J.K. Banthia, Registrar General of India
19. Shri Jawahar Thakur, Chief Controller of Accounts
20. Lt. Gen. Bhopinder Singh, DG, Assam Rifles
21. Shri Ajai Raj Sharma, DG , BSF
22. Shri K.M. Singh, DG, CISF
23. Shri J.K. Sinha, DG, CRPF
24. Shri Kanwal Jit Singh, DG, ITBP
25. Shri R.S. Mooshahary, DG , NSG
26. Shri Himanshu Kumar, DG, SSB
27. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
1. Shri Laxmi Chand, Secretary
2. Shri N.A. Vishwanathan, AS & FA
3. Dr. Surajit Mitra, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. H.K. Paliwal, Joint Secretary
5. Dr. T. Kumar, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Jawahar Thakur, Chief Controller of Accounts (Home)
7. Shri Manoj Das, AGM (NEDFi)
Representatives of North Eastern Council
1. Shri P.L. Thanga, Secretary, NEC
2. Shri U.N. Majhi, FA

23
2.0 The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to its first meeting and informed
the Members that the Home Secretary had sought exemption from appearing before the Committee
as he was leading the Indian Delegation to India-Pakistan talks on terrorism and drug trafficking
to be held in Pakistan. Thereafter, she welcomed the Secretary (Border Management) and his
colleagues to the meeting of the Committee.
2.1 The Secretary (BM) made a powerpoint presentation, inter-alia covering the Demands of
the Ministry of Home Affairs, ongoing schemes and projects, issues relating to citizenship,
immigration, Multi Purpose National Identity Card Scheme and Disaster Management.
3. After the presentation of the Secretary (BM) was over, the Chairperson sought a
clarification as to why there was no increase in the budget of the Ministry vis-a-vis the interim
budget presented in February except a demand of Rs. 10 crore. Thereafter, the Chairperson invited
Members to seek clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry, Directors-General of
Central Police Forces and Commissioner of Police, Delhi.
4.0 A Member wanted to know the status of the proposal to create the National Emergency
Management Authority; financial assistance to poor States under the National Calamity Relief Fund;
construction of Manav Adhikar Bhawan; level of satisfaction of the complainants to the National
Human Right Commission, border fencing; grievance redressal; vacancies in the Department of
Official Language; expansion of Civil Defence and Home Guards; pending bills of visits of the Prime
Minister and other Ministers; modernisation of Police Forces; announcements of schemes by the
Prime Minister on J and K; naxalite violence and monitoring of the release of central funds to States.
4.1 A Member raised questions relating to variation of Rs. 300 crore for Modernisation of Police
Forces in 2002-03, its break-up; inability of small States to provide matching grants; more funds
for modernisation of Police Forces; budget of Delhi Police for its modernisation needs, etc.
4.2 Another Member wanted to know from the officials the State-wise figures of crimes against
SCs/STs; monitoring the utilisation of funds given to States for welfare of SCs/STs and for
checking/stopping atrocities against them; reasons for vacancies in IPS Officers in the State of
Uttar Pradesh; and benefits to physically challenged persons.
4.3 A Member also raised several issues revolving around the definition of disaster management;
involvement of the ordinary citizens in these programmes; disaster management training for NCC
cadets; change in the nomenclature of left-wing extremism to naxalism; specific observations of the
‘Special Group Report 2003’ on the cross border terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir etc.
4.4 Some Members raised questions about the INMARSAT monitoring system; Multipurpose
National Identity Card Scheme; quality of bullet proof jackets; plight of undertrials in jails; bomb
shelter; increase in the budget for Police Modernisation in Uttar Pradesh; growth in the number of
Police personnel vis-a-vis population growth in the country; the status of the area on the other side
of border fence.
4.5 Another Member raised various issues relating to structure of the budget of the Ministry;
its plan and non-plan components; requirement of more plan expenditure for creating infrastructure
development and other issues like coastal security especially the arresting of fishermen by Sri
Lankan forces; centrally sponsored schemes implemented by the Ministry; uniform implementation
of the Freedom Fighters Pension Scheme in all the States and UTs; human rights education;
exclusion of five communities from the list of tribal communities in Pondicherry and the
outstanding audit objections with respect to Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.6 Some Members were of the view that the issue of fishermen should be taken up by the
Ministry of External Affairs and Coast Guard with Sri Lanka Government. Queries about lifting of

24
ban on the Peoples’ War Group and on the Veerappan gang in Tamil Nadu were put. Further queries
included reason for increase in BE on Salaries of Police when there was no revision in their
salaries; reduction in the allocation of funds for Home guards; reason for not having separate
allocation of funds for UTs from Calamity Relief Fund; State wise list of jails violating human
rights and the action taken against them; quality of foods in jails et al.
5. The officials of the Ministry replied to certain points/queries of the Chairperson and Members
of the Committee and requested it to give time to send written responses to the remaining queries.
6. The Chairperson acceded to the request of the representatives of the Ministry.
(The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee adjourned at 1.25 
P.M. and
re-assembled at 3.35 P.M.)
7. The Chairperson welcomed Secretary, Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
and his colleagues and made general observations on the budgetary provisions of the Ministry and
then invited him to make presentation on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry.
8.0 The Secretary, Ministry of DONER made a power-point presentation highlighting
the purpose of setting up of the Department of Development of North Eastern Region in
September, 2001 and upgrading that to a full-fledged Ministry on 27 May, 2004; remit of the
Ministry; the nature of Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR); expenditure on North
Eastern States by Central Ministries/Departments out of the ten percent allocation made from their
Budgetary Allocation; resource flow from the Ministry of DONER to NE States; details of Plan
Schemes for 2004-05 to the tune of Rs.1185.00 crore and Non-Plan Schemes to the tune of
Rs.9.70 crore of the Ministry; utilization of funds in the last four financial years; need for
enhancement of allocation as against the approved allocation in 2004-05; and projects under NLCPR
and their administration.
8.1 The Secretary also touched upon the North Eastern Council (NEC), briefly tracing its
background; the Outlay and Expenditure under IX Plan and Outlay Performance of X Plan. He
furnished the Plan Outlay (2004-05) and dwelt on utilisation of Plan Funds by NEC since 1995.
He also apprised the Committee of the fact that utilisation has been at an yearly average of almost
hundred percent. He then drew the attention of the Committee to the need for enhancement of NEC
Budget.
8.2 He also made a mention of Advocacy and Publicity Plan Schemes, Capacity Building Plan
Scheme and the recent initiatives undertaken by the Ministry in order to enhance resource flow to
NE Region. He further informed the Committee that the Ministry had identified six core sectors for
external funding, namely, road network, water resource management, energy, urban development,
tourism infrastructure development and strategy for integrated development.
9. At this point, Members raised queries/clarifications pertaining to the status of spending
capacity of the Central Ministries out of the ten percent of their budget earmarked for NE Region;
infrastructure development works in the North East; number of projects taken up by the Ministry
and North Eastern Council in each State of the region; inspection of projects especially their
physical and qualitative aspects, the expenditure and spending capacity and mandate of the Ministry
as well as NEC; outcome of the Ministry’s advertising and publicity schemes; externally aided
projects; loans and advances to North Eastern Development Financial Corporation Ltd.; Capacity
Building Plan Scheme; Report of the Committee on Revitalization of the North Eastern Council;
coordination of developmental activities; physical indicators of achievements of the Ministry and
NEC; air connectivity of the region; marketing of agricultural products of the region; ‘Road Map’
of NEC and differences of NEC and Ministry of DONER in specific terms etc.

25
10. The witnesses responded to some of the queries. However, the Chairperson requested the
Secretary to send written replies/clarifications to the Secretariat by 12 August, 2004 for
consideration of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The Committee adjourned at 5.55 
P.M. to meet again on 13 August, 2004.

26
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, 18 August, 2004 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
7. Shri N. Jothi
8. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
9. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
10. Shri Rahul Gandhi
11. Shri Tapir Gao
12. Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
13. Shri Sachin Pilot
14. Shri Ashok Pradhan
15. Prof. M. Ramadass
16. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
17. Shri Bajuban Riyan
18. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
19. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
20. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
21. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
2.0 The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee to adopt the draft
One Hundred and Ninth and One Hundred and Tenth Reports on Demands for Grants (2004-05)
of Ministry of Home Affairs and Development of North-Eastern Regions, respectively.
26

27
2.1 Some Members suggested changes in the format of the Reports of the Committee to reflect
the queries/suggestions of the Members in the Reports.
3.0 The Committee first took up for consideration draft One Hundred and Tenth Report
pertaining to the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of DoNER.
3.1 Members suggested certain amendments in the draft Report regarding conceptualisation and
initiation of developmental programme by the Ministry on its own in the region within the overall
Perspective Developmental Plan for the NE region (Para 17) preparation of a comprehensive plan
by the NEC to connect every region of NER by all weather motorable roads within a given time
frame (para 23.3) technical/financial to assistance to artists and artisans of the region within its
advocacy and publicity programme and strengthening of North Eastern Regional Agricultural
Marketing Corporation (NERAMAC) (para 41).
3.2 Subject to above mentioned amendments, the Committee adopted the Report.
4.0 The Committee then took up for consideration One hundred and ninth Report pertaining to
the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.1 Members suggested some points (para 23.7)on cross border infiltrations in Jammu and
Kashmir, naxalism paras (in 25.1 and 25.4), Modernisation of Police Forces (para 28.5 and 28.6),
Disaster Management, Multipurpose National Identity Card Scheme; Border Area Development,
observance of Human Rights in J&K, Relief and Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Pandits and Border
Migrants, protection of minorities in J&K, Housing projects of CPMFs, vacancies in the sub-
ordinate offices of Department of Official Language, Security of Senior Citizens in Delhi,
Complaints against the personnel of Delhi Police and nexus between CPN-Maoists and MCCI/PWG .
4.2 Some Members raised other issues like freedom fighter’s pension, rehabilitation for migrants
in NE etc., which the Committee decided to take up later, separately.
4.3 Subject to said amendments, the Committee adopted the Report.
5. The Committee authorized its Chairperson to present both the One Hundred Ninth and One
Hundred Tenth Reports to the Rajya Sabha and in her absence Shri R.K.Dhawan to do the same.
The Committee also authorized Shri Ashok Pradhan and in his absence Shri Rahul Gandhi to lay
the Report in Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee adjourned at 6.15 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.