93
C.S.(H.A.)-340
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained
in the One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report
on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  13 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  13 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—72
Chapter-I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government.... 2—40
Chapter-II
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee d oes not desire to pursue
the matter in view of the Government’s reply .......................................................... 41—50
Chapter-III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee ................................................................. 51—68
Chapter-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of
Government have not been received ............................................................................ 69—72
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONSOF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ...................... 73—77
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 79—82
7. A NNEXURE
List of the Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs .......................................... 83—92

COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
♣25. Vacant
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
♣ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 30 th September, 2013 in terms
of the provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act , 1951,
he ceases to be a Member of the Committee.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25
th April and laid on the Table
of the Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2013.
3. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Notes on the One Hundred Sixty-
ninth Report. The Minister of Home Affairs laid the statement on the status of implementation of
the recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee on the Table of Rajya Sabha/
Lok Sabha on 11
th and 10 th December, 2013, respectively, pursuant to the Direction of Chairman,
Rajya Sabha dated 24 th September, 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
11th December, 2013.
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
11th December,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs

ACRONYMS
AIR All India Radio
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
BSF Border Security Force
BOP Border Out Post
CFSL Central Forensic Science Laboratory
CISF Central Industrial Security Force
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force
CAPFIMS Central Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Science
CAPF Central Armed Police Forces
CCTNS Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System
CAS Core Application Software
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security
CPWD Central Public Works Department
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers
CSOLS Central Secretariat Official Language Service
CNE Committee on Non-plan Expenditure
CCIB Coordination Committee on International Border
DFSS Directorate of Forensic Science Services
DTC District Training Centre
DA VP Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
DAMEPL Delhi Airport Metro Express Pvt. Ltd.
DDA Delhi Development Authority
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer
DoP&T Department of Personnel and Training
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee
EOI Expression of Interest
EPIL Engineering Projects India Ltd.
(iv)

FICN Fake Indian Currency Notes
GDP Gross Domestic Product
IB Intelligence Bureau
IBB Indo-Bangladesh Border
IPB Indo-Pakistan Border
IIPA Indian Institute of Public Administration
IAP Integrated Action Plan
IAY Indira Awas Yojana
ICP Integrated Check Post
JHTs Junior Hindi Translators
JWG Joint Working Group
LRUR Local Register of Usual Residents
LWE Left Wing Extremist
MPF Modernization of Police Forces
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MDA Marketing Development Assistance
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forest
MORTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
NIA National Investigation agency
NDRF National Disaster Response Force
NSDG National Service Delivery Gateway
NCRB National Crime Research Bureau
NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
NSDC National Skill Development Corporation
NPCC National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd.
NSG National Security Guard
NCRMP National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
NERMP National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project
NECP National Emergency Communication Plan
NPDRR National Platform on Disaster Risk Reduction
NPR National Population Register
NATGRID National Grid
NHRC Nati onal Human Rights Commission
(v)

NCTC National Counter Terrorism Centre
NBWL National Board for Wild Life
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
PTC Police Training Centre
PIDDC Product/Infrastructure Development of Destination and Circuits
RRP Road Requirement Plan
RTC Regional Training Centre
RMSA Rashtriya Madhyamik Siksha Abhiyan
RIC Resident Identity Cards
SJSRY Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal
SRE Security Related Expenditures
SDC State Data Centre
SW AN State Wide Area Network
SPMU State Project Management Unit
SSA Sarva Siksha Abhiyan
SSC Staff Selection Commission
SOP Standard Operating Procedures
SIS Scheme for Special Insfrastructure
SDA Software Development Agency
SWLB S tate Wild Life Board
TRP Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India
UPSC Union Public Service Commission
(vi)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for the year 2013-14. The said Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha
on 25
th April and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2013.
2. Action Taken Note was received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report on 6 th August, 2013. Subsequently, the Minister of Home
Affairs laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 10 th December, 2013 and the Rajya Sabha on
11th December, 2013 a statement on the status of implementation of recommendations contained in
that Report. The Action Taken Note received from the Ministry of Home Affairs has been
categorized as follows:
Chapter–I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Para Nos. 2.8, 2.9, 2.17.6, 2.17.7, 2.17.14, 2.17.15, 3.6.13, 3.6.14, 3.6.15,
3.6.16, 3.8.8, 3.12.10, 3.12.11, 3.12.12, 3.14.19, 3.14.20, 3.14.23, 3.15.2, 3.16.2, 4.2.3,
4.3.4, 4.4.4, 4.6.10, 4.7.7, 4.8.11, 4.8.12, 4.9.16, 4.10.9, 4.10.12, 4.10.13, 4.11.10,
4.11.11, 4.13.2, 4.14.4, 5.7, 5.10.6, 5.11.10, 5.11.14, 5.11.15, 5.12.9, 5.12.12, 5.12.13,
5.12.14, 5.12.16, 5.13.20, 5.13.21, 5.13.22, 5.14.13, 5.14.14, 5.14.15, 5.14.16, 5.14.17,
6.1.4, 6.2.5, 6.3.1, 6.4.15, 6.5.12 (of One Hundred and Sixty-Ninth Report) Total – 57
Recommendations
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter–II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 3.6.17, 3.7.9, 3.8.7, 4.1.9, 4.1.10,
4.2.4, 4.3.3, 4.5.6, 4.9.15, 4.10.10, 4.10.11, 5.11.12, 5.12.11, 5.12.15, 6.4.12, 6.4.14,
6.5.13, 6.5.14 ( ibid) Total – 18 Recommendations
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and,
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter–III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.11, 3.9.6, 3.10.6, 3.13.5, 3.14.22,
4.5.5, 4.6.9, 4.9.17, 4.9.22, 4.11.9, 4.15.3, 5.8.15, 5.11.11, 5.12.10, 6.4.13, 6.4.16, 6.5.11,
6.5.15 ( ibid) Total – 18 Recommendations
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish
convincing explanations in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter–IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 3.11.2, 3.14.21, 3.15.3, 4.1.8, 4.7.6, 4.12.4,
5.9.6, 5.11.13, 6.2.6 ( ibid) Total – 9 Recommendation
In respect of nine recommendations in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished
interim reply or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that
the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendation.
3. The details of the ATRs have been analysed in various Chapters in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee notes that there is an increase of 17.65% over RE 2012-13 and 9.34% over
BE 2012-13 in budgetary allocation to the Ministry in BE 2013-14. The Committee also notes that
the Government has increased allocation in BE 2013-14 as compared to BE 2012-13 for Union
Territories by 13.13%. The Committee, however, apprehends that the overall marginal increase will
only take care of inflationary pressure and may not be able to maintain the tempo of the
development of infrastructure and implementation of plans and schemes, which have already been
affected by the reduction in the allocation due to austerity measure at RE 2012-13.
(Para 2.8 of 169
th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Ministry has identified the critical gaps in funding under various operational heads of
budget. The matter has been taken up by the Home Minister with the Finance Minister for
additional funding during 2013-14. It shall be the endeavour of the Ministry that important plan/
non-plan schemes do not suffer on account of resource crunch.
1.2 POLICE INFRASTRUCTURE AND BORDER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee also notes that the schemes of Police Infrastructure and Border Management
have been shifted from Non-Plan to Plan during 2011-12. The Committee hopes that this would
help improve implementation of both the schemes. As financial year 2012-13 was the first year of
the Twelfth Five Year Plan and the Ministry was busy clearing procedural bottlenecks, the Ministry
should complete the process of evaluation of schemes/projects within the timeframe given by
Ministry of Finance. Otherwise it can further delay allocation and consequently the same would
reflect on schemes/projects.
(Para 2.9 ibid)
Action Taken
Police Infrastructure
1.2.2 The process of evaluation of schemes/projects have been expedited by the Ministry of
Home Affairs and following major proposals have already been appraised by Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC).
2

3
Name of the
Force
Assam Rifles
BSF
CISF
CRPF
CAPFIMS
SSB
IB
Name of the Scheme
Appraisal of Plan scheme for infrastructural development
(Residential Buildings and Non-Residential Buildings at various
establishments of AR during Twelfth FYP).
Plan schemes of BSF for construction of infrastructure
(Residential, Non-Residential and BOPs) during Twelfth FYP
(i) Construction of residential and non-residential infrastructure
for GBS at Mahipalpur and SSG Unit at Greater Noida.
(ii) Construction of infrastructure of second reserve battalion
and Eastern Sector of Office complex at Jaggannath Pur,
Dhurwa (Ranchi), Jharkhand
T
OTAL
Appraisal of CoBRA Bns to revise cost estimates in respect of
Capital works
Augmentation of training facility in CRPF through expansion of
existing 5 Recruits Training Centres (RTCs), creation of 3 new
RTCs, 1 CoBRA School of Jungle Warfare and Tactics
(CSJWT) and 1 Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorism (CIAT)
School
Establishment of Central Armed Police Forces Institute of
Medical Science (CAPFIMS), along with 800 bedded Research
Hospital (500 bedded General Hospital + 300 bedded Super
Specialty Hospital), Nursing College and a School of Paramedics
Plan schemes for construction of infrastructure (Residential
buildings, Non-Residential Buildings and BOPs) at various
establishments of SSB during Twelfth FYP
Plan schemes of IB for construction of officer-cum-residential
buildings (OCR) at various IB Units and construction of
infrastructure at RTC Thiruvananthapuram
T
OTAL
Amount
(Rs. in crore)
969.96
3664.61
249.94
87.69
337.63
1121.82
1425.60
1377.56
3510.07
91.59
12411.15
1.2.3 Proposal of Rs.3328.50 crore is being submitted/submitted for appraisal of Expenditure
Finance Committee. In view of the above, it is submitted that all out efforts are being made to
ensure that there is no delay in the process of the evaluation of the Schemes/projects by the
Ministry.
Border Management
1.2.4 Department of Border Management, MHA, has engaged Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA), New Delhi, for conducting evaluation of border projects like fencing, road,

4
floodlighting, construction of BOPs along IBB and IPB. The said organization has submitted its
Evaluation Report in respect of both the Borders.
1.3 TRENDS IN DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee observes that against the projected amount of Rs. 6,088.22 crores under
Plan Head and Rs. 41,272.96 crores under non-plan, an amount of Rs. 3,562.61 crores (Plan) and
an amount of Rs.35,288.30 crores (Non-Plan) have been allocated during 2013-14. The reduction
of Rs. 2,525.61 crores under Plan and Rs. 5,984.66 crore under non-plan, i.e., a total Rs. 8,510.27
crore less allocation has been made during 2013-14. There is a shortfall in major heads of CAPFs,
AR, IB, NIA and CAPFIM.
(Para 2.17.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 Shortfall in the major heads of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), Assam Rifles, IB and
NIA is being reviewed in this Ministry and the additional funds required under major heads will be
projected at Supplementary stage/Revised Estimated stage to Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission based upon the expenditure trend and committed liabilities of CAPFs.
Recommendation
1.3.3 The Committee feels that it would not be easy for the Ministry of Home Affairs to manage
the expenditure over stated projects during 2013-14 as reduction of Rs. 2,525 crores is not a meager
amount and, moreover, the Ministry is planning for raising 16 battalions during the year. The
Committee observes that with reduced allocation, the Ministry would not be able to raise those
battalions. Keeping in view the fact that the demand for sophisticated weapons and gadgets is
growing more and more because of increasing rate of crime and also because of increasing
population, the Committee feels that there is every need to enhance allocation rather than reducing
allocation.
(Para 2.17.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.4 The allocation made by Ministry of Finance against the projection of MHA based upon the
requirement of CAPFs is not sufficient and will badly hamper the process of procurement of Arms
and Ammunition, requirement of new infrastructure for establishments, requirement of augmentation
of existing establishment and requirement of surveillance equipments. In this regard, based upon the
allocation made to CAPFs, the expenditure trend, committed liabilities in CAPFs, the additional
requirement for 2013-14 will be projected at Supplementary Stage/Revised Estimate stage to
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission so as to ensure that the requirement of CAPFs do not
suffer due to lack of funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.3.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs which is in sync with
the observation of the Committee. At this juncture, reduction of budgetary allocation to the
Ministry of Home Affairs for projects pertaining to CAPFs would not be better in the
interest of national security. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the matter with the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance for grant of enhanced budgetary allocation.

5
Recommendation
1.3.6 The Committee takes a serious note of the downsizing of the projected demands of the
Ministry by 16.53 % and feels that the amount projected by the Ministry under its different DFGs
should be positively considered by the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and suitable
enhancement be made at RE 2013-14 stage. The Committee while taking cognizance of the security
threats from Left Wing Extremism, Terrorism, flow of FICN, Cyber Security etc. recommends that
allocation for Schemes/Projects such as CCTNS, SRE, MPF, NDRF , etc. should be enhanced to the
projected levels so as to improve internal security scenario in the country. The Committee also
desires that allocations for Police Housing should be enhanced at RE 2013-14 stage so that
satisfaction level of CAPFs could improve to 25% as recommended by GoM.
(Para 2.17.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.7 The present allocation of funds under Security Related Expenditure (SRE) and
Modernization of Police Force (MPF) was demanded according to the requirement and assessment
of past expenditure. However, as per recommendation of GoM, it may be enhanced by 20 per cent
of the actual demand of current financial year to meet the urgent demand of the North Eastern
States under aforesaid scheme/projects.
1.3.8 There is a proposed plan Scheme of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) namely for
“Creation of Infrastructure for Twelve battalions of NDRF” at an estimated cost of Rs. 1250.80
crore. The Scheme is to be implemented in 12th Five year Plan. Since the Scheme is yet to be
approved, a provision of Rs 11 crores has been made during the current financial year. Once the
scheme is approved, an attempt will be made to increase the allocation at the RE stage and during
subsequent years.
1.3.9 Under the Security Related Expenditure (SRE) Scheme applicable to 106 districts falling
under Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, an allocation of
Rs 207.54 crore was made in BE 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs 186.79 crore in RE 2012-13,
against which, an amount of Rs 180.66 crore was released to the LWE affected States as
reimbursement of expenditure incurred by them on Anti-naxal operations during 2012-13.
1.3.10 An allocation of Rs 207.08 crore has been made in BE 2013-14 in the Demands for Grants
for the current year, which should be sufficient for providing assistance to the LWE affected States
under the SRE Scheme based on the past expenditure pattern. Additional requirement of funds, if
any, will be projected at RE Stage in 2013-14.
1.3.11 The allocation for relief and rehabilitation of J&K migrants has been increased to the tune
of Rs.115.75 crore in BE 2013-14 from Rs.100.00 crore and Rs.94.90 crore in BE and RE 2012-13
respectively.
Downsizing of Crime and Criminal Tracking Network Systems (CCTNS) Budget for the year 2013-14
1.3.12 The prime reason attributed to downsizing is less releases to States/UTs under Grants-in-
Aid. States/UTs have not been released funds because of low utilization of Funds already allocated
to them. The Budget had been downsized from the initial budget estimates of Rs. 400 crores in
year 2012-13 to the revised estimates of Rs. 85 crores.
1.3.13 The project implementation schedule of Crime and Criminal Tracking Network Systems
(CCTNS) project to be implemented in the Eleventh plan (2007-2012) was proposed for four years
(2008-2012). The schedule for four years was primarily based on a rationale that project activities

6
shall be undertaken by diverse stakeholders and would be successfully completed within the
proposed time. The various reasons for the delay are as follows:
● The CCTNS project is based on the principle of “Bundle of Services” wherein a
“System Integrator”(SI) would provide turnkey implementation of all the services
which will constitute implementation of a project in a State/UT. There has been
considerable delay in signing of the SI contract at State/UT level.
● The CCTNS project was conceptualized with a view to leverage the existing IT
infrastructure and network being developed under the other schemes of Department of
Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) such as SWAN (State Wide Area
Network), SDC (State Data Centre), NSDG (National Service Delivery Gateway) etc.
However, there is a considerable delay in the completion of the above mentioned
schemes when aligned with the proposed implementation schedule of CCTNS project
from the year 2008-12.
● The project initiation activities of CCTNS project in terms of project conceptualization,
preparation of State Plans, preparation of project guidelines, templates, RFPs and other
key project guidance documents which should have been ready in the year 2008-09 for
timely initiation of the project before the approval of CCEA note, were mostly complete
only by the end of the financial year of 2009-10.
● The Core Application Software (CAS) of CCTNS project should have been completed
for initiation of rollout in the year 2009-10 as envisaged in the CCEA note. However
the Software Development Agency (SDA) at the Central level was selected only by
June, 2010 after a bid process which started in August, 2009. The latest build of CAS
has been released to States/UTs only in December, 2012.
1.3.14 The work of Project implementation is in full swing across the country. Also, provided that
the Project Implementation deadline is 30
th June/31 st August, 2013, all States/UTs shall need to make
pending payments to System Integrator, State Project Management Unit (SPMU) and BSNL in the
next few months itself, hence the Ministry shall require more funds to be sanctioned/released to
States/UTs who inturn shall make the respective payments.
Current Status of the Project implementation and action taken to ensure progress as per timelines:
1.3.15 All States/UTs have been given a mandate to finish the CCTNS Project Implementation by
30
th June or 31 st August, 2013. Various actions are being taken to facilitate the State/UTs to achieve
the timelines and also to help them utilize the funds released to them. Some such steps are-
● Regular meetings at Home Secretary/AS/JS levels are being held with State Nodal
officers/System Integrators(SIs)/SPMUs and BSNL to monitor and push the progress
in each respect.
● Regular visits are being made by National Crime Research Bureau (NCRB) and CPMU
to review the progress in various States/UTs. NCRB and MHA has been intervening in
any matter that States/SIs or SPMUs need help with.
● In order to facilitate faster implementation by the SIs, payment terms are being revised
for SIs, which shall ensure that SIs have the needed cash flow and hence can
continue to work to meet the prescribed timelines.
1.3.16 Below paragraphs detail the Status of implementation of the project:
(a) Selection of System Integrator (SI) by all the States/UTs: 31 State/UTs have till date
signed their respective System Integrator (SI) contracts and 1 State has issued Letters of

7
Intent to the respective SI. The resources have been deployed by the SIs at the States/UTs
and work is in full swing.
(b) Selection of State Project Management Units (SPMU) by all the States/UTs: 31 States/
UTs have signed contracts with their respective SPMU. The resources have been deployed
by the SPMUs at the States/UTs
(c) Network Connectivity: BSNL has signed the Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with
27 States/UTs and 8 States/UTs have been given permission to go for SWAN connectivity
and some already have operational networks. These are AandN Islands, Chandigarh, Delhi,
Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Puducherry, Lakshadweep. In all the rest of the States and UTs,
the respective SLAs have been signed between BSNL and the respective States. Around
7319 Police Stations/Higher Offices are currently connected as on 21
st May, 2013 and BSNL
is currently working on providing network connectivity at the remaining sites.
(d) Capacity Building: District Training Centre (DTC), Regional training Centre (RTC),
Police Training Centre (PTC), State Crime Records Bureau have already been set up in
31 States/UTs. Training to 7,03,781 persons has been imparted. Formation of District
Mission Teams at States and UTs has been completed in 34 States/UTs.
(e) Financial Aspects: Total funds of Rs. 446.54 crores have been released to States/UTs
as Grants-in-Aid under the CCTNS project till date, out of which R 202.25 crores have
been utilized till 17.05.2013.
1.3.17 Under the Scheme for Modernization of State Police Forces (MPF Scheme) which was
approved in February, 2013, provisions of R 8195.53 crore has been approved for five years
(2012-13 to 2016-17) under Non-Plan and R3750.87 crore under Plan during the 12th Plan period
(2012-13 – 2016-17). Additionally, a provision of R.432.90 crore has been approved under the
Scheme for two years for funding Mega City Policing in six cities, namely, Hyderabad, Chennai,
Mumbai, Bengaluru, Kolkata and Ahmedabad under Non-Plan.
1.3.18 The BE 2013-14 provision for MPF Scheme under Non-Plan is R 750 crore and under Plan
is R1097 crore.
1.3.19 A scheme for modernization of CAPFs for R11,009.19 crore has been approved by the CCS
which would be implemented in phased manner upto 2016-17. The requirement of additional funds
for the year 2013-14 would be considered.
Recommendation
1.3.20 The Committee also takes note of the submission made by the Ministry that China spends
around about 119 billion dollars on defence and 123 billion dollars on internal security. The
Committee understands that China has a bigger economy than India, as India’ s GDP is about one-
fourth of China’ s GDP but as far as our allocation for internal security is concerned, it is one-
tenth of China’ s Budget for internal security. The Government should consider higher allocation to
the internal security in view of its strategic importance and keeping in view the fact that India
is facing internal disturbances on several counts. A separate long term planning should be made
for this.
(Para 2.17.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.21 As compared to China, the internal security challenges in India are much more complex due
to various factors including regional conflicts, religious fundamentalism, insurgency in different

8
parts of the country, Jehadi terrorism posing threat to most parts of the country, continued
militancy in JandK and activities of anti-India forces across the Indian borders. Economic disparity
and huge unemployed/partially employed population and various other social factors have also been
causing strain in the maintenance of public order in different parts of the country.
1.3.22 There is definitely a need for long term strategic planning for internal security of the
country for which enhancement in the Budget is needed. However, the requirement of funds for
the internal security has to be examined keeping in mind the various other social and developmental
commitments of the Government.
1.4 LEFT-WING EXTREMISM
Recommendation
1.4.1 Left Wing Extremism is the single biggest threat to India’s internal security. The maoists are
directly challenging the democratic fabric of our country. Left Wing Extremism is violent in nature
and has pre-defined political objectives of seizing political power through barrel of gun. They do not
believe in parliamentary democracy. Maoists’ violence, which persisted for a long time has assumed
serious and threatening proportions. The Committee feels that while pursing security related and
development related activities, the maoists should also be challenged ideologically at various fora
such as seminars, media etc. Though the Home Secretary contends that there is improvement in the
situation, the Committee feels that there is no marked visibility of the improvement.
(Para 3.6.13 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 A Central Sector Scheme namely Media Plan is being implemented for the Left Wing
Extremism (LWE) affected areas. The main objective of the Scheme is to familiarise people in the
LWE affected States about the various ongoing schemes of the Government for the infrastructure
development, job creation, education and skill development programmes including skill upgradation,
in order to enable them to avail the benefits under these schemes so that they are not lured by
the Maoists.
1.4.3 During the last Financial Year i.e. 2012-13, 
R 6.00 crore was allocated under the head of
Advertisement and Publicity (Media Plan). The fund was utilized for conveying relevant messages
to LWE affected areas through broadcast of audio spots over All India Radio (AIR), presenting
4560 programmes through the Song and Drama Division and organizing the 5
th Tribal Youth
Exchange Programme at 4 places viz. Gangtok, Mysore, Alwar and Pune through the Nehru Yuva
Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) which envisaged participation of 2000 Tribal Youths from the worst
LWE affected areas. Apart from this, the Institute of Social Science, New Delhi is in the process
of conducting 08 Seminars on LWE related issues which is funded by the MHA. In the past, MHA
has also published newspaper advertisements and posters through the DA VP.
1.4.4 As a result of multi-pronged approach of the Central Government in dealing with the
problem of Left Wing Extremism, the LWE violence level has come down during the last two
years, as may be seen from the following table:
Year Incidents Deaths
2010 2213 1005
2011 1760 611
2012 1415 415

9
Recommendation
1.4.5 The Committee is well aware of the fact that maoists have expanded their areas of influence
considerably by exploiting social, economic and political grievances of local poor population. The
maoist problem is the result of the lack of adequate resources to the poor people and tribals, and
hence the maoist affected regions remained underdeveloped with less infrastructure facilities. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central and State Governments should ensure that the
fruits of development should reach the LWE infested areas as well to bring back the misguided
people to the mainstream of the society. More and more employment of the youth from those areas
will go a long way in improving the situation.
(Para 3.6.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.6 The Government of India has adopted an integrated approach in dealing with LWE activities
in the arenas of security, development, ensuring entitlements of marginalized sections, good
governance and public perception management. The Integrated Action Plan (IAP) being implemented
by the Planning Commission in 82 selected Tribal and Backward Districts, inter-alia, including
71 LWE affected districts; the Road Requirement Plan (RRP) being implemented by the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways in 34 most adversely LWE affected districts; and the Skill
Development Scheme being implemented by the Directorate General of Employment and Training,
Ministry of Labour and Employment in 34 most adversely LWE affected districts, are three
important development schemes that focus on the LWE affected areas. Apart from these, there are
other development Schemes like Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and Indira Awas
Yojana (IAY) (M/o Rural Development); Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Siksha
Abhiyan (RMSA), Sakshar Bharat (D/o School Education and Literacy, M/o Human Resources
Development); Implementations of provisions of Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas
Act), 1996 (M/o Panchayati Raj); National Rural Health Mission (M/o Health and Family Welfare);
Bal Bandhu Scheme (National Commission for Protection of Child Rights) etc. that cover LWE
affected areas also. Further, the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) deployed in LWE affected
areas have also undertaken small skill development/employment oriented programmes in LWE
affected areas under the Civic Action Programmes.
Recommendation
1.4.7 The Committee is of considered view that schemes such as development of socio-economic
infrastructure and services such as school buildings, Anganwadi Centres, Primary Health Centres,
Drinking water Supply, Village Roads, Electric lights in public places such as PHCs and schools
etc. under Integrated Action Plan (IAP) for Selected Districts should be implemented in a big way.
The Committee is of the firm view that providing basic infrastructure facilities in LWE infested
areas can change the mindset of inhabitants and check their support to Left Wing Extremism.
(Para 3.6.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.8 The Planning Commission is implementing the Integrated Action Plan (IAP) in 82 Selected
Tribal and Backward Districts, inter-alia , including 71 LWE affected districts, for accelerated
development of the affected areas. The nature of works taken up under the IAP includes public
infrastructure and services which create a perceptible impact on the ground and among the local
communities. Macro-level monitoring of the IAP is being carried out by the Committee headed by
the Secretary, Planning Commission and regular video conference meetings are being held with the
District Collectors/District Magistrates and the Development Commissioners of the States

10
concerned. As on 06th June, 2013, an amount of R 6090 crore has been released so far under the
Scheme and against which an expenditure of R 4435.60 crore (72.83 %) has been reported. The
number of Projects completed so far under IAP is 82568.
Recommendation
1.4.9 The Committee expresses its concern over the expansion of maoists influence in new areas
particularly in North-Eastern region of the country. The presence of LWE in the north-eastern parts
of the country can derail the socio-economic developmental projects of the Central and State
Governments as a result of which, efforts of the Government could go in vain. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government must show its determination to flush out maoists from
these areas.
(Para 3.6.16 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.10 ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ being State subjects, action with respect to maintenance of law
and order lies primarily in the domain of the State Governments concerned, who deal with the
various issues related to Left Wing Extremist (LWE) activities in the States. The Central
Government monitors the situation closely and supplements and coordinates their efforts in several
ways.
1.4.11 As per available inputs, the CPI (Maoist) have been trying to forge links with insurgent
groups in the North Eastern States, particularly in Assam. The State Governments have been
sensitized in this regard and they have been requested to take urgent steps to tackle the situation
so as to obviate any possibility of these States emerging as another LWE theatre. A number of
significant arrests have been made of top leadership of the Maoists in Assam, which has
considerably impaired their capacity in the North-East.
1.5 TERRORISM IN J&K
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee is of the view that the impact of good governance should be visible at the
ground level in the remotest areas of the valley. The Committee recommends that the Government
in tandem with State Government should make an all-out effort for socio-economic development
of the State which could heal the deep wounds of people of Jammu and Kashmir victimised by
terrorism. Besides, the Government should also utilize “advocacy and publicity” to make people
aware about terrorism and its negative fallout. More employment opportunities should be provided
to the youth of the State. Private sector should also be encouraged in selecting youth from the area
for employment.
(Para 3.8.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 Following Schemes are being implemented for creating job opportunities in the State. The
Schemes Udaan, Himayat have been launched to involve private sector in employment generation
in the State.
Special Industry Initiative for J&K (SII J&K) ‘UDAAN’: (Implementation by Ministry of Home Affairs)
1.5.3 Based on the recommendations of the Expert Group constituted by the Prime Minister, the
Government of India launched the Scheme Special Industry Initiative for Jammu & Kashmir in the

11
nature of partnership between the corporates of India and Ministry of Home Affairs. The scheme
is being implemented by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). The Programme aims at
providing the skill and enhance employability of 40,000 unemployed youths of J&K who are
graduate/post graduate. Total budget for the Scheme is Rs.1000crore. out of which MHA share is
R750 crore. Balance amount will be borne by the corporate.
1.5.4 Thirty Five leading corporates have partnered with NSDC under UDAAN to train more than
50,000 youth from the State over the next 5 years. Training of 360 candidates have been
completed. Out of them 166 have offered job. During the last two months, more than 1500
candidates have been selected by the corporates for training.
HIMAYAT:
(Implementation by Ministry of Rural Development)
1.5.5 Mandate under HIMAYAT is to train and place 100,000 youth from J&K in organized
sectors and self employment over a five year period (2011-12 to 2016-17). Priority will be given
to youth who are school drop-outs, have studied up to 10th class or 12 th class and those who are
college drop-outs. As on 10 th May, 2013, 7929 candidates have been trained and 5434 candidates
have been placed in jobs.
Special Scholarship Scheme for J&K:
(Implementation by Ministry of Human Resources Development)
1.5.6 Based on the recommendation of the Expert Group constituted by the Prime Minister, the
Scheme has been launched with the aim to encourage the J&K youths to take advantage of the
education facilities in the rest of the country by offering 5000 fresh scholarships every year (4500
scholarships for general courses, 250 for engineering courses and 250 for medical studies) over
the next five year.
1.5.7 The Special Scholarship Scheme for Jammu & Kashmir started in the year 2011. In the first
year, only 420 applications were received and 38 students were found to be eligible and awarded
scholarship. The reason for lesser number of applications was due to lack of awareness of the
scheme.
1.5.8 In the academic year 2012-13, 5186 nos of application received. Out of this, the number
of eligible students short-listed by All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) is 1048 – 88
for Medical, 412 for Engineering and 548 for General Degree courses.
Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students
1.5.9 The Department of Higher Education, is operating a scheme “Central Sector Scheme of
Scholarship for College and University Students” on all-India basis, including the State of Jammu
& Kashmir. J&K State has been given a quota of 768 scholarships.
1.5.10 Other Schemes being implemented for employment generation are as follows:
“A provision under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
(MGNREGA) has been made to provide at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage
employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to
do unskilled work. Besides MGNREGA, other Scheme like Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SJSRY); Prime Minister’ s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) and
National Rural Livelihood Mission and entrepreneurial development programmes and

12
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) are being implemented throughout the
country including in Jammu & Kashmir for employment generation.”
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.5.11 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of all efforts undertaken.
1.6 COASTAL SECURITY
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee is anguished to note that the proposed procurement of boats under Coastal
Security Scheme Phase-II due to procedural wrangles is still halfway and a substantial amount
allocated for the purpose could not be utilized during 2012-13 which led to the reduction of
allocation from 
R 170 crore to R 80 crore in RE 2012-13 which is causing delay in completion
of projects. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the process of procurement of boats
should be completed during 2013-14 as assured by the Ministry with enhanced allocation without
time and cost overrun. The Committee also recommends that other components of the Coastal
Security Scheme such as construction/procurement of coastal Police stations, jetties, Marine Police
Operation Centres, large vessels, Rigid Inflatable Boats, four wheelers and motor cycles should be
completed at the earliest as any delay could further delay the putting in place of Coastal Security
Scheme. The Committee is of the view that Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme must be
implemented within set time frame to avoid any further delay in ensuring the safety of the long
stretch of India’ s coast.
(Para 3.12.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is expediting the procurement of boats under Phase-II of
Coastal Security Scheme, and boats would be delivered soon to the coastal States/UTs for
enhancing the surveillance and patrolling.
1.6.3 The construction work for Coastal Police Stations, Jetties and Marine Police Operations
Centres and procurement of four-wheelers and two-wheelers is being done by Coastal States/UTs.
They have been requested to expedite the construction work and procurement of vehicle and
complete the same within stipulated time. Necessary funds for the same has already been released
to Coastal States/UTs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.6.4 The Committee recommends that there should not be any delay in construction of
Coastal Police Stations etc. and procurement of vehicles. The Ministry may take it up with
the states.
Recommendation
1.6.5 The Committee appreciates that some coastal states are considering to raise specific cadre
for Coastal Security. The Union Home Ministry should take this idea further. The Committee feels
that coastal States should be motivated and provided possible help to set up separate cadre for
coastal police and till such arrangements are made, it is advisable that the local State Police
personnel should be deployed for Coastal Policing with proper training.
(Para 3.12.11 ibid)

13
Action Taken
1.6.6 The proposal for raising of Special Marine Police Battalion on the pattern of Indian Reserve
Battalion is under examination in MHA. The deployment of manpower in the Coastal Police Stations
and for manning the boats is being done by Coastal States/UTs. At present, the training
requirements of the State Marine Police is being met by the Indian Coast Guard. Coastal States/
UTs have also recruited some ex-Navy and Coast Guard personnel for manning the boats.
Recommendation
1.6.7 The Committee feels that all the sensitive coastal areas of the country should be fortified
to check smuggling, crime, infiltration, terrorism, which are serious threats to the nation. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Navy which is responsible for overall maritime
security including coastal security and offshore security should work in close coordination with
State Police and Coastal Police to ensure safety and security to the coast of the country.
(Para 3.12.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.8 A three tier Coastal security ring all along our coast is provided by Marine Police, Indian
Coast Guard and Indian Navy. Government has initiated several measures to strengthen Coastal
Security, which includes improving surveillance mechanism and enhanced patrolling by following an
integrated approach. Joint Operational Exercises are conducted on regular basis among Navy, Coast
Guard, Coastal Police, Customs and others to check the effectiveness of this approach adopted for
security of coastal areas including island territories. Further, continuous review and monitoring of
various mechanisms have been established by the Government at different levels, involving various
agencies, including the State/Union Territory authorities. The intelligence mechanism has also been
streamlined through the creation of Joint Operation Centres and multi-agency coordination
mechanism. Installation of radars covering the country’s entire coastline and islands is also an
essential part of this process. Issue of biometric identity card to coastal population including
fishermen and registration of all type boats/vessels plying in Indian water are the other steps taken
by the Govt. to strengthen Coastal Security.
1.7 BORDER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
1.7.1 The Committee observes that the main objective of effective border management is to secure
the country from ulterior motives of enemy countries such as illegal migration, infiltration,
smuggling etc. while facilitating legitimate trade and commerce across the border. The Committee
believes that Border Roads in good condition would help in better Border Management. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that construction of roads on Indo-Nepal Border, Indo-
Bangladesh Border and Indo-Bhutan Border should be completed in a time bound manner as per
desired specifications. The Committee also notes that Ministry is contemplating to set up a separate
construction organization under its ambit. Such proposal would reduce delay in achievement of
physical and financial targets. The Committee recommends that this proposal may be pursued in the
right earnest with sufficient technical expertise and staff strength.
(Para 3.14.19 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.2 Construction of 313 Kilometers road along Indo-Bhutan Border with an outlay of 
R 1259
crores has been approved by CCS. TC&HLEC has approved the DPR for 61.8 Kilometer road with

14
an estimated cost of R 293.76 crores. Efforts are being made to persuade the State Govt. of Assam
to bear the cost of land acquisition and statutory clearances.
1.7.3 Construction of 1377 Kilometers road along Indo-Nepal Boder with an outlay of R 3853
crores has been approved by CCS. The project is scheduled to be completed by five years w.e.f.
2011-12. The State Govrnment of U.P., Bihar and Uttarakhand have been persuaded for timely
completion of the border roads in scheduled period as per specification. The construction of the
border roads has already been started.
1.7.4 Out of sanctioned length of 1540.72 km. of border roads, work to the extent of 947.60 km
of roads has been completed along Indo-Bangladesh Border. The balance works are under progress
and are likely to be completed in the given time-frame. Maintenance of roads along IBB is looked
after by CPWD and funds are released to the agency for maintenance and repair works of the said
border roads .This would facilitate better border domination by the Border Security Force (BSF).
1.7.5 The proposal of setting up a separate construction organization by MHA is already under
process in MHA. Moreover action has already been initiated to incorporate the proposal of setting
up the separate construction organization by MHA in the Draft Border Infrastructure (Development)
Bill, 2013 which is also under process in MHA.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.7.6 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress of
construction of roads along the borders which India is sharing with its neighbours.
Recommendation
1.7.7 The Committee expresses serious concern over infiltration attempts made from across the
border particularly across the Line of Control. The Committee recommends that security mechanism
at sensitive Border points from where most of the infiltration takes place, must be strengthened in
flawless manner through appropriate measures.
(Para 3.14.20 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.8 The concerned border guarding forces have been sensitized to take appropriate measures to curb the
infiltration on borders.
1.7.9 The Government has adopted a multi-pronged approach for effective domination and to check illegal
activities including infiltration from neighboring countries. The steps taken in this regard inter-alia includes:
●   Effective domination of the border by carrying out round the clock surveillance of the borders
    by patrolling nakas (border ambushes) and by deploying observation posts all along the
     International Border. Riverine segments of international border are being patrolled and dominated
    with the help of water crafts/speed boats/floating Border Out Posts (BOPs) of BSF water
    wings.
● Construction of patrol roads, floodlighting and additional Border Out Posts.
● Induction of force multipliers and Hi-Tech surveillance. Constant efforts are being
made to procure the latest surveillance equipments for further enhancing the border
domination.
● Upgradation of intelligence network and co-ordination with sister agencies.
● Conduct of special operations along the borders.

15
● 161 vulnerable BOPs on Indo-Pak border have been identified from the point of view
of smuggling of heroin, FICN, Arms and cross border movements of armed infiltrators
and being strengthened by deploying additional man power, special surveillance
equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support.
● Government of India has sanctioned 2 frontier headquarters, 3 sector headquarters and
16 Bns to augment BOPs in riverine/hilly/vulnerable segment on Indo-Bangladesh
border. These Bns are being raised in a phased manner in five years from 2009-2013-14.
● In addition to the above, Government have sanctioned 383 BOPs for Indo-Bangladesh
Border and 126 BOPs for Indo-Pakistan Border which are being constructed under
Composite Scheme. These establishments are being raised in the phased manner in five
years perspective plan from 2009-10 to 2013-14.
1.7.10 MHA has floated an Expression of Interest (EOI) in September, 2012 inviting power point
presentation by interested firms/companies for deployment of technological solutions to fill/bridge
unfenced gaps (8 terrains identified for this purpose) along international border with India. 34
firms/companies participated in the said power point presentation held during March, 2013 to
April, 2013. BSF/ITBP have been advised to assist the firms/companies to carry out the field trials
in the said terrains.
Recommendation
1.7.11 The Committee notes that the Integrated Check Post (ICP) at Attari has been
operationalized. The Committee observes that delay in the acquisition of land is procrastinating
construction of other ICPs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the problems coming in
the way of land acquisition should be resolved and ICPs should be operationalised with all
necessary infrastructure and logistic support as per the schedule. Petrapole should be commissioned
by November, 2013 as scheduled and there should be no delay. Raising of battalions for
strengthening BOPs on reverine/hilly/ vulnerable segments along IBB be completed by 2013-14 as
scheduled. New BOPs sanctioned for IBB and IPB may be completed at the earliest so that the
borders can be insulated completely.
(Para 3.14.23 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.12 The Land Port Authority of India is taking all efforts to resolve the issue of land acquisition
and for operationalization of the Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) with all necessary infrastructure
and logistic support as per the schedule. Efforts are on for commissioning of the ICP at Petrapole
by November, 2013 as scheduled.
1.7.13 In pursuance of Cabinet Committee on Security(CCS) approval for construction of
additional 509 BOPs (383 – IBB and 126-IPB), work of construction of BOPs has been awarded
to 3 executing agencies viz.  Central Public Works Department (CPWD), National Projects
Construction Corporation Ltd. (NPCC) and Engineering Projects India Ltd.(EPIL). Out of
509 BOPs, 62 BOPs have been constructed along IBB and IPB and work is in progress in respect
of other BOPs. The work is targeted to be completed by March, 2014.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.7.14 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that work will be completed as targeted.

16
1.8 CYBER CRIMES AND SECURITY
Recommendation
1.8.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that though the Ministry of Home Affairs, has the prime
responsibility for internal security concerns but it has little role in combating cyber threat. The
Committee observes that cyber attacks have emerged as a new but serious threat to the country and
the Government should pay serious attention to it. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should evolve an institutionalised mechanism to deal with this kind of new age threat
and make our cyber security mechanism effective to prevent sabotage, espionage and other forms of
cyber threats. The Government should explore possibility to evolve a National Cyber Security
Architecture involving all the intelligence agencies of Central as well as State Governments. Cyber
attacks can be launched from distant corner of the world with the click of the mouse, hence can’t
be tackled by individual level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that India should go into
bilateral or multi-lateral negotiations with other countries to counter the threat of cyber terrorism.
In preventing cyber threats, Ministry of Home Affairs should play an important role.
(Para 3.15.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 In order to have a National Cyber Security Architecture to deal with cyber threat, a
proposal is under consideration of the Government. The proposed cyber-security architecture
envisages a multi-layered approach for ensuring defense in-depth and will allocate the responsibility
for overall cyber security amongst different organizations.
● Bilateral multi-lateral negotiations with other countries
(I) In order to deal with cyber security issue, in the Homeland Security Dialogue
(HSD) between India and USA, one Sub group led by MHA has been constituted
on cyber security and critical infrastructure protection.
(II) EU-India Consultation on Cyber security and Cybercrime is initiated and led by
MEA.
(III) Discussion with some other countries like Israel, Russia and Spain on combating
crime is also initiated by MEA.
1.9 FAKE INDIAN CURRENCY NOTES (FICN)
Recommendation
1.9.1 The Committee understands that the Central Government in close coordination with concerned
State Governments must try to check the challenge of this new economic security threat and affected
States should be motivated and persuaded to step up their drive against FICNs. The Home Ministry
should impress upon the Finance Ministry to make it mandatory for banks operating in a particular
area to evolve a mechanism of a nodal officer to deal with this threat who would report the seizures
of the FICNs to concerned authorities. The Committee also feels that circulation of FICNs is a form
of economic terrorism and the Government must make all efforts to neutralize it.
(Para 3.16.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.9.2 To address the multi-dimensional aspects of the FICN menace, several agencies such as the

17
RBI, the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Home Affairs, Security and intelligence of the Centre and
State, CBI are working in tandem to check the inflow of fake Indian currency notes.
1.9.3 The legal regime has been further strengthened by way of recent amendments in the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 wherein the damage to the monetary stability of India
by way of production or smuggling or circulation of High Quality Fake Indian Paper Currency,
Coin or any other material has been declared as ‘terrorist act’.
1.9.4 Further, one special FICN co-ordination Group has been formed in MHA to share the
intelligence/ information amongst the different security agencies of State/ Center to counter the
menace of circulation of Fake currency notes in the country. IB, CBI, NIA, R&AW and DRI
continuously share operational intelligence to neutralize FICN smugglers.
1.9.5 NIA has been empowered by NIA Act to investigate and prosecute offences relating to
FICN. The Government has also constituted a Terror Funding and Fake Currency Cell in NIA to
focus investigation on Terror Funding and Fake currency cases.
1.9.6 The security features in the High Value currency notes are being constantly upgraded by the
Ministry of Finance/ RBI which has also strengthened the mechanism for detection of counterfeit
notes by the Banks.
1.9.7 In order to counter the menace of FICN, efforts have been made to raise the issue at
multilateral and bilateral fora. The JWGs with Nepal and Bangladesh have made special provision
for the operation cooperation of security agencies on the interdiction of FICN smugglers and
contraband. A Joint Task Force with the Government of Bangladesh has also been constituted to
monitor cases of smuggling and circulation of FICN. The Task Force shall monitor the
investigation of FICN cases filed with State Police and shall ensure filing of charge sheet in such
matters expeditiously. It will also monitor the source of original abroad and its delivery and modus
operandi for further circulation in India.
1.9.8 The Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all States/UTs have been requested that a police
station in each district Police Headquarters may be designated as the nodal Police Station wherein
the offences relating to FICN recovered by Banks can be reported. The Banks will also
correspondingly designate a nodal officer in each of the Districts in their respective Banks who will
be vested with the responsibility of reporting the seizures of the FICN in the said District. RBI
has also been requested to designate a nodal officer in each district for lodging FIR in such nodal
Police Station.
1.10 CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Recommendation
1.10.1 The Committee notes the fact that enhanced allocation in BE 2013-14 would mostly be
utilized for salaries, allowances and raising of additional Battalions. The Committee, while
acknowledging the fact that salaries and allowances are an important aspect for CRPF personnel,
recommends that the allocation should be enhanced at RE stage for further modernizing the armed
personnel in terms of weaponry, training etc.
(Para 4.2.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.10.2 The proposal for enhancement of allocation under relevant head of account will be
considered at RE Stage for modernization of weaponry/special equipments etc. based on the actual
requirement received from CRPF. The addtionality will be projected to the Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission at Supplementary stage/Revised Estimate stage.

18
1.11 NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD (NSG)
Recommendation
1.11.1 The Committee believes that the increased allocation would be utilized properly for
construction of NSG Hubs. The physical and financial targets should be met without time and cost
overrun. The Committee takes serious note of the reported poor quality of construction work in the
new NSG Hub building in Mumbai. The Committee is of the view that a proper monitoring
mechanism should be created for overseeing quality of construction of works at the site. The
Committee desires to be informed of the findings of IIT Roorkee and the corrective measures taken.
(Para 4.3.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.2 The building constructed for the Mumbai Regional Hub has been occupied on 01.11.12. The
IIT Roorkee was entrusted the job of examining the buildings for its durability and safety aspects
and to suggest remedial measures. The IIT Roorkee in its report dated 09.01.13 has confirmed that
the design of all the buildings are correct and conform to all specifications and codes. The most
of the superficial cracks that are noticed in the buildings infill walls do not have an effect on the
structure. The IIT Roorkee has further recommended that the buildings can be occupied forthwith
as the issues are of minor nature and can be corrected. IIT Roorkee has further recommended to
take the remedial measures in its report. The NBCC has been directed to take the remedial action
as suggested by IIT Roorkee.
1.12 BORDER SECURITY FORCE
Recommendation
1.12.1 The Committee while taking note of the increase in allocation for BSF in BE 2013-14 in
comparison to last year’ s allocation in RE 2012-13, is quite hopeful that increased allocation
would be utilized for raising of new Battalions/SHQrs in a time bound manner. The Committee
recommends that both physical and financial targets should be met. The Committee notes that 16
Bns out of sanctioned 29 Bns have already been raised. The Committee hopes that the remaining
13 Bns would also be raised soon, so that border points could be manned properly. The physical
targets may be met as per targets. Arms and ammunition may be procured as per the requirement
and efforts may also be made for modernization.
(Para 4.4.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.12.2 These Bns were/are to be raised by the end of financial year 2015-16. Status of raising of
newly sanctioned Bns is as under:
Year Bns raised Bn yet to be raised
2009-10 02 Bns
2010-11 07 Bns
2011-12 07 Bns
2012-13 02 Bns
2013-14 – 03 Bns
2014-15 – 04 Bns
2015-16 – 04 Bns
T
OTAL 18 11

19
1.12.3 Arms and Ammunition for the above newly raised/to be raised Bns are being procured out
of budget allotted to BSF under head Arms and Amn (Gen) as well as under the modernization
scheme.
1.12.4 In view of the above, the Battalions are being raised as per the phasing decided by the
Government. Also Arms and Amn is being procured as per the requirement of forces considering
the availability of fund, expenditure trend and committed liabilities. With regard to additional fund,
the same will be projected to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission at Supplementary Stage/
Revised Estimate stage.
1.13 CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
Recommendation
1.13.1 The Committee, in view of the requests made by private sectors for deployment of CISF in
their establishment, desires that there should be proper security audit before these requests are
acceded to. The Committee hopes that pending requests would be cleared as soon as possible. The
Committee in this connection would also like to emphasise that claims for reimbursement of the
charges for providing deployment of personnel should also be settled on regular basis and huge
pendency of such claims should be avoided.
(Para 4.6.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.13.2 The request of a Private Sector Organization is examined by MHA based on the threat
perception report of IB and other agencies and priority of the sector. The decision on whether to
deploy CISF for security of a private unit is taken based on the priority of the sector concerned
and the overall threat perception. Therefore, the requisite manpower is sanctioned based on the
joint survey of CISF and management. Once the manpower is sanctioned by MHA, CISF are
deployed on completion of other formalities including Pre-Induction Formalities.
1.13.3 CISF have so far been deployed in following Private Sector/Jt. Venture Units:
Sl. Name of Pvt. Sector Strength Date of
No. sanctioned induction of
by MHA CISF
01. Infosys Bangalore 101 31.07.2009
02. Electronic City, Bangalore 68 29.01.2010
03. Infosys Mysore 102 26.03.2010
04. Reliance Refinery and Petrochemicals, Jamnagar, Gujarat 217 28.10.2010
05. Delhi Metro Airport Metro Express Pvt. Ltd., Delhi 419 23.02.2011
06. Infosys Technologies, Pune 134 21.04.2011
1.13.4 Presently there is no report of pending outstanding dues against cost of deployment of CISF
in the above Private Sector Organization except Delhi Airport Metro Express Pvt. Ltd., Delhi
[DAMEPL]. As on 30.04.2013, a sum of Rs.11,12,35,204/- towards CISF dues are pending against
DAMEPL. Efforts are on to recover this amount on priority.

20
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.13.5 The Committee notes the reply and desires that outstanding amount along with penal
interest from Delhi Airport Metro Express Pvt. Ltd. May be recovered at the earliest.
1.14 ASSAM RIFLES
Recommendation
1.14.1 The Committee hopes that allocations made for arms and ammunitions under general budget
would be utilized in a time bound manner so that it improves the combat strength of Assam Rifles.
The Committee also desires that the physical targets should be met.
(Para 4.7.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.14.2 The fund allocation of procurement of arms and ammunition in BE 2013-14 would be
utilized by Assam Rifles as per their procurement plan. Additional demand, if required will be
projected subsequently.
1.15. SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
Recommendation
1.15.1 The Committee hopes that SSB would utilize the enhanced allocation for raising of new
battalions, Sector Headquarters, Frontier Headquarters in time bound manner. The Committee hopes
that the targets would be adhered to for enhancing the operational efficiency of SSB.
(Para 4.8.11 ibid)
Action Taken
1.15.2 Although the enhanced allocation includes the provision for new raising, but in view of the
expenditure for 2012-13, SSB still requires additional funds to meet the requirement of new raising
under different Heads. The requirement of additional funds under different Heads will be submitted
to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission at Supplementary stage/Revised Estimate stage.
Recommendation
1.15.3 The Committee notes that though SSB has been trying to check smuggling of illegal Arms,
FICNs, Narcotics and other prohibited items besides manning Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Border,
however it is reported very often that most of the smuggling is taking place through Nepal border.
The Committee feels that much still needs to be done to check smuggling of illegal Arms, FICNs,
Narcotics and in this regard more vigilance, including watch on unscrupulous personnel, if any, is
required The Committee also observes that about 17% vacancies exist in SSB against its authorized
strength of 80697 personnel. In view of the Committee, this is a very peculiar case of
contradictions where on one hand SSB is in expansion mode whereas on the other side, significant
vacancies are there. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all the sanctioned strength
be filled first without any delay, and thereafter the expansion plan may be taken up.
(Para 4.8.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.15.4 Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan borders are open and porous border and citizens of India/Nepal

21
and India/Bhutan are authorized to cross Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan border respectively without
any travel documents. To stop any smuggling, including that of illegal weapons, FICNs, Narcotics
from across the border, SSB has been making efforts constantly along with revamping its
intelligence machinery. SSB has so far established 582 BoPs (450 on Indo-Nepal Border, and 132
on Indo-Bhutan Border), which regularly carry out various operational activities like patrolling and
naka-bandi along the border. Checking of persons crossing the border is also being carried out both
randomly on the basis of inputs received from own sources/sister agencies. Continuous monitoring
is being done in this regard. Field formation and intelligence set ups have been sensitized.
1.15.5 Further, in order to plug the gaps in the borders, 16 new operational Bns have been
sanctioned to SSB by MHA out of which 9 Bns will be deployed on Indo-Nepal border and 7 Bns
on Indo-Bhutan border. Once fully raised, 152 new BoPs i.e. 89 on Indo-Nepal border and 63 on
Indo-Bhutan border will be established raising the total number of BoPs to 734 (539 on Indo-Nepal
and 195 on Indo-Bhutan borders).
1.15.6 The details of Seizure and Arrest made by SSB in 2013 (till April-2013) are as under:–
(i) Narcotics –
R 17,70,81,161/-
(ii) FICN (Face value) – R 13,31,500/-
(iii) Contraband – R 4,57,52,651/-
(iv) Forest Product – R 2,29,77,796/-
(v) Antiques – R 16,00,00,000/-
(vi) Arms – 29 Nos.
(vii) Cartridges – 52 Nos.
(viii) Improvised Bomb – 02 Nos.
(ix) Explosive – 5.3 Kgs.
(x) Grenade – 01 No.
(xi) Magazine – 03 Nos.
(xii) Arrest – 234 Nos
(including 02 illegal Infiltrators).
1.15.7 As regards filling up of sanctioned strength, a total of 85,755 posts are sanctioned in SSB.
Out of which, 68,565 posts have been filled up and 17190 posts are vacant as on 30.4.2013.
1.15.8 Besides above, SSB has received allocation of 122 successful candidates for appointment to
the post of AC(GD), therefore, the quota against direct recruitment has already been filled up.
Moreover, 14 vacancies have also been reported to UPSC through MHA for the year 2012-13. With
regard to filling up the vacancies of Promotion Quota is concerned, regular DPCs are being held
for promotion of eligible Officers. However, the quota prescribed against promotion quota could not
be filled up due to non-availability of eligible officers in the feeder grade. Further, all the vacancies
under direct quota in technical cadres have been notified for recruitment. Personnel, who were
eligible for promotion, have already been promoted even after obtaining relaxation in residency
period where ever required.
1.16 DELHI POLICE
Recommendation
1.16.1 The Committee is of the view that arms, vehicles, GPS systems or other modern equipments,

22
as required for the Delhi Police, should be provided because the Delhi Police is the Police of the
national capital, and any shortage of funds will have negative impact on the functioning of the
Delhi Police. Keeping that in mind, the Committee strongly recommends that the Finance Ministry
should positively consider the proposal and requirements of the Delhi Police as projected by them
in their demand.
(Para 4.9.16 ibid)
Action Taken
1.16.2 There is no shortage of arms and other modern gadgets in Delhi Police. The Finance
Ministry has been sanctioning posts as required for Delhi Police. They have recently sanctioned
1084 posts of women officers/constables. The Delhi Police now has 6051 vacant posts, which are
sanctioned and need to be filled up. This Ministry has asked Delhi Police to quickly fill up these
6051 vacant posts.
1.16.3 The Government has additionally sanctioned 370 vehicles for PCR in February, 2013. After
February, 2013, 39 vehicles have further been sanctioned to Delhi Police. This is in addition to
28 vehicles already sanctioned before February, 2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.16.4 The Committee notes the reply and strongly recommends that the Delhi Police
should fill up 6051 vacant posts at the earliest.
1.17. MODERNIZATION OF ST ATE POLICE FORCES (MPF)
Recommendation
1.17.1 The Committee notes that the Planning Commission had agreed to meet the requirement of
funds of R3750.87 crore under the MPF Scheme under Plan during the 12th Plan period with the
year-wise provision of R562.63 crore for 2012-13 and R797.06 crore for each of the financial years
2013-14 to 2016-17 but no provision was made for the MPF Scheme under Plan in RE 2012-13.
The Committee takes serious exception to such non fulfillment of commitment and recommends that
the Government should pay attention to the decision of Planning Commission and allocate the fund
as recommended by it.
(Para 4.10.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.17.2 The proposal of MHA to fund the infrastructure components of MPF Scheme under Plan
was approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 14.11.2012. The
EFC agreed to a provision of R3750.87 crore for MPF Scheme under Plan during the Twelfth Plan
period (2012-13 to 2016-17) which was based on the Gross Budgetary Support of Planning
Commission to MHA. The year-wise Plan provisions agreed to by the Planning Commission for
MPF Scheme was R562.63 crore for the financial year 2012-13 and R797.06 crore in each of the
remaining four financial years 2013-14 to 2016-17.
1.17.3 Subsequently, the proposal for extension of MPF Scheme for five years w.e.f. 2012-13,
under Non-Plan and Plan was approved by the competent authority on 7 th February, 2013. As such,
no provision was made for the Scheme under Plan in RE 2012-13. However, in the current
financial year 2013-14, a provision of R1097 crore has been made for MPF Scheme under Plan
in BE stage.

23
Recommendation
1.17.4 The scheme of MPF plays an important role in police modernization of States/UTs
particularly naxal affected ones. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that some States/
UTs have not utilized the amount allocated under this scheme. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs should not release the funds to the State/UT Governments till they utilize
their earlier allocation fully in a time bound manner.
(Para 4.10.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.17.5 The status of utilization of funds released by MHA in previous financial years to State
Governments under the MPF Scheme is taken into consideration while releasing grants-in-aid to
States in subsequent financial years. The amount of unspent balances, if any, lying with the State
Government is deducted from the allocations made to the concerned State under the MPF Scheme
in a financial year and the remaining amount of Central allocation is released.
Recommendation
1.17.6 The Ministry may also take up with the state governments to increase the women police
force in the respective state police forces to 33%. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should impress upon the State Governments to set up women cells compulsorily
in all the police stations throughout the country so that victim woman could be able to have free
and easy access to lodge complaints against the perpetrators. Women cell in each police station
would further enhance the participation of women in the policing system.
(Para 4.10.13 ibid)
Action Taken
1.17.7 It has been a constant endeavour on part of the Ministry of Home Affairs to increase the
representations of women in Police Force. In pursuance of the stated objective, Ministry of Home
Affairs regularly interacts with the State Government through various meetings, conference,
seminars etc. to persuade them to increase the women strength in Police forces.
1.17.8 Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an advisory on 22.04.2013 to State
Governments/UTs, wherein it has been advised to ensure availability of women to 33% of
the police force. An earlier advisory in this regard has also been issued by the MHA dated
04.09.2009.
1.17.9 In the recently held Conference of Chief Ministers on Internal Security on 5 th June, 2013
this issue was taken up with the States/ UTs. The Chief Ministers and representatives of the States/
UTs assured that the issue of increasing representation of women in Police has been given priority
and steps are being taken to remove this discrepancy.
1.17.10 The Ministry of Home Affairs also convened a day long conference of Chief Secretaries
and Director Generals of Police on crimes against Women and atrocities against SCs/STs in New
Delhi on 4 th January, 2013. The meeting was presided by the Hon’ble Minister of Home Affairs,
Minister of Women and Child Development, Union Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment
and Hon’ble Ministers of State for Home Affairs. This issue was discussed in this forum also
wherein the States/UTs have assured about steps taken in this regard.
1.17.11 Committee of Secretaries chaired by Cabinet Secretary is also actively monitoring this
issue and has already held two meetings on 23.01.2013 and 21.05.2013.

24
1.18 HOUSING SCHEME
Recommendation
1.18.1 The Committee finds that the target to construct 6665 houses for CAPFs in the year 2012-13
has not been achieved till date, and therefore, recommends that construction of remaining 3401
houses should be expedited and completed at the earliest.
(Para 4.11.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.18.2 As per the report available from CAPFs as on 1.4.2013 for the year 2012-2013 against the
target of 6665 houses, 3602 houses have already been constructed and 2418 houses were under
construction. Further against the target of 149 barracks, 104 barracks have been constructed and
102 barracks were under construction. The infrastructure related works of CAPFs i.e. construction
and maintenance of residential building, office building and Border Out Posts are mostly executed
by CPWD. Regular review meeting are held with the senior officials of CPWD and CAPFs. Last
review meeting in this regard was held on 27.5.2013. It has been observed that overall delay in
execution of works have been reduced and there is improvement in the execution of works by
CPWD. CAPFs and CPWD have been advised to work in close coordination and hold regular
meetings at field level so as to ensure that the construction works are completed without any cost
and time overrun. For expediting the construction works detailed guidelines have been issued and
followed up.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.18.3 The Committee desires that remaining 2418 houses must be constructed without
further delay.
Recommendation
1.18.4 The Committee finds that an ambitious project of construction of houses for Delhi Police
under PPP mode has been taken, which would go a long way in meeting the requirement of Delhi
Police for residential accommodation. The Committee therefore, recommends that all procedural
formalities in this regard should be completed without delay. The Committee also notes that recently
15 Building Projects have been sent to the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for appraisal
and after the appraisal by the EFC, these projects shall be placed before the Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for approval. The Committee recommends that all procedural
clearance to the 15 remaining projects be given at the earliest so that construction of
accommodation is started without delay. Necessary funds may also be provided for the purpose and
steps be taken to avoid time and cost overrun.
(Para 4.11.11 ibid)
Action Taken
1.18.5 Police Housing (5202 Staff Qtrs.) at Dheerpur, Delhi have been taken under Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode. The concessionaire agreement was signed on 09.04.2012 and expected
date of completion of this project is 855th day from appointed date.
1.18.6 The above Project is being monitored by the Senior Officers of Delhi Police as well as MHA
with the objective of ensuring that the project is completed within the schedule period.
1.18.7 Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) meeting was held on 18.04.2013 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Finance, for appraisal of 15 Delhi Police Projects under Plan Head of

25
Delhi Police Building Programme. EFC have approved all 15 Projects. The proposal is now being
placed for the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). Construction of these
Projects will be started without delay after obtaining the approval of CCEA. The MHA has
sanctioned funds amounting to 
R283.32 crore under the Plan Head (Delhi Police Building
Programme) during CFY 2013-2014.
1.19 OCCUPATIONAL STRESS IN PARAMILITARY FORCES
Recommendation
1.19.1 The Committee understands that long years of postings of para-military forces personnel in
difficult areas distant from their permanent residence, long working hours, sleep deprivation, denial
of leave, lack of healthcare facilities, delay in promotions, poor quality uniforms, lack of clarity
in order etc. are the many reasons responsible for stress amongst them and are also forcing them
to quit the paramilitary forces. The Government should address the stress issue very seriously. The
immediate superiors should be regularly in touch and gauge the behavior and attitude and any
abnormality should be immediately attended to. The Committee recommends that the findings/
recommendations of the Report submitted by IIM, Ahmedabad should be implemented by the
Government in letter and spirit.
(Para 4.13.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.19.2 IIM, Ahmadabad’s Report is under examination. A presentation is scheduled to be made by
Professor Dheeraj Sharma, IIM, Ahmadabad, on the subject. However, CAPFs are already taking
care to address the majority of issues due to which stress level could be minimized. All possible
measures are being taken to reduce occupational stress and the some of the major steps are :-
(i) Implementing a transparent, rational and fair leave policy;
(ii) Grant of leave to the Force personnel to attend to their urgent domestic problems/
issues/needs;
(iii) Regular interaction, both formal and informal, among Commanders, officers and
troops to find out and address their problems;
(iv) Revamping of grievances redressal machinery;
(v) Regulating duty hours to ensure adequate rest and relief;
(vi) Improving living conditions through provision of basic amenities/ facilities for troops
and their families;
(vii) Motivating the forces through increased risk, hardship and other allowances;
(viii) Provision of STD telephone facilities to the troops to facilitate being in touch with
their family members and to reduce tension in the remote locations;
(ix) Better medical facilities for troops and their families including introduction of
Composite Hospitals with specialized facilities;
(x) Organising talks by doctors and other specialists to address their personal and
psychological concerns;
(xi) Yoga and meditation classes for better stress management;
(xii) Recreational and sports facilities and provision of team games and sports etc;

26
(xiii) Providing welfare measures like Central Police canteen facility to the troops and their
families, scholarships to their wards, etc.;
(xiv) Giving status of ex-CAPF personnel to the retired personnel of CAPF, which is
expected to boost the morale of the existing CAPFs personnel and also expected to
provide better identity, community recognition and thus higher esteem and pride in the
society to the Ex-CAPF personnel.
1.20 COORDINATION BETWEEN STATE AND PARA-MILITARY FORCES
Recommendation
1.20.1 Para-military Forces happen to be unaware of the terrain where they are deployed,
therefore, they deserve much cooperation and support from local police. They are after all there
to assist State police force only. The Committee recommends the Government to impress upon the
State/UT Governments for ensuring better co-ordination between the para-military forces and the
State-Police Forces. The Committee also recommends that mechanism of Unified Command should
be reviewed from time to time to ensure better coordination.
(Para 4.14.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.20.2 ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ being State subjects, action with respect to maintenance of law
and order lies primarily in the domain of the State Governments concerned, who deal with the
various issues related to Left Wing Extremist (LWE) activities in the States. The Central
Government monitors the situation closely and supplements and coordinates their efforts in several
ways, inter-alia, including providing Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) to assist the State
Police Forces to deal with the LWE problem. The deployment and operational strategy of security
forces for Anti-naxal operations is devised jointly by the State Police and the CAPF concerned. The
issue of improving the co-ordination between the State Police Forces and the CAPFs is emphasized
by the MHA regularly.
1.20.3 The most adversely LWE affected States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha and West
Bengal have constituted a Unified Command to carry out carefully planned Anti-naxal operations.
The MHA has requested the State Governments concerned to hold the meetings of the Unified
Command at least once in every month to facilitate fine-tuning of the Anti-naxal operations. The
Union Home Minister has also written to the Chief Ministers of these States to consider chairing
the meetings of the Unified Command at his/her level and to ensure holding of these meetings at
least once in a quarter.
1.21 HOME GUARDS
Recommendation
1.21.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that Home Guards are governed by the Home Guard
Acts and Rules of their respective States/Union Territories. However, the Ministry of Home Affairs
should impress upon the State/UT Governments to improve the working conditions of the Home
Guards. They do not get fixed remuneration as they are paid pocket expenses when they are called
for duty which makes their life miserable. The Committee recommends that Government should
consider to make service-conditions of Home Guards more lucrative and sustaining as the job
description of Home Guards, even if voluntary, demands better remuneration and facilities. In all
the States, there are a large number of vacancies in the State Police Forces. Until the vacancies
are filled, Home Guards services may be used to the maximum extent.
(Para 5.7 ibid)

27
Action Taken
1.21.2 A Director General of Police is the Commandant General of Home Guards in the State. He
is assisted by Addl. Director General of Police/Addl. Commandant General and Inspector General
of Police/Deputy Commandant General. These officers in the State Home Guards Head Quarters are
drawn from Indian Police Service cadre. There are also Deputy Inspector General/Deputy
Commandant General and Assistant Commandant General/Divisional Commandant level officers
from Home Guards Officers cadre posted in the State Head Quarters to assist the Commandant
General. Divisional Commandant/Asstt. Commandant General head the organization at the district
level. District Commandants reporting to the District Magistrate supervise the organization at the
district level.
1.21.3 The primary role of Home Guards is to serve as an auxiliary to the Police in maintenance
of law and order and internal security, help the community in any kind of emergency such as air-
raid, fire, cyclone, earthquake, epidemic etc., help in maintenance of essential services, promote
communal harmony and assist the administration in protecting weaker sections, participate in socio-
economic and welfare activities and perform civil defence duties. They render valuable assistance
to police in regulation of traffic, crowd control maintenance of internal security, communal
harmony etc.
1.21.4 W ith a view to make Home Guards an effective force, they are trained in various police
crafts like regular drill, map reading, security, intelligence collection, law and order maintenance,
rifle/pistol/automatic gun handling, traffic duty, disaster management, fire fighting, first-aid
leadership etc. at State level Home Guards Training Institutes.
1.21.5 An advisory is being issued through DG(NDRF and CD) to all the States/UTs for better
service conditions of Home Guards.
1.22 CIVIL DEFENCE
Recommendation
1.22.1 The Committee notes the Ministry’ s submission that Mainstreaming Civil Defence in disaster
risk reduction with a total outlay of 
R600 crore has been proposed to be implemented during 12th
Plan period for which Planning Commission has given in-principle approval and draft EFC note
is being finalized in consultation with Integrated Finance Division of MHA. The Committee
observes that procedural bottleneck has become the reason for reducing the allocations. The
Committee thinks that strengthening of civil defence is the need of hour and allocation should be
made as per the requirement. Even though it is such an important set up, the Ministry has taken
a very long time in revising the scheme and even now also it is not final as yet. An early decision
should be taken in this regard. Civil Defence set up should also be closely linked with Disaster
Management set up.
(Para 5.10.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.22.2
R 65.22 crore at R.E. stage in 2012-13 has been kept for two plan schemes viz. revamping
of Civil Defence set up in the country and Strengthening of Fire and Emergency Services in the
country. Both these schemes were to end by 31
st March, 2013. Two new schemes viz.
mainstreaming Civil Defence in disaster risk reduction with a total outlay of R 300 crore and
Modernization of Fire and Emergency Services with an outlay of R 700 crore have been
contemplated to be implemented during Twelfth Plan period. Planning Commission has since given
in-principle approval for both the schemes and draft EFC note is being finalized. Since it will take

28
time to get final approval of the competent authority for these two new schemes, a token provision
of 10 crore has been kept for both these schemes in BE 2013-14. Civil Defence Act was passed in
1968 and amended in 2009 with a view to include Disaster Management under Civil Defence Set up.
1.23 JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Recommendation
1.23.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that relief is a State subject and Central Government
is not dealing with the individual cases of settlement of claims of affected persons. However,
displacement of J&K migrants is one of the biggest mass level exodus of a group of people in the
country. In view of this, they should be declared “internally displaced persons” and the Central
Government should take responsibility for their rehabilitation as the State Government is not
coming forward with many proposals.
(Para 5.11.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.23.2 The issue relating to declaring the Kashmiri migrants as ‘internally displaced persons’ has
already been settled by NHRC in their order dated 06.05.1996. The NHRC has concluded that:–
“We have given our anxious consideration to this question and are of the view that there
is no scope for objecting to the term ‘migrants’ and the apprehension of the Union
Government is not without any basis. Accordingly, we would not like to substitute the term
‘migrants’ by ‘internally displaced persons”.
1.23.3 As regards rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants, the Hon’ble Prime Minister has announced
a comprehensive package for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants, which includes
assistance towards housing, transit accommodation, continuation of cash relief, student
scholarships, employment, assistance to agriculturists/horticulturists and waiver of interest on loans.
Recommendation
1.23.4 The Committee notes that the number of domestic as well as foreign tourists in the valley
has increased manifold during the last four years. The Government should further promote tourism
in the Kashmir valley, which is considered heaven on the earth, as it would lead to employment
generation for the people residing there.
(Para 5.11.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.23.5 Central Financial Assistance to the State Government: Ministry of Tourism provides Central
Financial Assistance to the State of Jammu and Kashmir for development of tourism infrastructure
in the State under various schemes such as Product/Infrastructure Development of Destination and
Circuits (PIDDC), Fairs and Festivals, Information Technology and Capacity Building for Service
Providers (CBSP).
1.23.6 During the Tenth Plan period, 51 projects were sanctioned with central financial assistance
of 
R128.23 crores and R107.22 crore have been released. State Government has furnished
utilization certificates for the entire released amount.
1.23.7 During the Eleventh Plan period, 100 projects have been sanctioned with central financial
assistance of R367.66 crores and so far R231.88 crore have been released. State Government has
furnished utilization certificates for R171.66 crores.

29
1.23.8 In the Twelfth Plan period during 2012-13, 25 projects (including one Festival) have been
sanctioned with central financial assistance of R112.60 crores and R23.94 crores have been
released.
1.23.9 Rural Tourism Projects: Out of 50 Rural Tourism Projects targeted under the PM
Reconstruction Plan, the State Govt. of J&K submitted proposals for 48 villages. Out of these,
projects pertaining to 29 villages have been sanctioned. So far the Ministry of Tourism has
sanctioned an amount of 
R1376.70 lakh and released R 1163.35 lakh towards hardware component.
Similarly R 520.91 lakhs has been sanctioned and R 426.78 lakh has been released towards
software components for Rural Tourism sites in J&K.
1.23.10 Publicity: During 2012-13, 63 hospitality guests from abroad visited Jammu and Kashmir
on invitation of the Ministry. They are expected to give wide publicity to J&K in the media and
the trade.
1.23.11 Under Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme of the Ministry, no tour
operator/travel agent from the State of Jammu and Kashmir has availed any assistance during 2012-13.
However, the Ministry of Tourism provides complimentary space to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir in important tourism events such as WTM, London and ITB, Berlin to showcase their
tourism products.
1.23.12 Training and Skill Development: The brief details of persons trained/under training in J&K
by IHM, Srinagar and FCI Jammu, under the scheme of Hunar Se Rozgar Tak and as Tourist
Facilitators are as under:
Year Hunar Se Skill Testing and T ourist
Rozgar Tak Certification Facilitators
2009-10 381 0 222
2010-11 586 0 579
2011-12 1032 0 475
2012-13 2917 330 891
(as on 28.3.2013)
Under Training 254 0 0
(as on 28.3.2013)
T
OTAL 5170 330 2167
Recommendation
1.23.13 The Committee is also pleased to note that violence and casualties during the last four
years is on the decrease. However, the Government should not be complacent and continue to
remain vigilant as the forces from across the border can try to foment trouble.
(Para 5.11.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.23.14 Though there has been a perceptible decline in the levels of terrorist violence, the
Government is taking all efforts to counter terrorism in J&K. The Government in tandam with the
State Government have adopted a multi-pronged approach to contain cross border infiltration and
pro-active action against terrorists within the State, including various counter terrorist methods to

30
neutralize the efforts and capabilities of militants. The Government has also encouraged policies to
mainstream the youth and discourage the local youth from joining militancy.
1.24 DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
1.24.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that India is vulnerable to many natural and man-made
disasters due to geo climatic conditions and terrorism and extremism. The Committee is of the view
that the main objective of any disaster management project should be disaster mitigation alongwith
minimizing the loss of lives and property. The Committee understands the need for further disaster
preparedness at the grass root level.
(Para 5.12.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.2 MHA has initiated various mitigation projects with the objective to minimize risks caused by
various disasters. Some of the mitigation projects initiated are:
(1) National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) (Phase-I): The main aim and
objective of this project is to strengthen the structural and non-structural cyclone
mitigation efforts, to reduce the cyclone risk and vulnerability in the coastal districts
prone to cyclones and in building capacities for cyclone risk mitigation therein. The
government has approved the implementation of Phase-I of the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme of National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) for Andhra Pradesh and
Odisha at a cost of 
R 1496.71 crore. The project is being implemented by National
Disaster Management Authority.
(2) National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (NERMP): The objective of NERMP is to
enhance the preparedness to face earthquakes and to reduce the losses to lives and
property caused by earthquakes. This project was approved at a total cost of  R24.87
crore to be implemented by National Disaster Management Authority on 5th April,
2013.
(3) National School Safety Project: The project was sanctioned on 21st June, 2011 with
a view to promote awareness and education activities, demonstrating disaster risk
management, training and capacity building and assessing vulnerability and taking
mitigation measures. The total estimated cost of this project is 
R 48.47 crore.
Recommendation
1.24.3 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the State/UT
Governments to raise separately, specialized Disaster Response Force, instead of using existing
force during the disasters as only specialized Disaster Response Force can exert the suitable
response to tackle disaster.
(Para 5.12.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.4 MHA impress upon the State/UT Governments at various occasions to raise their State
Disaster Response Force for providing response to the States/UTs. At present 15 States i.e.
Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram, Tripura, Assam, J&K, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu,
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Kerala, Rajasthan, Odisha and Uttarakhand have been raised their SDRF.

31
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.24.5 The Committee notes the reply and desires that remaining States may be persuaded
to raise SDRF.
Recommendation
1.24.6  The Committee notes that the Government is implementing National Emergency
Communication Plan (NECP) Phase-II since 2011-12. The Committee also notes that the provision
of 96.03 crores is sufficient for the year 2013-14, subject to the condition that after approval of
NDRF infrastructure, more funds would be required. The Committee recommends that fund
allocation may be enhanced suitably to avoid time and cost overrun.
(Para 5.12.13 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.7 NECP Phase-II was approved on 31st May, 2011 for a total outlay of 
R 76.789 crore. A
provision of R 25.00 crore has been kept for the financial year 2013-14 and it is expected that the
project would be completed by March, 2014.
Recommendation
1.24.8 The Committee is concerned to note that NIDM is still not functioning from its own
building complex. Since, Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has allotted land, the Committee
recommends that the construction work should take off soon and be completed without further
delay. Steps may be taken to remove all the procedural delays.
(Para 5.12.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.9 NIDM has made necessary p ayments to DDA. NIDM is in the process of preparing land
development plan and thereafter the construction activities will start on the spot.
Recommendation
1.24.10 The Committee recommends that “National Platform on Disaster Risk Reduction (NPDRR)
should be used to evolve a comprehensive mechanism for dealing with disasters by making it a
converging point for all institutions dealing with disasters. The Committee also recommends that
in the direction of strengthening the Disaster Risk Reduction, efforts should be made for bringing
the corporate social responsibility into this.
(Para 5.12.16 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.11 The need to reduce the impact of disasters by means of systematic efforts has been
gaining recognition among Governments, worldwide. Disaster Risk Reduction is a cross cutting
development issue. It requires political and legal commitment, scientific knowledge, careful
development planning, application of technology, law enforcement, community participation, early
warning systems and effective disaster preparedness and response mechanism. There is a need to
foster an enabling environment for developing a culture of prevention and to enable concerted
measures to facilitate the integration of disaster management into development planning in various

32
sectors. It is therefore desirable that the Central and State Governments, stakeholders in the field
of disaster management and people representing different interests in the area should evolve a
participatory process of decision making in disaster management, which will not only strengthen
the disaster management structure and institutions all over the country but will also enhance the
federal structure of our polity. The functions of NPDRR are:
(i) To review the progress made in the field of disaster management from time to time.
(ii) To appraise the extent and manner in which the Disaster Management Policy has been
implemented by the Central and State Governments and other concerned agencies, and
to give appropriate advice in the matter.
(iii) To advise regarding coordination between the Central and State Governments/UT
Administrations, State Governments, local Governments and civil society organizations
for development of Disaster Risk Reduction.
(iv) To advice s uo-moto or on a reference made by the Central Government or any State
Government or a Union Territory Administration on any question pertaining to disaster
management.
(v) To review the Disaster Management Policy.
For the discharge of these functions, the Platform may:
(a) Call for information and comments from any government institution, any other
organization or an individual.
(b) Appoint committees or groups comprising members of the Platform and/or others as
may be necessary, and
(c) Commission through the Central Government or any other agency, studies, research
or reports on any specific issue requiring the attention of the Platform or its
committees or groups.
1.25 NATIONAL POPULATION REGISTER
Recommendation
1.25.1 The Committee observes that MHA projected the plan outlay during 2013-14 for Census
Surveys and Statistics including National Population Register (NPR) at 
R1783.16 crore which
was reduced to R1122.16 crore (excluding R220.00 crore earmarked for North Eastern Area)
which may affect the plan scheme of NPR substantially and other schemes to some extent. The
Committee, in view of this, recommends that the amount should be enhanced as per requirement
of MHA.
(Para 5.13.20 ibid)
Action Taken
1.25.2 One important component of the scheme of National Population Register (NPR) i.e.
issuance of Resident Identity Cards (RICs) to all usual residents of 18 years and above in the
country has been recommended by EFC. The proposal was placed before the Union Cabinet, which
has recommended the matter to a Group of Ministers (GoM). Two meetings of the GoM have been

33
held so far, but no decision has been taken yet. If the proposal is approved in this financial year,
additional budget provisions will be requested.
1.25.3 The next phase of the scheme of NPR, i.e. updating and maintenance of NPR Data base
is under submission and it has been directed to open NPR centres at each Tehsil for Direct Benefit
Transfer (DBT), initially in NPR States/UTs. Once approved, request for additional allocation of
funds will be made for this component of the scheme from the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation
1.25.4 The Committee notes that the demographic data collection (in paper format) for creating
the NPR has been completed for the entire country along with House listing and Housing Census
in 2010. However, the Committee is constrained to observe that data digitalization process has not
yet been completed and as far as biometric enrolment and issuing of Aadhar Cards are concerned
the work is also at slow pace. Aadhaar card issuance and National Population Register would take
years to complete. Since, Aadhar card is linked with Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme, it should be
completed at a fast pace; otherwise the beneficiaries would not be able to avail their entitlements.
The Committee recommends that there should be some interlinkage between the Aadhar card and
the NPR otherwise it would prove to be duplication of whole exercise causing confusion in the
minds of common people about their utility and validity.
(Para 5.13.21 ibid)
Action Taken
1.25.5 The data digitalization of more than 117.36 crore records (97%) has been completed. The
work is in progress to complete the balance records.
1.25.6 The biometric enrolment for NPR has been completed for 14.52 crore persons. The steps
are being taken to expedite the work. However, the hindrance is the availability of UIDAI certified
operators which is a pre-requisite for biometric enrolment of any person. The problem is acute
especially in remote areas and the existing certified operators are not willing to travel to other
places.
1.25.7 Out of the 78 districts selected for DBT Phase II, the biometric enrolment is to be
undertaken by RGI in 33 districts. These 33 districts are spread over 11 States/UTs. The biometric
enrolment of all beneficiaries of various government schemes has been taken on priority in these
districts. At tehsil/taluk/block level, enrolment centres have been set-up in order to cover the
beneficiaries in the time bound manner apart from the normal camps which are organized in the
local areas.
1.25.8 To minimize the duplication of efforts between NPR and UIDAI, the Government has
decided that NPR enrolments will continue as envisaged but during the course of NPR biometric
enrolment, if a person indicates she/he is already enrolle d for Aadhaar, then the biometric data will
not be captured for NPR. Instead the Aadhaar number will be recorded in NPR and the biometric
data will be sourced from the UIDAI.
1.25.9 It has been also decided that once UIDAI completes major enrolment in an area, NPR would
follow and complete the enrolment in NPR.
1.25.10 Accordingly, the necessary software was finalized by UIDAI and the same has been
deployed in the field in all the NPR biometric camps since August, 2012, mainly in States/UTs

34
allotted to UIDAI. The capture of Aadhaar number/EID number is under progress, wherever any
resident indicates that she/he has been already enrolled under UIDAI.
Recommendation
1.25.11 The Committee is also apprehensive that refugees, foreigners and nationals of hostile
countries may try to be enrolled into NPR so that they could prove to be an Indian citizen. The
Government should look in this aspect seriously. The Committee is of the considered view that the
responsibility of NPR enrollment approval cannot be left to a local “patwari” particularly in those
areas where there are a large number of foreign nationals allegedly residing there. There must be
a high level foolproof mechanism in each district for scrutinizing and giving final approval and
cross checking. This is because the moment the National Population Register comes up, it will be
a legal document for claiming Indian citizenship and also avail related facilities.
(Para 5.13.22 ibid)
Action Taken
1.25.12 The sufficient steps have been taken to ensure the integrity of NPR database. The details
are as under:
(a) Primary collection of the data of every usual resident under NPR has been done by
house to house enumeration by duly authorized Government servants who have
signed each and every form.
(b) While collecting the data, the respondent has been cautioned that ‘providing any false
information would attract penalties under the Citizenship Rules 2003.’
(c) A signed declaration has been taken from the resident that “I declare that all the
information provided is true to be best of my knowledge and belief.” Thus, any false
information would invite penal consequences.
(d) All the filled-in NPR forms have been scanned and are available in electronic archive.
(e) The collected data has been digitized.
(f) The biometrics of the person in the NPR database being collected in the presence
of a Government servant, duly appointed for the purpose.
(g) The Government official(s) present at the NPR biometric camps check the digitized
database and confirm with the help of acknowledgement slip that the person
appearing at the biometric camp is the same person whose data was collected and
then take the biometrics.
(h) The person whose name is not found in the digitized database, would be included
in the NPR database by filling up new NPR form and only after the details provided
by the person has been verified by local registrar.
(i) After de-duplication by UIDAI and generation of Aadhaar number, the clean list of
usual residents along with photograph and Aadhaar number would be printed in the
form of Local Register of Usual Residents (LRUR) and provided to the local
authorities.
(j) LRUR would be published in the local areas for inviting objections and claims. The
LRUR would also be placed before the Gram Sabha/Ward Committee for social
vetting.

35
(k) Any claims and objections made with regard to entries in the LRUR should be
carefully enquired into by the Local Registrar appointed for this purpose.
(l) Provision for appeal against the order of the Local Registrar has been made in the
Rules. The Sub-district and District Registrars would carefully dispose these appeals
in a time bound manner.
(m) In sensitive areas, State/UT Government have been requested to take up additional
measures for verification and will be free to involve the local Police Stations or the
Village Chowkidars in the process of verification.
1.25.13 Therefore, at each and every stage, care has been taken to ensure not only that all genuine
usual residents are included in the NPR but also that the information provided is correct. All State/
UT Governments have also been requested to follow the above measures.
1.25.14 NPR is a register of usual residents which would contain citizens as well as non-citizens.
It is the first step towards the creation of a National Register of Indian Citizens (NRIC). After
completion of NPR, steps can be taken towards creation of NRIC as and when and wherever
desired.
1.26 OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
Recommendation
1.26.1 The Committee understands that it is the constitutional duty of the Government of India to
promote Hindi language and it is duty of the Department of Official Language to promote/
encourage use of Hindi Language in all the Departments/Ministries of the country. The Committee
is of the view that all the documents of the Government of India should be made available
simultaneously both in Hindi and English.
(Para 5.14.13 ibid)
Action Taken
1.26.2 The Department of Official Language issues instructions from time to time to all Ministries/
Departments to scrupulously follow the Official Language Act and Rules framed there under and
monitors its implementation. In accordance with Rule 12 of the Official Language Rules, 1976, it
is the duty of the Administrative Head of the Ministry/Department concerned to ensure compliance
of Official Language Rules and other provisions of the Official Language Act, etc. The
recommendations of the Standing Committee have been circulated to all Ministries/ Departments for
compliance.
Recommendation
1.26.3 The Committee takes note of the fact that a Committee has been set-up recently to evaluate
present Hindi vocabulary and develop “saral” Hindi dictionary which could be used without any
difficulties for administrative and other purposes. The Committee desires that the evaluation
process done by the said Committee may be completed in a time bound manner.
(Para 5.14.14 ibid)

36
Action Taken
1.26.4 An eight member Expert Committee has been constituted for the purpose. The Committee
has been mandated to give its report in six months period. Two meetings of the Committee have
already been held on 25-5-2013 and 28-5-2013.
Recommendation
1.26.5 The Committee is constrained to observe that Ministry of Panchayti Raj, Department of
Chemical and Petrochemical, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare are not abiding by the provisions of Section 3(3) of the Official
Languages Act 1963. The Committee recommends that the matter should be taken up with all these
Ministries/Departments and this Parliamentary Committee’ s observation should be conveyed to
them. The Committee further recommends that Department of Official Language should prevail
upon these Departments/Ministries to follow the rules/acts in this regard strictly.
(Para 5.14.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.26.6 All the Ministries/Departments have been issued instructions on 26.4.2013 to scrupulously
follow the provisions of Section 3(3) of the Official Language Act, 1963. The recommendation of
the Standing Committee have been circulated to the referred Ministries/Departments and they have
been again advised to comply with the provisions of Section 3(3).
Recommendation
1.26.7 The Committee also recommends that the vacancies in various Departments/Ministries
should be filled up at the earliest. The Department of Official Language should pursue the matter
vigorously with Staff Selection Commission.
(Para 5.14.16 ibid)
Action Taken
1.26.8 V arious steps have been taken to fill up the various vacancies in different Ministries/
Departments at different levels. Departmental Promotion Committees (DPCs) have been held and
orders for promotion even on ad-hoc basis, wherever necessary were issued to fill up vacancies
in various grades of Central Secretariat Official Language Service(CSOLS) Cadre. Consequently,
regular and ad-hoc promotions have been granted to 297 Junior Hindi Translators to the post of
Sr. Hindi translators, 61 Sr. Hindi Translators to the post of Assistant Director, 53 Assistant
Directors to the post of Deputy Director and 13 Deputy Directors to the post of Joint Director.
1.26.9 The vacancies at the feeder level of CSOLS i.e. Junior Hindi Translators (JHTs) are filled
up through Staff Selection Commission (SSC). SSC conducts yearly examination for recruitment
to the post of JHTs. In order to fill up the vacancies intimated by the Department to the SSC
expeditiously, matter was taken up with the Chairman, SSC through a D.O. letter from Secretary,
Deptt. of Official Language on 2.4.2013. DOL has since started receiving dossiers of selected
candidates of JHT Examination 2012. So far 10 dossiers of selected candidates have been received
in DOL from Zonal Offices of SSC at Bangalore and Raipur, which have been allocated to various
Ministries/Departments for appointing them on the vacant posts of JHT. On receipt of dossiers of
selected candidates from other Zones of SSC, allocations will be made to Ministries/Departments,

37
where vacancies exists. The Chairman, SSC has again been requested to instruct all Zonal Offices
to send dossiers of successful candidates expeditiously.
Recommendation
1.26.10 The Committee feels that if a person writes in one of the scheduled languages other than
English and Hindi to any department/Ministry or to any officer of the Government of India, there
should be a mechanism to give reply in that language. The Committee desires that Department of
Official Language may explore this possibility.
(Para 5.14.17 ibid)
Action Taken
1.26.11 The Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further action.
1.27 LAKSHADWEEP (Agatti Airport)
Recommendation
1.27.1 The Committee observes that since long the issue of extension of runway in Agatti in UT
of Lakshadweep is being raised at various levels. Due to short runway airlines operators face
difficulty in operating bigger aircrafts. Since, environmental clearance has been granted by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests, the UT Administration in tandem with the Union Ministry of
Home Affairs should complete the process of land acquisition for the runway extension. The
Committee recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs to come forward and take charge of the
project and ensure that it may be completed at the earliest. The matter may also be taken up with
Ministry of Civil Aviation.
(Para 6.1.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.27.2 Lakshadweep Administration has informed that earlier, Airport Authority of India had sought 9
acres of land for the extension of the runway. Now they have increased the demand to 17 acres which
also includes the Agatti Island Beach Resort (AIBR). The AIBR is presently s ub-judice as the Islander
holding it on lease was asked to vacate the resort after completion of lease period and he has taken
up the matter with the High Court of Kerala.
1.27.3 In principle, UT Lakshadweep Administration has agreed to acquire 17 acres including area
under AIBR and taking the steps for land acquisition. Since matter is sub-judice, UT Administration has
to inform the court and seek permission for acquiring the land under AIBR which is being processed.
1.27.4 The UT Administration is striving to provide the required land within the shortest possible time
and MHA is convening meetings with stakeholders to sort out issues as the project is important for
providing connectivity to the islands and also from the strategic point of view. The Union Home
Secretary has conducted five meetings on 12.11.2012, 22.01.2013, 11.02.2013, 11.03.2013 and
04.06.2013 to discuss the connectivity issues in the Island of Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.27.5 The Committee notes the reply and desires that pro-active approach by Union Territories
administration should be continued.

38
1.28 LAKSHADWEEP (51st IR Battalion)
Recommendation
1.28.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the plea of the Ministry that conversion of IRBn to State
Armed Police is possible only if personnel constituting any battalion belong to a single state. The
Committee, in view of this, recommends that the Ministry should ponder upon creating a separate UT
cadre of IRBn wherein their salaries and allowances should be same wherever they are posted.
(Para 6.2.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.28.2 This issue was discussed at Home Ministers Advisory Committee of Lakshadweep on
28.2.2013. The Government is of the view that it is not possible to create a separate battalion for
Lakshadweep as the population and crime rate is very low and even the present 50% posts in IRBn
for Lakshadweep is difficult to be justified. After discussion it was decided in the meeting that 3
companies can be posted in Lakshadweep and 3 in Daman and Diu. The reduction of 1 company
for Daman, Diu can be made up with allocation of 1 more company of CRPF. In pursuance to
that, a meeting in this connection was held on 15.5.2013 in MHA. UT has been requested to come
up with joint proposal in consultation with UT of Daman and Diu wherein deployment and
allowances of IRBn personnel working in Lakshadweep or Daman and Diu are worked out in a
mutually advantageous manner.
1.29 LAKSHADWEEP (FISHING)
Recommendation
1.29.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that UT of Lakshdweep is endowed with vast lagoons
and tuna-rich oceanic waters. Given this natural advantage, the Committee hopes that UT would
increase its fish landing. The Committee notes the initiatives taken  by the Ministry to increase
fishing yield. The Committee recommends that the fishing community should be given financial
incentives and other encouragement such as fishing boats, machineries etc. at subsidized rates as
this is the main vocation of the people there.
(Para 6.3.1 ibid)
Action Takens
1.29.2 To encourage fish landing the UT of Lakshadweep is promoting multi-day fishing with
financial assistance to the tune of 50% (
R25 Lakh) for construction/acquisition of modern/multi-
day fishing boats and for construction of open type Lakshadweep model pole and line boats.
Assistance to the extent of 40% on hull and 50% on machineries is given. Further, for
mechanization of non-motorized crafts, engines are supplied under Hire Purchase System with 25%
subsidy.
1.30 DAMAN AND DIU
Recommendation
1.30.1 The Committee takes note of the issue of fishermen rotting in the jails of Pakistan caught
while fishing. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs in tandem with
Ministry of External Affairs should raise this issue before Pakistani establishment during

39
diplomatic talks for bringing them back. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that reports
of intrusion by Pakistani Coast Guard into our sea should be verified with Ministry of Defence
and if found true, should be checked with all possible means.
(Para 6.4.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.30.2 The Government of India has been consistently taking up the issue of release of Indian
fishermen in Pakistani jails and their boats with the Government of Pakistan at all appropriate levels.
The matter was discussed at India-Pakistan Home/Interior Secretary talks held in Islamabad on May
24-25, 2012 and India-Pakistan Foreign Secretary level talks in New Delhi on July 4-5, 2012. The
External Affairs Minister raised this issue with the Foreign and Interior Ministers of Pakistan in
Islamabad in September, 2012. With the consistent efforts, we have secured the release of 677
fishermen in 2012 and 07 fishermen in 2013 so far.
1.30.3 The India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners (including fishermen) visits jails in each
other’s countries and makes recommendations to the two Governments regarding humanitarian
treatment and early release of prisoners and fishermen. The Committee has met six times so far
(February, 2008, June, 2008, August, 2008, April, 2011, January, 2012 and April, 2013). The
Committee in its joint statement in 2012 and 2013 made specific recommendations regarding release
of fishing boats.
1.30.4 A Joint Working Group (JWG) meeting between Indian Coast Guard and Pakistan Maritime
Security Agency was held in New Delhi on July 12, 2012 to discuss setting up a mechanism for
release of fishermen with their boats who cross maritime borders inadvertently.
1.30.5 As per the information furnished by the Ministry of External Affairs, there are more than
700 Indian fishing boats in Pakistan’s custody belonging to the Indian fishermen. This issue has
been repeatedly taken up in the Home/Interior Secretary level talks and was also discussed in details
between the Home Minster and the Interior Minister of Pakistan in December, 2012 during latter’s
visit to India. Unfortunately, there has been no progress in the release of Indian fishing boats. This
will again be taken up in the next interaction between Indian Coast Guard and Pakistan Maritime
Security Agency.
1.30.6 High Commission of India, Islamabad, on a continuing basis, monitors the status of all India
fishermen in Pakistani jails and requests for Consular Access. After the Consular Access is granted
and the nationality status is verified, the High Commission takes up the matter with the Government
of Pakistan for the release of all those Indian fishermen who have completed their sentences.
1.30.7 Ministry of Defence and Coast Guard have informed that they have no information
regarding any intrusion by Pakistani Coast Guard or other maritime forces into Indian waters.
1.31 ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS
Recommendation
1.31.1  The Committee takes serious note of the fact that Tsunami occurred in 2004 and
compensations and other rehabilitation measures have still not been completed particularly the issue
of loan waiver to fishermen in the UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should get the entire issues examined and furnish the status report
to the Committee at the earliest.
(Para 6.5.12 ibid)

40
Action Taken
1.31.1 The Request of Sh. Bishnu Pada Ray, MP(LS) dated 9th June, 2010 for waiver of the loan
of the fishermen affected by Tsunami was received through the Prime Minister’s Office
endorsement dated 1.7.2010Comments of the UT Administration were sought in this regard. A&N
Administration intimated in their letter dated 10.2.2011 that the fishermen in A&N Islands are
tribals, settlers or migrants from mainland and are economically weak. Therefore, UT
Administration recommended waiver of the entire loan granted to fishermen for repair, replacement
and up gradation of boats damaged due to Tsunami, along with accrued interest.
1.31.2 As intimated by UT Administration, 370 Tsunami affected fishermen of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands were having outstanding loan plus interest thereon amounting to 
R2.10 crore
(approx.) as on 31.03.2012.
1.31.3 After seeking the comments of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services
and UT Administration on the proposal, Note for Cabinet for seeking approval to waive the loan+
the amount of interest thereon in respect of 370 Tsunami affected fishermen as may be outstanding
on the date of settlement and to reimburse the same to concerned banks (
R2.10 crore approx. as
on 31.3.2012) was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 5 th October, 2012.
1.31.4 Meeting of the Cabinet was held on 18 th October, 2012 in which the proposal of the
Ministry to waive the loan + the amount of interest thereon in respect of 370 Tsunami affected
fishermen was approved. The sanction for the same was issued on 8
th November, 2012.
1.31.5 UT Administration has intimated that the total loan amount outstanding as on 31.3.2012 is
R2,10,23,909,27/-. Cheques were issued to respective banks by UT Administration on 03.04.2013.

41
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE THE
MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
2.1 LEFT-WING EXTREMISM
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee also notes the death of several security forces personnel in LWE incidents
in 2012. In some cases, it was alleged that the personnel were posted in those areas without
adequate training and the casualties occurred due to non-observance of Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP). The committee feels that these issues need serious consideration and recommends
that the Government should provide adequate training to the personnel of Central Police Forces
as well as State police forces before sending them to LWE affected areas. The Committee also
recommends that these personnel should be equipped with all necessary modern weapons and
security gadgets and the required SOPs should be scrupulously followed by the forces.
(Para 3.6.17 of 169th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.1 ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ being State subjects, action with respect to maintenance of law
and order lies primarily in the domain of the State Governments concerned, who deal with the
various issues related to Left Wing Extremist (LWE) activities in the States. The Central
Government monitors the situation closely and supplements and coordinates their efforts in several
ways, inter-alia, including providing Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) to assist the State
Police Forces to deal with the LWE problem.
2.1.2 The CAPF battalions, prior to their induction in the LWE affected States, undergo Counter
Insurgency/pre-induction training at two stages. At the first stage, they undergo pre-induction
training of four weeks with the Army Infantry units and thereafter familiarization/orientation training
of 15 days under the respective State Police.
2.1.3 Besides, in order to strengthen the training inputs of the State Police Forces, the Central
Government has approved establishment of 21 Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorist (CIAT)
Schools in the States affected by insurgency and terrorism including Left Wing Extremism. Fifteen
such CIAT Schools have been established/are being established in the LWE affected States of
Bihar (3), Chhattisgarh (4), Jharkhand (4), Odisha (3) and West Bengal (1). The Central
Government also provides assistance to the State Governments in training of State Police Forces
through the Ministry of Defence, Central Police Organisations and Bureau of Police Research and
Development.
2.1.4 W ith regard to provision of modern weapons and gadgets, the Central Government is
providing financial assistance to the State Governments for modernization and upgradation of the
State Police Forces and their intelligence apparatus under the Scheme for Modernization of State
Police Forces (MPF Scheme).
41

42
2.1.5 The State Governments are advised from time-to-time to ensure observance of SOPs by the
security forces deployed in the LWE affected areas.
2.2 NORTH EAST
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee is concerned over the prevalence of insurgency in north-east with the
neighbouring countries of the region aiding and abetting ultra-groups in the region. The Committee
notes the large number of surrenders by the underground militants in recent period and is also
aware of the fact that the Government of India has initiated talks with NSC-IM and other militant
groups of the region and hopeful that it will yield desired results soon. The Committee feels that
neighbouring countries of the region should be diplomatically approached and negotiated at highest
level for not allowing their territories for carrying out anti-India activities by insurgent groups of
the region. The Committee understands that several schemes for infrastructural development scheme
are under implementation in the North-East. But the pace of the work is so less that its impact
is not much visible. This needs to change. The Committee is of the firm view that socio-economic
development and expansion of connectivity infrastructure in the North-eastern region only can
counter the ideological influence of the insurgent groups.
(Para 3.7.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The internal security and law and order situation in the North Eastern States, including
insurgencies and talks with various extremist outfits operating in the region as well as security
issues between Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Myanmar are discussed at the highest level and these
issues are reviewed periodically.
2.3 TERRORISM IN J&K
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee notes the claim of the Ministry of Home Affairs that there has been decline
in terrorist violence and infiltration attempts by Pakistan based and aided militants in J&K and
quantum increase in flow of tourists visiting the Kashmir Valley. However, the Committee cautions
the Government from being complacent and to be vigilant constantly as the terrorist infrastructure
in Pakistan/PoK remains intact and infiltration attempts are still being made from across the
border.
(Para 3.8.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 The Government has adopted various counter terrorist methods to neutralize the efforts and
capabilities of militants to disturb peace in the State. The Government has also encouraged policies
to mainstream the youth and discourage the local youth from joining militancy.
2.4 CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
Recommendation
2.4.1 The Committee is of the view that “Orderly system” functional in Police forces is quite
discriminatory and reminiscent of British colonial era which affects the morale of the forces

43
personnel who are trained to become security personnel, however, employed as cooks, drivers,
attendants, etc. The Committee is of the view that this system should be abolished completely,
forthwith, as recommended by 6th Pay Commission. The Committee is also of the view that posts
of cooks, drivers, attendants, etc., if necessary, at the residences of senior officers of the forces
should be sanctioned separately.
(Para 4.1.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 W ith regard to recommendations of 6th Central Pay Commission, instructions were issued
by MHA vide  UO No.II.27011/26/2009-PF.II dated 29
th October, 2009 and the practice of
deployment of Constable/Follower security service in CAPFs has been stopped, therefore, these
posts are no longer in existence. With regard to utilization of service of security/force personnel
at the residence of officer, the Forces have been asked to submit proposals for creation of
Group –‘C’ posts for deployment at the residences of the officers purely on the basis of operational
requirement/justification.
Recommendation
2.4.3 The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should issue a mandatory
direction to all the heads of the Forces including the Delhi Police as well as police in UTs, for
not using any security personnel or police personnel for duties such as drivers, washermen, cooks,
attendants, peons, or for other personal use of the officers other than their regular security duties.
The Centre should set up an example by compliance of such mandatory directions so that the States
can follow.
(Para 4.1.10 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.4 W ith regard to recommendations of 6th Central Pay Commission, instructions were issued
by MHA vide UO No.II.27011/26/2009-PF.II dated 29
th October, 2009, and the practice of
deployment of Constable/Follower security service in CAPFs has been stopped, therefore, these
posts are no longer in existence. With regard to utilization of service of security/force personnel
at the residence of officer, the Forces have been asked to submit proposals for creation of
Group –‘C’ posts for deployment at the residences of the officers purely on the basis of operational
requirement/justification.
2.5 CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Recommendation
2.5.1 The Committee also takes note of the delay in raising of additional Battalions. In 2009
itself, Government sanctioned 38 additional Battalions, however, only four Battalions were under
the process of being raised in 2012-13 and additional four will be raised in 2013-14. The
Committee strongly recommends that the proposed 38 battalions be raised at the earliest.
(Para 4.2.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.2 The raising of additional Battalions is going as per the approved plan. Approved raising
schedule of Units/Estt sanctioned by the Government vide letter No. II-27102/36/2007-PF-III dated
01.09.2009 is as under:–

44
FIRST PHASE 
BN/Estt 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 T otal
Unit 2 4 4 4 4 18
Mahila Bn 1 - - -           -         1
GC - 1 111 4
Range HQrs - 1 1 1   1 4
Sector HQrs - - 1 - - 1
CIAT School 1 - - - -    1 
CWS 1 - - - - 1
T
OTAL 5 6 766 3 0
SECOND PHASE
BN/ Estt 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 T otal
Unit 2 4 4 4 4 18
Mahila Bn 1 - - -           -         1
GC - 1 1 1 - 3
Range HQrs - 1 1 1 - 3
Sector HQrs - - 1 - - 1
T
OTAL 3 6 764 2 6
2.5.3 It may be noted from the above that the raising was to be done in 10 years and not in
one year. During first phase 18 Units, 1 Mahila Bn, 04 Group Centres, 04 Adm Ranges, 01 Sector
Hqr, 01 CIAT School and 01 CWS have been raised as per approved raising schedule. Out of 18
Units, 04 Units each of 2012-13 and 2013-14 are under raising/training.
2.5.4 From the above details, it may thus be seen that there is no delay in raising of Units/
Establishments.
2.6 NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD (NSG)
Recommendation
2.6.1 The Committee notes the stand of the Ministry that allocation of  R.585.81 crore is
sufficient to meet the current requirement for creation of infrastructure for the new NSG Hubs and
acquisition of Arms, Ammunition etc. for the financial year 2013-14.
(Para 4.3.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.6.2 The fund allocation for procurement of arms and ammunition in BE 2013-14 would be
utilized as per procurement plan of NSG. Additional demand, if required will be projected
subsequently.

45
2.7 INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
Recommendation
2.7.1 The Committee also recommends that besides incentives to personnel working in difficult
terrains, Risk/Hardship based allowance may also be given to the personnel of ITBP at par with
that paid to the army troops deployed in difficult altitude/terrains.
(Para 4.5.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.7.2 MHA has already conveyed approval of the competent authority for introduction of the
following Risk/Hardship based allowances to combatized CAPFs personnel up to the rank of
Commandant at the same rate as admissible to the Army personnel vide OM No.II.27013/56/2006-
PF.I dated 16-04-2009:–
(a) High Altitude Allowance.
(b) Field Area Allowance or the Counter Insurgency Operations (CI Ops) Allowance.
(c) LWE Risk Allowance equivalent to CI Ops to the personnel deployed for anti-naxal
operation in LWE affected areas.
2.8 DELHI POLICE
Recommendation
2.8.1 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the allocated funds will not be sufficient
to complete all projects of Delhi Police proposed for the Financial Year 2013-14. Keeping in view
that the internal security is the top priority for the Government and Delhi being the national
capital city of the country for which Delhi Police has been entrusted for policing, the Committee
is unable to understand the logic behind drastic cut in the fund allocations which could hamper
effective functioning of Delhi Police. The Committee is aware of the fact that there has been a
spurt in cases of crimes and there is also an increase in the reporting of the crimes in Delhi. The
Government must not cut down expenditure in the name of fiscal deficit or for maintaining fiscal
deficit as the same would invite unwarranted situation which may affect adversely the policing in
Delhi.
(Para 4.9.15 ibid)
Action Taken
2.8.2 The Allocation under Plan and Non-Plan have gone up. In the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the
total revised allocation was only 
R333.40 crore, whereas in the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the
allocation is R1874.13 crore thus registering huge increase. Similarly, the Non- Plan allocation too
have seen a constant increase. In financial Year 2011-12 and 2012-13 the non plan allocation was
R 3353.28 crores and R3665.33 crore respectively which has now been increased to R 4133.53
crore for 2013-14.
2.8.3 The Government has sanctioned CCTV project for Delhi Police in various phases. CCTV
projects worth R376.76 crores have been approved requiring installation of 5103 cameras. Of these,
2677 cameras have been already been installed. R120 crore. have been exclusively provided in
Financial Year 2013-14 for installation of CCTVs in this year.

46
2.9 MODERNIZATION OF ST ATE POLICE FORCES (MPF)
Recommendation
2.9.1 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the implementation of the Scheme for a
further period of five years with effect from 2012-13 was approved in the beginning of 2013 which
led to non releasing of funds to States out of the BE provision of 
R750 crore under Non-Plan.
Approval should have been given well in advance so that the under utilization could have been
avoided. The Committee also takes a serious view of the fact that the provision of R150 crore
under Non-Plan for creation of Capital Assets could also not be utilized due to procedural
handicaps. The Committee hopes that 
R1847 crore allocated under Non-Plan and Plan put together
for this year under this scheme would be utilized without time and cost overrun.
(Para 4.10.10 ibid)
Action Taken
2.9.2 The proposal of the Ministry of Home Affairs for extension of the MPF Scheme for a
further period five years, 2012-13 to 2016-17 was initially placed before a Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) for consideration. The Committee of Secretaries in its meeting held on 22.3.2012
recommended extension of the MPF Scheme for five years. It was also recommended by CoS that
Police Infrastructure i.e.  ‘Construction/upgradation of Police Stations/Outposts/Police lines
buildings’, ‘Police Housing, Forensic Science Laboratories and ‘Training Infrastructure –
Construction of buildings’ component may be recommended to be funded from Plan and remaining
components i.e. mobility, weapons, equipment and Training from Non-Plan side.
2.9.3 Thereafter, the proposals on Non-Plan and Plan components of MPF Scheme were
formulated in MHA and placed before the respective appraisal authorities, i.e. the Committee on
Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) and the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The proposal on Non-
Plan MPF Scheme was considered by the CNE on 31.8.2012 and recommended. The EFC agreed
to recommend the proposal on Plan MPF Scheme in a meeting held on 14.11.2012.
2.9.4 Subsequently, a composite proposal for continuation of the MPF Scheme for five years
from 2012-13 to 2016-17 under Non-Plan and Plan was prepared in MHA and sent to Cabinet
Secretariat in January, 2013 for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). The
CCS considered the proposal of MHA in a meeting held on 7
th February, 2013 and approved the
proposal.
2.9.5 As the Scheme was approved only in February, 2013, no funds could be released to States
out of the available BE 2012-13 provision under MPF Scheme under Non-Plan before February,
2013. The BE 2012-13 provision of 
R150 crore under Non-Plan for creation of Capital Assets could
also not be utilized as the police infrastructure components were proposed to be funded out of Plan
funds from 2012-13. However, the entire provision of R300 crore made for MPF Scheme under
Non-Plan in RE 2012-13 was released to States by 31 st March, 2013. There was no budgetary
provision made for MPF Scheme under Plan in RE 2012-13.
Recommendations
2.9.6 Keeping in view the fact that the naxal affected districts continue to lack proper policing,
the Government should reconsider its decision of dropping components for naxal affected districts
under the MPF Scheme. Similarly, border policing is also crucial in view of activities from across
the border and dropping of border policing from the MPF Scheme also needs reconsideration.
(Para 4.10.11 ibid)

47
Action Taken
2.9.7 The separate naxal component which involves providing 100% Central assistance for
strengthening the police infrastructure in naxal affected areas has been dropped from the MPF
Scheme from the financial year 2012-13 onwards, as a separate scheme is being implemented by
the Ministry of Home Affairs for construction of police stations in naxal affected areas. Similarly,
border policing has been dropped from MPF Scheme from 2012-13 onwards since there is no
additionality in budgets being provided.
2.10 JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Recommendation
2.10.1 The Committee also notes that out of 505 units of proposed transit accommodation, the
State Government has completed 405 units of transit accommodation in the Valley and remaining
100 are expected to be completed shortly and another 200 flats have been constructed at Budgam
and the accommodation has been allotted to migrants who have been appointed. The Committee
recommends that the Government should make a comprehensive plan for constructing permanent
accommodation for migrants so that they can live there peacefully along with their families.
(Para 5.11.12 ibid)
Action Taken
2.10.2 The PM’s Package announced by Hon’ble PM inter-alia provides for assistance towards
housing as under:–
Place Total (No.) Completed (No.)
Vessu (Kulgam) 250 150
Khanpur Baramulla) 130 130
Hawal (Pulwama) 65 65
Kupwara 60 60
505 405
Housing
(i) Assistance @ 
R 7.5 lakh for fully or partially damaged house.
(ii) R2.00 lakh for dilapidated/unused houses.
(iii) R.7.5 lakh for purchase/construction of a house in Group Housing Societies for
those who have sold their properties during the period after 1989 and before the
enactment of “The J&K Migrant Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and
Restraint of Distress Sale) Act, 1997” on 30.05.1997.
2.11 DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
2.11.1 The Committee notes that a New Scheme namely Creation of Infrastructure for NDRF
battalions at an estimated cost of 
R1250.80 crore is being formulated for implementation during

48
the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends that all necessary procedural clearance
may be obtained to start the scheme at the earliest for creating state of the art infrastructure for
NDRF.
(Para 5.12.11 ibid)
Action Taken
2.11.2 On submission of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Note for creation of infrastructure
of NDRF across India amounting to 
R 1250.80 crore, Planning Commission and the Department
of Expenditure (MoF) have forwarded their views/comments. Secretary Expenditure is being
requested to convene a meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for approval of the
proposal of NDRF. This phase of the scheme is scheduled to be completed during the current
Five Year Plan. The remaining part of the proposal relating to Infrastructure of NDRF is likely to
be implemented during Thirteenth Five Year Plan.
Recommendation
2.11.3 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has been undertaking mass awareness
programmes to prepare people during or post-natural or manmade disasters. The Committee
understands that without participation of common people, the Government machineries alone
cannot tackle disasters at different locations of country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Government should continue to conduct mock exercises from time to time which could be very
helpful in the wake of any actual incident of disaster. Civil Defence set ups may be also involved
in all such mock drills.
(Para 5.12.15 ibid)
Action Taken
2.11.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the following information:–
● NDRF is being regularly conducting Mock drills in different parts of the country.
● 111 Mock Drill have been conducted during the year 2012.
● Mega Mock Drill conducted in 09 districts of Delhi on 15.02.2012.
● NDRF participated in the Tri-cities Mega Mock Drill held in Shimla, Chandigarh,
Punchkulla and Mohali on 13.02.2013.
2.12 DAMAN AND DIU
Recommendation
2.12.1 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 165 th Action Taken Report on
161st Report that development of Minor Ports in Daman & Diu is necessary for promoting tourism
through cruise ships plying between Daman & Diu and between Mumbai and Daman. The
Committee notes that the Egis India Ltd. submitted Inspection Report on 26th February, 2013. The
Committee recommends that UT Administration should take follow-up-actions at the earliest so that
the work takes off without delay.
(Para 6.4.12 ibid)
Action Taken
2.12.2 UT Administration has intimated that:-

49
(i) Inspection report has been received from the consultant on 24.04.2013.
(ii) The feasibility report has been received from the consultant in the last week of
June, 2013 and is under consideration.
2.12.3 UT Administration has stated that it is highly technical matter because the depth of water
in Daman during low tide is very less. The pattern of sedimentation is required to be studied before
dredging is done for the boats to reach the port at Daman without interruption. However, this can
be done only after the consultant finds the establishment of minor port economically viable and
technically feasible.
Recommendation
2.12.4 The Committee, in its 161st and 165th Reports, had recommended the Ministry and UT
administration for expediting the process of regularization of daily wage employees. Since, UT
administration considers that the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in above case is not
restrictive but more of enabling nature which permits the Government to regularize employees, who
have worked for more than 10 years, the Committee reiterates that the UT Administration should
take necessary action to regularize these daily wage employees at the earliest by adopting pro-
active approach on humanitarian ground.
(Para 6.4.14 ibid)
Action Taken
2.12.5 Nine daily wage employees eligible in accordance with the guidelines prescribed by DOP&T
have been regularized. The provision of work charge is guided by the CPWD manual and as per
the same, workers/employees kept on work charge to the specific works. The daily wage workers
working in Departments like PWD, electricity are governed under CPWD manual and accordingly
based on the eligibility, they are converted into work charge.With regard to regularization of
employees not covered/eligible in accordance with the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court,
DOP&T have opined that making a departure from the guidelines will be completely against the
directions of the Supreme Court.
2.13 ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
Recommendation
2.13.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Government has sanctioned a project of
setting up of a Marina at Viper Island. Since, the matter pertains to the sentiment of the people
as the said Island has a historical value, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should
impress upon Ministry of Tourism and A&N Administration to shift this project to any other Island
of UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
(Para 6.5.13 ibid)
Action Taken
2.13.2 The project was approved by the Ministry of Tourism after following due processes. The
Planning Commission had allocated an amount of 
R 7.5 crore as 50% subsidy under Tsunami
Rehabilitation Programme (TRP) for setting up of a 50 berth Marina in A & N Islands with a view
to revive Tourism in these islands which was badly affected by the Tsunami of December, 2004.
This Administration had taken up the project at Viper Island after a detailed feasibility study after
taking into consideration that Viper island is an uninhabited island which is techno-economically
ideal for setting up a Marina. Previously there was no activity/project on the island and hence it

50
was in a state of gross neglect. The entire island was not being utilised for any fruitful purpose
and was being littered due to stray cattle and waste swept inland by the sea.
2.13.3 It was felt that by setting up this project the island will be provided an overall facelift and
shall be maintained properly thereby attracting more tourists. Such a project would also result in
generating employment opportunities for local unemployed youth of these islands apart from
generating revenue for the Administration. By setting up a project of international standards the
islands would get the recognition and attention of all the visitors from world over as against the
earlier state of neglect. Further, the Administration is already taking necessary initiatives for a
holistic development plan for the heritage buildings/structures at Viper Island including preservation
of the structures and landscaping of the area.
2.13.4 The entire bidding process for the project was done for setting up the project at Viper
Island and all the necessary clearances from Government of India had been taken i.e. EFC and SFC
meetings for clearing the project were held under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of
Tourism, Government of India after which the Concession Agreement was signed with the private
developer for executing the project in this island.
2.13.5 As regards project of Marina, the Administration had all along since the process of
conceptualization of the project, borne in mind that there should be no damage or disgrace to the
monuments and the sanctity/historical significance of the island should remain undisturbed. To this
end it was ensured that the Marina should be at a considerable distance from the existing jetty and
there should be a separate approach/jetty for the Marina visitors. The area for Marina would be
segregated and clearly earmarked causing no interference to the historical monuments.
2.13.6 The Andaman Nicobar Command had given a NOC for setting up a Yacht Marina in 2009.
However, this has been withdrawn recently. The Andaman Administration is exploring various
available alternatives and thus the project is being reviewed.
Recommendation
2.13.7 The Committee also recommends that necessary immediate action be taken for procurement
of ships by the A&N Administration.
[Para 6.5.14 ibid]
Action Taken
2.13.8 A ship acquisition Committee under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary is taking
necessary steps for finalizing the broad parameters of ships keeping in view the requirement of sea/
oceanic connectivity of Mainland-Island sector as well as Inter-Island sector of the UT of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands for the procurement of ships, including both construction of new ships as well
as chartering of ships. Tendering exercise in the matter shall be initiated at the earliest.

51
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT
OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that a large quantum of unspent balances
are lying with State Governments under major schemes such as Modernization of State Police
Forces, Special Infrastructure Scheme in LWE affected States etc.. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should persuade lagging States/UTs to implement the Schemes/
Projects of the Ministry at a fast pace and if the attempts are still not yielding the desired results,
the State Governments may be asked to furnish the Utilization Certificates (UCs) at the earliest.
In case, UCs have become overdue, the amount may be asked to be surrendered or the same may
be adjusted while granting further allocation.
(Para 2.11 of 169
th Report)
Action Taken
3.1.2 The Scheme for Special Infrastructure (SIS) in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected
States was approved for implementation during the Eleventh Plan period. The implementation
of the Scheme commenced in the year 2008-09. The works under SIS were sanctioned for
creating necessary infrastructure with a view to enable the security forces to effectively deal
with Left Wing Extremism. During the Eleventh Plan period from 2008-09 to 2011-12, a total
amount of 
R 445.82 crore was released under SIS to the 9 LWE affected States, against
which, Utilization Certificates for R 258.26 crore have been submitted by the 9 LWE affected
States so far.
3.1.3 The works were to be undertaken in remote and severely LWE affected areas. The Progress
of works under the Scheme has been slow due to serious security problems created by the
Maoists, reluctance of contractors to operate in these areas, difficulty in mobilization of material
and machinery resulting in slower utilization of funds. Further owing to changing situations in the
LWE theatre, the CAPFs are required to shift their bases often, which necessitate change of works
approved under SIS leading to delays.
3.1.4 The MHA has been pursuing at all levels for Utilization Certificates and physical and
financial progress report by sending letters/reminders regularly to the State Governments
concerned.
3.1.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs has been taking up the issue of unspent balances lying with
States under the Scheme for Modernization of State Police Forces with the concerned State
Governments from time to time. In various meetings held in MHA, the Ministry has impressed upon
the State Governments to speed up the pace of implementation of the Action Plan approved under
the Scheme and utilize the funds released by the Ministry of Home Affairs for the purpose,
expeditiously.
51

52
3.1.6 The State Governments are requested to furnish Utilization Certificates (UCs) which are due
for rendition to Ministry of Home Affairs timely. The UCs furnished by the State Governments
form the basis for release of grants-in-aid to States under the Scheme in subsequent years. While
processing release of funds to States under the Scheme, the amount of unspent balances lying with
the States for which the UCs have become overdue, is deducted/adjusted by the Ministry of Home
Affairs from the allocations made to the concerned State and the remaining amount is released to
the State.
3.1.7 There is a provision in the Scheme which allows that funds which could not be released
to States due to unspent balances of previous financial years, as on 31
st December of the Financial
Year, may be pooled up and released to better performing States which have a faster pace of
expenditure.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
3.1.8 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that almost half of the
amount allocated during Eleventh Five Year Plan under the Special Infrastructure Scheme
to the State Governments is lying unspent. The Committee understands that
implementation of development projects/schemes in LWE areas is a challenge for the
Government but partial completion of projects would frustrate the very purpose of the
allocations. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should impress upon the State Governments to put all out efforts for optimal
utilization of earmarked allocations in furtherance of execution of developmental projects/
schemes and submit the utilization certificate in time.
3.2 NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that NIA, a premier investigating
agency, entrusted with the responsibilities to investigate and prosecute offences affecting the
sovereignty, security and integrity of India is working without required manpower and essential
facilities such as vehicles and the officers of the Agency are forced to perform their duties using
private taxies. The Committee, therefore, strongly, recommends that all the vacancies in NIA must
be filled up at the earliest and the Agency should be provided with all needed infrastructural and
logistic support. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should come forward with
positive attitude and provide requisite fund for the three proposed regional offices of the NIA at
the RE stage.
(Para 3.9.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 During the year 2012, the sanction for creation/operationalisation of 04 new branches of
NIA at Guwahati, Lucknow, Mumbai and Kochi with 265 posts has been issued.
3.2.3 Sincere efforts are being made for filling up the IT and Legal posts by writing to the Chief
Secretaries, Director Generals of Police and Directorate of Prosecution of various states for
nominating willing and competent officials for deputation to NIA.
3.2.4 As Recruitment Rules for some of posts were not finalized, NIA were authorized to fill the
posts without consultation with UPSC vide MHA order dated 8.01.2010. This exemption expired in
January, 2013 and the matter regarding extension of this exemption for a further period of one year
has been taken up with DoPT at the level of Home Secretary. However, despite these concessions

53
NIA has not been able to fill up all the posts due to non receipt of sufficient nominations. To meet
this deficiency, MHA has allowed NIA to fill up the posts on hiring basis/outsourcing, as a
temporary measure. Such sanction have been issued for 10 IT staff, 05 Data Entry Operator, 04
Housekeeping staff. It has also been decided to provide the personnel to NIA on attachment basis
for which the posts have been circulated to the various CAPFs for sending the nominations.
3.2.5 W ith regard to funds, additionality will be projected to Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission at Supplementary stage/Revised Estimate stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.2.6 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the non framing of Recruitment Rules
for some of the posts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Recruitment Rules must
be finalised without further delay. The Committee further recommends that the
Government should expedite filling up of 265 sanctioned posts for operationalisation of four
new branches of NIA at Guwahati, Lucknow, Mumbai and Kochi. Besides, inducting state
Government officials into IT and Legal posts on deputations should also be expedited. The
Committee is also of the view that various CAPFs should be advised to send nominations
of suitable officials to fill up the required posts. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation that Ministry of Finance should take necessary steps to provide requisite
fund for the three proposed regional offices of the NIA at the RE stage.
3.3 NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE GRID (NATGRID)
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee is constrained to express its deep displeasure over dilly-dallying attitude of
the Government in regard to creation of infrastructure of NATGRID. The very proposal of setting
up of NATGRID is still at nascent stage even after a lapse of two years. The Committee
understands that delay in construction of Data centre building of NATGRID would create hurdles
in accomplishing the set objective of the organization. The delay is unacceptable and the project
should pick up pace. The Committee observes that there is no seriousness on the part of Central
Government and, therefore, recommends that the Home Minister or the Cabinet Secretary should
have a meeting with all the concerned Ministries to clear procedural bottlenecks and this project
should take off on immediate basis without any further time and cost overruns.
(Para 3.10.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 The NATGRID is conceived to be the frame-work which will enable visibility of a big
picture and of events beyond the horizon by collating disjoined pieces of information that exist in
different parts of the environment and stitching them into one view. It will leverage information
technology to access, collate, analyse, correlate, predict and provide speedy dissemination.
3.3.3 Planning Commission has accorded its “in Principle” approval to the project on 08.07.2012,
as a ‘Central Plan Scheme’ under Ministry of Home Affairs from 2011-12. Cabinet Committee on
Security has approved the ‘Detailed Project Report’ (DPR) for an amount of 
R1002.97 crores on
14.06.2012 for Implementation of Foundation, Horizon-I and some elements of Horizon II of the
project. Accordingly, work on the Foundation and Horizon-I has already commenced, and the
current stage of the project is detailed below:–
(i) The detailed organization structure, staffing Plan, role and responsibilities and other
elements of the NATGRID personnel have been prepared and sent to the Department

54
of Personnel and Training (DoP&T). Comments of the DoP&T have been received and
the proposal is being sent to the Ministry of Finance for approval after which their
recruitment will commence.
(ii) An interim arrangement to induct a team of about 30 select positions has also begun.
(iii) Land has been allotted to NATGRID for Construction of Data Centre (DC & BCP) at
New Delhi and for Disaster Recovery Centre (DR) at Bengaluru.
(iv) As per the approval of the Cabinet Project Management Consultants (PMC) are being
hired to design the various RFPs for System Integrators for implementation of
NATGRID solutions. Also, as per the Cabinet approval, information related to Banks
and Financial Institutions are to be provided through the Financial Intelligence Unit
(FIU), for which the Detailed Project Report shall be prepared.
(v) The construction work of data centre building has been entrusted to National
Building Construction Corporation (NBCC) on a turn-key basis. An EFC proposal for
construction of Data Centre Building has been prepared and sent to the Ministry of
Finance for appraisal. As per the EFC Memo, the projected timeline for
commissioning the Datacentre and Disaster Recovery is about 30 calendar months
after approval of the Cabinet. Thus, NATGRID would become fully functional after
these facilities are ready for launching of The full-fledged NATGRID solution.
However, preliminary support to User Agencies can commence well before that with
several pilot Project.
3.3.4 As regards Standing Committee’s recommendation that meeting be convened at the level of
Home Minister or Cabinet Secretary to clear procedural bottlenecks, the matter is under
consideration for further action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.3.5 The Committee is not convinced with the explanation and expresses its anguish over
inordinate delay in creation of infrastructure of NATGRID. Despite “in Principle” approval
by the Planning Commission in July, 2012 for the project and approval of Cabinet
Committee on Security of the ‘Detailed Project Report’ (DPR), the ground work is yet to
take off. The Committee, therefore, once again recommends that all official procedural
bottlenecks should be cleared at the earliest so that the creation of infrastructure for
NATGRID should be expedited.
3.4 CRIME AND CRIMINAL TRACKING NETWORK AND SYSTEMS (CCTNS)
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee understands that Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and System
(CCTNS) project would go a long way in tracking criminals and investigation of criminal cases,
besides strengthening citizen based service delivery system. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government should complete this project within stipulated time frame for its actual
operationalisation. The Committee is of the strong opinion that the project should not suffer for
want of funds, and therefore, further recommends that enhanced allocation may be made for
CCTNS project during the current financial year, if necessary. The Committee also desires that the
physical target of project implementation by August, 2013 should be achieved.
(Para 3.13.5 ibid)

55
Action Taken
3.4.2 The prime reason attributed to downsizing is less releases to States/UTs under Grants-in-
Aid. States/UTs have not been released funds because of low utilization of funds already allocated
to them. The Budget had been downsized from the initial Budget Estimates of v 400 crores in year
2012-13 to the Revised Estimates of 
R 85 crores.
3.4.3 The project implementation schedule of Crime and Criminal Tracking Network Systems
(CCTNS) project to be implemented in the Eleventh plan (2007-12) was proposed for four years
(2008-12). The schedule for four years was primarily based on a rationale that project activities
shall be undertaken by diverse stakeholders and would be successfully completed within the
proposed time. The various reasons for the delay are as follows:
● The CCTNS project is based on the principle of “Bundle of Services” wherein a
“System Integrator”(SI) would provide turnkey implementation of all the services
which will constitute implementation of a project in a State/UT. There has been
considerable delay in signing of the SI contract at State/UT level.
● The CCTNS project was conceptualized with a view to leverage the existing IT
infrastructure and network being developed under the other schemes of Department of
Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) such as SWAN (State Wide Area
Network), SDC (State Data Centre), NSDG (National Service Delivery Gateway) etc.
However, there is a considerable delay in the completion of the above mentioned
schemes when aligned with the proposed implementation schedule of CCTNS project
from the year 2008-12.
● The project initiation activities of CCTNS project in terms of project conceptualization,
preparation of State Plans, preparation of project guidelines, templates, RFPs and other
key project guidance documents which should have been ready in the year 2008-09 for
timely initiation of the project before the approval of CCEA note, were mostly complete
only by the end of the financial year of 2009-10.
● The Core Application Software (CAS) of CCTNS project should have been completed
for initiation of rollout in the year 2009-10 as envisaged in the CCEA note. However
the Software Development Agency (SDA) at the Central level was selected only by
June, 2010 after a bid process which started in August, 2009. The latest build of CAS
has been released to States/UTs only in Dec, 2012.
3.4.4 The work of Project implementation is in full swing across the country. Also, provided that
the Project Implementation deadline is 30th June/31st August, 2013, all States/UTs shall need to
make pending payments to System Integrator, State Project Management Unit (SPMU) and BSNL
in the next few months itself, hence the Ministry shall require more funds to be sanctioned/released
to States/UTs who inturn shall make the respective payments.
Current Status of the Project implementation and action taken to ensure progress as per timelines:
3.4.5 All States/UTs have been given a mandate to finish the CCTNS Project Implementation by
30th June or 31st August, 2013. Various actions are being taken to facilitate the State/UTs to
achieve the timelines and also to help them utilize the funds released to them. Some such steps
are:–
● Regular meetings at Home Secretary /AS/JS levels are being held with State Nodal
officers/System Integrators(SIs) /SPMUs and BSNL to monitor and push the progress
in each respect.

56
● Regular visits are being made by National Crime Research Bureau (NCRB) and CPMU
to review the progress in various States/UTs. NCRB and MHA has been intervening in
any matter that States/SIs or SPMUs need help with.
● In order to facilitate faster implementation by the SIs, payment terms are being revised
for SIs, which shall ensure that SIs have the needed cash flow and hence can
continue to work to meet the prescribed timelines.
3.4.6 Below paragraphs detail the Status of implementation of the project:
(a) Selection of System Integrator (SI) by all the States/UTs: 31 State/UTs have till date
signed their respective System Integrator (SI) contracts and 1 State has issued Letters
of Intent to the respective SI. The resources have been deployed by the SIs at the
States/UTs and work is in full swing.
(b) Selection of State Project Management Units (SPMU) by all the States/UTs: 31 States/
UTs have signed contracts with their respective SPMU. The resources have been
deployed by the SPMUs at the States/UTs.
(c) Network Connectivity: BSNL has signed the Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with 27
State/UTs and 8 States/UTs have been given permission to go for SWAN connectivity
and some already have operational networks. These are A&N Islands, Chandigarh,
Delhi, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Puducherry, Lakshadweep. In all the rest of the States
and UTs, the respective SLAs have been signed between BSNL and the respective
States. Around 7319 Police Stations/Higher Offices are currently connected as on 21st
May 2013 and BSNL is currently working on providing network connectivity at the
remaining sites.
(d) Capacity Building: District Training Centre (DTC), Regional training Centre (RTC),
Police Training Centre (PTC), State Crime Records Bureau have already been set up
in 31 States/UTs. Training to 7,03,781 persons has been imparted. Formation of
District Mission Teams at States and UTs has been completed in 34 States/UTs.
(e) Financial Aspects: Total funds of 
R 446.54 crores have been released to States/UTs as
Grants-in-Aid under the CCTNS project till date, out of which Rs 202.25 crores have
been utilized till 17.05.2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.4.7 The Committee notes the reply and observes that there has been delay on several
counts. The Committee desires that there should not be any further delay in the matter.
All efforts should be taken for completion as per schedule.
3.5 BORDER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee understands the hurdles coming in the way of fencing, construction of roads
etc. due to difficulties in terms of acquisition of land, difficult terrain, non-cooperation from
bordering countries etc. The Committee is of the view that the Government should sort out all these
bottlenecks at the earliest and complete remaining works of fencing and flood lighting as targeted
in a given timeframe. The Committee recommends that the Government should diplomatically
approach and negotiate with the Bangladesh Government for border fencing within 150 yards along
Indo-Bangla Border. An early decision may be taken in the matter.
(Para 3.14.22 ibid)

57
Action Taken
3.5.2 Indo-Bangladesh Border Road passing through Dampa Tiger Reserve (DTR), Mizoram: A
stretch of about 59 km. (BP-2305 to 2313) for construction of border roads along Indo-Bangladesh
Border, falls within the territory of DTR, Mamit district in Mizoram is pending for Forest/
Environment clearance. MoEF clearance is being expedited by the State Government with the
concerned State Wild Life Board (SWLB) and National Board for Wild Life (NBWL) keeping in
view the importance of national security. Their response is awaited in the matter.
3.5.3 Land acquisition:- Execution of works covering about 95 km of border length under
Phase-II project has been adversely affected due to pending land acquisition (LA). This includes
79.58 km. in West Bengal, 11.31 km. in Tripura and 4.11 km. in Mizoram. Although, land
acquisition issues are being regularly monitored/reviewed by the MHA, the problem has persisted
over the years and, given heightened public sensitivities, States have been making slow progress.
The executing agencies viz. CPWD, EPIL and NBCC have been advised to expedite the same in
coordination with the concerned State Governments and BSF.
3.5.4 Delay on account of public protests:- In Meghalaya, construction works under Phase-II
project, in a stretch of about 133 km., has remained suspended for long due to protest by the
Coordination Committee on International Border (CCIB) of Meghalaya. Following continuous
persuasion by MHA, matter in respect of 62.55 km has been sorted out in November, 2011 and
work resumed. With further persuasion with the State Government, stretches of 7 km more have
been sorted out subsequently. Issues including land acquisition for the balance stretches of
63.45 km. are still to be resolved before work commences. A.D.O. letter from JS(BM) has been
addressed to the Chief Secretary, Meghalaya, with the request to convene a meeting to sort out
the above-mentioned issues.
3.5.5 Issues of Fencing within 150 yards of the international borders:- Fencing is generally
constructed beyond 150 yards of the IBB. However, due to existence of population within 150
yards of the IBB and also topographical constraints, it has sometimes been necessary to undertake
fencing within 150 yards of the IBB. This activity has been objected to by Bangladesh. India has
been trying to persuade Bangladesh Government through meetings at different levels  viz.  Home
Secretary, Foreign Secretary, DG/ BSF that the proposed fencing is for the mutual benefit of both
the countries and will help in curbing illegal cross-border activities.
3.5.6 Earlier there were 46 such identified priority patches, and subsequently 185 priority patches
were identified by BSF. It is also stated that both the Border Guarding Forces of the countries
undertake joint survey of these patches. Accordingly, the total priority patches comes to 231. Till
now 129 have been jointly been surveyed by BSF and BGB for fencing within 150 yards from IB.
Patches which need not to be covered are 92 and 10 patches are still required to be jointly
surveyed by BSF and BGB.
Measures adopted by the Government to sort out the problems related to land acquisition, public
protest and 150 yards
3.5.7 The problems of land acquisition and public protest in Meghalaya and Tripura are being
settled by active participation of Land Revenue department of the concerned State Government,
executing agency and BSF. The role of Coordination Committee on International Border (CCIB) is
also important in this case.
3.5.8 MoEF clearance is being expedited by the State Government with the concerned State Wild
Life Board (SWLB) and National Board for Wild Life (NBWL) keeping in view the importance of
national security.

58
3.5.9 The balance border works like fencing, roads and floodlighting are under progress and
are likely to be completed in the given time-frame. The work is targeted to be completed by
March, 2014.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.5.10 The Committee is of the strong view that the concerns for national security cannot
wait too long and even compromise on account of forest/environment clearance. Therefore,
the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter with vigor and co-ordinate with
concerned State Governments and State Wild Life Board and National Board for Wild Life
for fencing, construction of roads along Indo-Bangladesh Borders. The Committee
recommends that MHA must undertake follow-up action with Land Revenue Department of
concerned State.
3.6 INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that the amount provided in BE 2012-13
to the tune of 
R 2432.75 was reduced to R 2378.12 at RE stage. The Committee in its
161st Report on DFG 2012-13 had made observation that even the amount of R 2432.75 was not
sufficient for procurement of modern and latest weapons and had recommended for enhancement
of the amount under this head at the RE stage, and despite that the same was reduced. The
Committee feels that this is not at all desirable as the scheme must have suffered due to reduced
allocation.
(Para 4.5.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.2 W ith regard to ITBP, an amount of 
R3482.05 crore was projected against which only
R3192.15 crore has been allocated by the Ministry of Finance as per the details given below:
(Rupees in crore)
Amount projected Fund allocated Shortfal l
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
Rev 1.00 2912.44 1.00 2629.93 0.00 -282.51
Cap 472.81 95.80 327.04 95.80 -145.77 0.00
TOTAL 473.81 3008.24 328.04 2725.73 -145.77 -282.51
3.6.3 It may be seen that there is shortfall of R428.28 crore ( R145.77 + R282.51) against the
projected requirement for ITBP. This will affect the works of newly raised formation as well as
the existing establishments for meeting their day-to-day requirement of augmentation. The additional
fund required will be requested based upon the expenditure trend, committed liabilities from the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission at Supplementary Stage/Revised Estimate stage. Further,
Procurement of Arms and Ammunition are provisionally being made from Ordinance Factory Board
(OFB) and some percentage of the cost is being paid in advance to OFB and balance after supply
of stores. The allocated funds were utilized for the procurement of Arms and Ammunition and no
major procurement has been delayed due to non-availability of funds.

59
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.6.4 The Committee expresses concern that due to shortfall in allocation against the
projected demand meant for ITBP in BE 2012-13, the works of newly raised formation as
well as day-to-day requirement of augmentation of existing establishment suffered. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission
must keep in mind the actual requirement of forces while deciding demands of Ministry of
Home Affairs.
3.7 CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee expresses its concern that the Ministry has projected an amount of 
R116.83
crore for CISF to Planning Commission for 2013-14 under the Plan schemes against which an
amount of R95.10 crore has allocated by Planning Commission. The Committee is surprised to find
that no fund has been allotted to CISF during 2013-14 for purchase of weaponry under the
modernisation head and 
R100.00 crore has been allotted for procurement of arms and ammunition
under general budget head. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Planning
Commission must consider favourably the projection for allocation made by the CISF as it would
help meeting its requirements. The Committee hopes that allocated amount of 
R100.00 crore for
procurement of arms and ammunition under general budget would be utilized as per targets and
requirements without time and cost overrun.
(Para 4.6.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 The inadequate allocation under Plan Schemes at Office Building and Residential Building is
badly affecting the development works of CISF. Due to this inadequate allocation for Arms and
Ammunitions and other ordnance stores for CISF, the anticipated expenditure works out to
R 75.00 crore during 2013-14, subject to supply of full consignment by Ordnance Factories.
However, the Ordnance Factory Board has already been requested to direct GMs of all ordnance
factories to forward the Performa invoice for making payment. The requirement of additional funds
under different Heads will be submitted to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission at
Supplementary stage/Revised Estimate stage.
3.7.3 The modernization Plan-I for CAPFs came to an end on 31.03.2011 and the new
Modernization Plan-II has been approved by CCS only in May, 2013. For the year 2012-13 there
was no advance existing for Modernization of CAPFs, thus allocation under General budget has
been made.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.7.4 The Committee takes note that the inadequate budgetary allocation in 2013-14 under
Plan Scheme at Office Building and Residential Building is adversely affecting development
work of CISF. Therefore, the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter on priority
basis with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for their active
consideration and positive decision. The Committee also recommends that Government must
come forward with Modernisation Plan-II for CAPF as it has been approved by CCS in May,
2013 and operationalise the same without much delay.

60
3.8 DELHI POLICE
Recommendation
3.8.1 Only R 0.50 crore was provided for induction of latest technology in Delhi Police in RE
2012-13 which has been increased to R 2.00 crore in BE 2013-14. The Committee is of the belief
that the nature of crime has turned complex due to development in science and technology. In view
of this, the Government should equip Delhi Police with latest gadgets so that criminals could be
nabbed easily. Besides, the Committee recommends that equipment to check red light/over-speeding
violators should be installed in all the important traffic locations in Delhi.
(Para 4.9.17 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.2 The original allocation of 
R0.50 crore was subsequently reduced at RE/BE stage to R0.22
crore because Delhi Police could not utilize this money. Out of R0.22 crore, Delhi Police could only
utilise R0.10 crores in FY 2012-13 and surrendered R0.12 crore. The Government has directed
Delhi Police to ensure that in this FY 2013-14, the allocation of R2 crore is fully utilized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.8.3 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that out of reduced amount
of R0.22 crore, an amount to the tune of R 0.12 crore was still left unspent by Delhi Police
for induction of latest technology in the year 2012-13. The Committee would like to know
the reasons for this. The Committee, however, recommends that the Government should
ensure that the enhanced allocation for financial year 2013-14 for induction of latest
technology in Delhi Police is spent. A sincere monitoring is required in this regard.
Recommendation
3.8.4 The Committee in its 167
th Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 has
observed that women police in over all police strength in the country is only about 6% which is
very inadequate. The Committee viewed that the strength of the women police force should be at
least be 33 per cent of total strength, and therefore recommended that Union Ministry of Home
Affairs may impress upon the State Governments to take suitable measures in this regard. The
Committee reiterates its recommendations made in the 167th Report and recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs should take suitable action to enhance the women strength in other
Central Police Forces also.
(Para 4.9.22 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.5 It has been a constant endeavour on part of the Ministry of Home Affairs to increase the
representations of women in Police Force. In pursuance of the stated objective, Ministry of Home
Affairs regularly interacts with the State Government through various meetings, conference,
seminars etc. to persuade them to increase the women strength in Police forces.
3.8.6 Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an advisory on 22.04.2013 to
State Governments/UTs, wherein it has been advised to ensure availability of women to 33%
of the police force. An earlier advisory in this regard has also been issued by the MHA
dated 04.09.2009.

61
3.8.7 In the recently held Conference of Chief Ministers on Internal Security on 5 th June, 2013
this issue was taken up with the States/UTs. The Chief Ministers and representatives of the States/
UTs assured that the issue of increasing representation of women in Police has been given priority
and steps are being taken to remove this discrepancy.
3.8.8 Ministry of Home Affairs also convened a day long conference of Chief Secretaries and
Director Generals of Police on crimes against Women and atrocities against SCs/STs in New Delhi
on 4th January, 2013. The meeting was presided by the Hon’ble Minister of Home Affairs, Minister
of Women and Child Development, Union Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment and
Hon’ble Ministers of State for Home Affairs. This issue was discussed in this forum also wherein
the States/UTs have assured about steps taken in this regard.
3.8.9 Committee of Secretaries chaired by Cabinet Secretary is also actively monitoring this issue
and has already held two meetings on 23.01.2013 and 21.05.2013.
3.8.10 The Committee on Empowerment of Women (2010-11) in their Sixth Report in
Recommendation No.84 have recommended urgent need to provide due representation to women
in Paramilitary Forces.
3.8.11 The matter has been considered in the Ministry and CAPFs are advised to bring the
percentage of women in the Forces to 5% within the next three years vide UO No.45017/14/2010-
Pers.I dated 31.05.2011.
3.8.12 In the ATRs on Ninth Report (15
th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Empowerment of
Women, it has been intimated that there is no provision for separate quota for women in CAPFs
and the concerns expressed by CAPFs over the induction and operational deployment of the
women in CAPFs. Further, due to difficult terrain of the deployment of CAPFs, harsh working
conditions, uncongenial environment, hazardous/risky area of deployment especially in North
East, LWE affected and Kashmir region etc. it is felt that there are difficulties faced by the
CAPFs in achieving even a target of 5%. Once the target of 5% is achieved by the CAPFs, the
question of raising it any further can be examined in the light of circumstances existing at the
appropriate time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.8.13 The Committee feels that women can participate in all walk of life at par with men
successfully and there are ample articles and studies to suggest this. The Committee is,
therefore, of the view that Government should bring forth necessary amendment in the
Recruitment Rules for paving way for employment of women in CAPFs.
3.9 HOUSING SCHEME
Recommendation
3.9.1 The Committee expresses concern to note that the allocation made under Residential
Building (Plan) is not sufficient to meet the requirement of CAPFs. The Ministry had projected an
amount of 
R 11547.90 crore to Planning Commission in Twelfth Plan. However, Planning
Commission allocated R 5346.43 crore against this projected demand. In view of the reduced
allocation, the Committee strongly recommends that the Government should reconsider its decision
and allocation must be increased as per requirement, otherwise, the Housing Projects would suffer
a lot.
(Para 4.11.9 ibid)

62
Action Taken
3.9.2 Against the projection of R11547.90 crore to the Planning Commission for CAPFs Housing
Project, only 47% i.e. R5346.43 crore has been allocated for this scheme. It is submitted that with
the projected amount of R11547.90 crore, 57787 No. of houses and 348 No. of barracks were
proposed for construction on EPC mode, however, with the reduced allocation the target has been
revised and 22038 No. of houses and 159 No. of barracks are to be constructed. The housing
satisfaction level in CAPF is dismally low i.e. 16% against the present norms of only 25%. This
is one of the main reasons of higher level of stress amongst CAPFs personnel as they are not in
a position to keep their families with them due to non-availability of residential quarters. In view
of the recommendation of the Committee, the additional requirement for this project will be
projected to the Ministry of Finance/ Planning Commission at Supplementary stage/re-appropriation
stage and also during mid-term appraisal of the Plan scheme.
3.9.3 Apart from that 
R5346.43 crore, an amount of R8193.77 crore has been provided under the
Office Building (Plan) and R 4177.55 crore under the Residential Building (Plan) in Twelfth Plan
for the purpose.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.9.4 The Committee is constrained to note that the housing satisfaction level in CAPF is
dismally low i.e. 16% against the present norms of 25 per cent which has led to higher level
of stress amongst CAPFs personnel as they are not in a position to keep their families with
them. The Committee feels the nature of stresses under which the para-military personnel
perform in difficult terrains. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Finance
Ministry/Planning Commission should positively consider the additional requirement for
housing scheme at Supplementary stage/re-appropriation stage and also during mid-term
appraisal of the Plan scheme.
3.10 FORENSIC SCIENCES LABORATORIES
Recommendation
3.10.1 The Committee notes that the Government of India has allocated 
R 322 crore in Twelfth
Five Year Plan for various schemes of DFSS to strengthen and upgrade the Forensic Science
facility in the country. The Committee understands that in the era of complicated nature of crimes
the Forensic Science Laboratories play an important role in crime investigation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry to impress upon DFSS for timely completion of upgradation of
existing CFSLs at Kolkata, Hyderabad and Chandigarh. The Committee also recommends that
Planning Commission should reconsider the proposal of opening of 6 RFSLs and 52 DMFUs in
Twelfth Five Year Plan.
(Para 4.15.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.2 A provision of 
R 313.00 crore is available in Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-13 to
2016-17) for various schemes of the Directorate of Forensic Sciences Services (DFSS). The DFSS
has prepared Twelfth plan proposal to strengthening and upgrade forensic science facility in the
States for placing before the SFC and the EFC. The proposal are presently at various stages of
processing in MHA for placing before the committees/seeking approval of the competent authority.
No Plan Funds have been allocated by Planning commission for opening of 06 RFSLs and
52 DMFUs during Twelfth Plan as a roll over scheme of the Eleventh Plan.

63
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.10.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must expedite the
processing of the Twelfth Plan Proposal of Directorate of Forensic Science Services (DFSS)
for strengthening and upgrading forensic Science facility in the States. Keeping in view the
important role being played by Forensic Science Laboratories to investigate the complex
nature of crime the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Planning
Commission may consider to allocate requisite funds for opening of 06 RFSLs and
52 DMFUs during Twelfth Plan.
3.11 REHABILITATION OF REPATRIATES FROM SRI LANKA
Recommendation
3.11.1 The Committee finds that Sri Lankan Government is not abiding by the Commitment made
in the agreement on the issue of repatriation of Sri Lanka Refugees. The Committee understands that
this is very sensitive issue where two countries with ethnic overlapping are involved and the
rehabilitation process would take a long time. The Committee observes that 99,469 refugees have been
repatriated back to Sri Lanka upto March, 1995, and thereafter, there is no organized repatriation.
In view of the large influx of Tamil refugees, the Committee is of the view that the approach of the
Government of India should be to see that the influx of refugees should be discouraged and they
should be rehabilitated in their own homeland of Sri Lanka. The Committee in this regard notes that
as a follow up action decided in the Inter-ministerial meeting, a joint inter-ministerial delegation was
to visit camps in Tamil Nadu in January-February, 2012, but its visit is yet to be materialized. The
Committee understands that other course of actions are to be followed up on the findings of the
delegation. This reflects non-seriousness of the Government in redressing the problem. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the course of action as decided in the inter-ministerial meeting held by
Ministry of External Affairs be pursued in the right earnest. The Government should try to prevail
upon the Sri Lankan Government to create conditions conducive for their return.
(Para 5.8.15 ibid)
Action Taken
3.11.2 The Ministry has already requested the State Government of Tamil Nadu as well as the
Ministry of External Affairs to finalize the programme and date for visit of joint inter-ministerial
delegation to the refugee camps in Tamil Nadu to assess the desire of Sri Lankan refugees in India
to return to Sri Lanka and ascertaining the kind of facilitation they expect for this. The Ministry
of External Affairs has also been requested to follow up the action as decided in the inter-ministerial
meeting.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.11.3 The Committee is not at all satisfied with the reply. In spite of its recommendation,
no visit of Joint-inter-Ministerial delegation to the camps, till date, has taken place. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation and strongly desires that all necessary
steps be taken to mitigate the sufferings of Tamil refugees.
3.12 JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Recommendation
3.12.1 The Committee takes note of the rehabilitation attempts made under PM’s package. The

64
Committee observes that as against 2184 appointment letters issued to candidates, only 1446
persons joined. Explaining the reason for low number of persons joining the service, it was
submitted that some of the selected persons do not want to join in valley and also due to some
of them getting appointment on two posts and they chose to join higher posts. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the migrants should be given the choice in terms of place of joining
the jobs i.e. at a place where they feel safe and secure. The Committee also recommends that
remaining posts also be filled up at the earliest and action be taken to get the cases in the courts
settled at the earliest. The Committee is however distressed to note that for other 3000 posts for
which it is the responsibility of the State Government nothing has been done. The Committee takes
serious note of the negative attitude of the State Government. The Union Government should
prevail upon the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir for filling up these posts as soon as
possible.
(Para 5.11.11 ibid)
Action Taken
3.12.2 As per recruitment rules these jobs are meant only for Kashmiri migrants and the place of
posting is Valley only. As such the selected candidates cannot be given the option of working at
any place. This issue was also discussed in one of the proceedings of the NHRC.
3.12.3 In this connection, an extract of the proceedings of NHRC held on 20.07.2010 is
reproduced below:
“Shri C.L. Gadoo, appearing on behalf of the Kashmiri Samiti Submitted that these selected
candidates shall not be asked to work only in the Valley but in the whole State of Jammu
& Kashmir.
It is a part of the Rehabilitation Scheme - as a measure to rehabilitate them in the Kashmir
V alley - and it is a condition of the Scheme. It is not proper on our part to change that
condition. Moreover, it is told in advance that these candidates will have to work in the
valley.
As regards filling in of 1554 posts out of 3000 posts created by the State Government for
which expenditure is to be met by the Central Government, though the Court has granted
stay, the process of selection by the recruiting agencies is on and the final list would be
announced only on vacation of stay by the Court.
The State Government has also been requested to follow up the matter in the Court for
vacation of stay.
As regards filling of another 3000 posts for which the expenditure is to be met by the State
Government, the State Government has already been requested to create and fill up these
posts in a time bound manner and the issue is being followed up with the State Government
on a regular basis.”
Further Recommendation
3.12.4 The Committee reiterates that remaining posts be filled up at the earliest. The State
Government may also be impressed upon the need to fill up 3000 posts on its part.
3.13 DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
3.13.1 The Committee in its 161
st report had observed that a specialized force like National

65
Disaster Response Force (NDRF) having 10 battalions only, for entire country, will not serve the
purpose and recommended for raising more battalions of this force. The Ministry in its Action
Taken Reply had mentioned that a draft Cabinet Note for raising of two Additional NDRF
battalions by conversion of two SSB battalions has been prepared by NDRF and the total battalions
of NDRF will be raised to 12. The Committee in its 165th Report on ATR of the Government then
observed that conversion of two SSB battalions into NDRF will not be right approach as it would
affect working of SSB and recommended to the Government to explore other sources to raise
additional battalions of NDRF . The Ministry in its written reply has mentioned that 10 Battalions
of National Disaster Response Force have been constituted for the purpose of specialist response
to disasters and are located at 10 strategic places across India. The Committee is constrained to
observe that the Government has done very little in compliance with the recommendations of the
Committee. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should raise more
Battalions of NDRF for responding to disasters.
(Para 5.12.10 ibid)
Action Taken
3.13.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has taken the decision of raising two new NDRF battalions
converted from SSB battalions in Sept. 2009. To provide prompt response to the South-Western
area of the country, it was decided by the Ministry to station the new NDRF battalion in Karnataka
to take care of parts of Kerala and Karnataka. For providing response to the North-Eastern part
of the country, one NDRF battalion has already been deployed at Guwahati. On requisition of the
State Government of Assam, NDRF battalion deployed at Guwahati provides response to the Upper
Assam during any disaster situation.
3.13.3 Though NDRF is a specialized and well-equipped Force, it is a fact that it is not meant to
the first responder in a disaster. The task of first response is always discharged by the official
machinery of the concerned State Government/UT administration. It is therefore our endeavour to
encourage State Government to develop their own State Disaster Response Force (SDRF). It is also
necessary for the State Governments to pool in their resources, from Home Guards, Civil Defence,
Fire Services, State Red Cross, Nav Yuvak Kendra, National Cadet Corps and National Social
Service V olunteers so that the Disaster Management apparatus is kept in a constant and high state
of preparedness.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.13.4 The Committee is not satisfied with the vague reply submitted by the Government
with regard to raising more battalions of NDRF for responding to disasters. The Committee
reiterates that there should not be conversion of SSB battalions or battalions of other para-
military forces as it would badly affect the working of SSB or other para-military forces.
The Committee is of the considered view that there should be other sources for creating
additional battalions of NDRF.
3.14 DAMAN AND DIU
Recommendation
3.14.1 The Committee, in its 161
st Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) had, recommended
that seven bridges across the rivers and one signature bridge (cable stayed) connecting Moti Daman
and Nani Daman which are at various stages of construction should be completed in time bound
manner. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note on 161
st Report apprised the Committee about status
of these proposed Bridges. The Committee in its 165 th Report expressed its deep displeasure over

66
non-completion of these bridges. Again, the Committee finds that construction of these bridges is
still at nascent stage. The Committee, in view of this, strongly recommends that all the procedural
obstacles should be cleared soon to complete construction of these bridges.
(Para 6.4.13 ibid)
Action Taken
3.14.2 The bridges are in various stages of implementation:-
(i) Construction of Bridge at village Pataliya, Nani Daman to Udwada village on Kolak
river-The total length of the bridge is 409.04 mt. The work order was issued on
2.5.2012 with tender cost of 
R14.08 crores. Date of starting of the project was
3.05.2012 and is likely to be completed by December, 2013.
(ii) Construction of Bridge at Jampore, Moti Daman to Kalai village on river Kalai –
Detailed project report was received on 27/8/2012 and technical sanction was
accorded on 5.09.2012. Land acquisition for approach towards Daman side is under
process.
(iii) Construction of Bridge across river Kolak at village kadaiya to village kolak at Nani
Daman – After detail presentation for various alternatives, alignment of bridge was
finalized on 16th February, 2012. The Administration received the DPR on 5.9.2012.
The total length of the bridge is 1350.58 mt. The technical sanction was accorded
on 6.09.2012. Land acquisition for approach towards Daman side is under process.
(iv) Construction of bridge across river Damanganga at Village Magarwada to Village
Kachigam at Nani Daman – The total length of bridge is 1186.47 mt. The technical
sanction was accorded on 24.08.2012. Since the project cost of 
R62.80 crores is
beyond sanction power of the Administrator, the proposal has been sent to the
Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways, for convening EFC.
(v) Construction of bridge across river Kalai at village Bamanpuja to village Pali at Moti
Daman – The total length of bridge is 378.23 mt. Technical sanction was accorded
on 10.08.2012. Land acquisition for approach towards Daman side is under process
and land acquisition towards Gujarat side has been submitted to Executive Engineer,
R&B Vlasad on 18.09.2012. The project started on 22.02.2013 and stipulated date of
completion is 21.11.2014.
(vi) Construction of bridge with approaches across Damanganga river connecting
Kachigam on Nani Daman saide and Zari on Moti Daman side in the UT of Daman
Jampore bridge – The total length of bridge is 1792 metres. Technical sanction was
accorded for an amount of 
R41.78 crores. Since the payment cost is beyond the
sanction power of Administrator, the proposal has been submitted to the Ministry of
Road, Transport and Highways.
(vii) Consultancy services for detailed report for construction of parallel bridge to the
existing Diu Ghogla bridge – length of main portion is 490 metres . The work order
has been issued on 3.4.2011 who has submitted interim report on 6.12.2012. The
design received from the Consultant has been submitted to IIT Mumbai for proof
checking. Draft DPR is likely to be received by June, 2013.
(viii) Consultancy services for detailed project report for signature bridge from Moti
Daman light house to Nani Daman, Jetty (Cable stayed/Extra dosed bridge) - Lengh
of the bridge is 938 metres. Concerns were expressed by the fishermen community
of Nani Daman and many elected representatives about the likely adverse impact on

67
their livelihood and some existing structures on Moti Daman side. Taking into account
their concerns, the alignment and design of the bridge has been modified and it was
decided to go ahead with the project in a meeting with representatives on 21.1.2013.
All the Plan schemes including the projects of construction of bridges are monitored
by the MHA at senior levels from time to time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.14.3 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that despite its repeated
recommendations for timely completion of seven bridges across the rivers and one signature
bridge connecting Moti Daman and Nani Daman nothing substantial have been achieved. The
Committee is anguished to find that the construction of bridges at Jampore, Kadaiya,
Bamanpuja are yet to see the light of the day because land for the purpose could not be
acquired. While projects pertaining to construction of bridges at Magarwada and Kachigam
have been submitted to Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the matter with the
concerned authority and the earliest so that all the projects are completed without much
procrastination.
Recommendation
3.14.4 The Committee takes note of the fact that major issue concerning UTs of Daman & Diu
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli is the lack of National Highway connectivity. The Ministry of Home
Affairs should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Transport in this regard.
(Para 6.4.16 ibid)
Action Taken
3.14.5 The Administrator, Dadra & Nagar Haveli have taken initiative to consider the proposal to
examine the feasibility for extension of national highway along with NH-8 (now 48) so that the
heavy vehicular traffic can smoothly fly on these road stretches to the Union Territories of Daman
& Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORTH) has
conveyed in principle approval by notification No.NH-14012/4/2012-P&M dated 17.4.2013 vide
which it has been conveyed that the proposed highway will start from NH-48 near Vapi and will
meet again NH-48 near Talasare (in Maharashtra) through Dadra-Pioaria (Piparia) – Silvassa –
Ultanfalia – Bhurkudfalia – Khadoli – Surangi – Velugam thereby covering the UT of Dadra & Nagar
Haveli.
3.14.6 However, the administration has intimated that MORTH has not agreed to give National
Highway connectivity for Daman as well as Diu vide letter No.NH-14012/5/2013-P&M dated
18.04.2013 as the Annual Plan for the same has already been approved/finalized by the Planning
Commission.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.14.7 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that the MORTH should
be persuaded to include the project on National Highway Connectivity in the next year.
3.15 ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
Recommendation
3.15.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry has taken up necessary action to organise an Inter-

68
Ministerial meeting to review the pending issues relating to the A&N Islands and hopes that it
would help expedite solving problems concerning the islands. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the outcome of the exercise undertaken in this regard.
(Para 6.5.11 ibid)
Action Taken
3.15.2 The Union Home Secretary took Inter-Ministerial meeting on 02.05.2013 to discuss various
issues pending with various Ministries/Departments of GoI to resolve the issues of UTs.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
3.15.3 The Committee takes a very serious exception to the very casual reply of the
Ministry. The Committee had sought outcome of the meeting, but the Ministry, to the
reasons best known to it, choose to skirt the main thrust of the Committee’s
recommendation.
Recommendation
3.15.4 The Committee, in view of the pending issues concerning the UTs, particularly the UT of
A&N Islands, directs the Home Ministry to impress upon the UTs administrations to hold review
meeting with the concerned Members of Parliament representing the UTs and ask for report on the
action taken and furnish the same to the Committee.
(Para 6.5.15 ibid)
Action Taken
3.15.5 The first review meeting was held on 27.04.2013 under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary with Hon’ble Member of Parliament where all the Senior Officer of A&N Administration
were present. All the Secretaries of the Administration have been advised to resolve issues raised
by Hon’ble Member of Parliament which fall within their respective jurisdiction and inform him
accordingly at the earliest.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.15.6 The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken as it seems that only Union
Territory administration of Andaman & Nicobar held review meeting with the concerned
public representative. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry of Home
Affairs to suggest to other Union Territory administrations also to hold review meeting with
the concerned Members of Parliament.

69
CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 NATIONAL COUNTER TERRORISM CENTRE (NCTC)
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee, while examining Demands for Grants 2012-13 had taken note of the
objections raised by the Members and also objections reportedly raised by several State
Governments on the issue of setting up of NCTC. The Committee suggested to the Government to
keep the decision in abeyance until discussions were held with all the State Governments and all
political parties and a consensus was arrived at. The Committee takes note of the fact that meeting
was held on 5
th May, 2012 with State Governments and UTs and the matter is still under
examination. The Committee, in the circumstances, would like to impress upon the Government that
the matter may be sorted out to the satisfaction of all the State Governments and UTs and decision
may be taken with the consensus of all the concerned.
(Para 3.11.2 of the Report)
Action Taken
4.1.2 C abinet approved the setting up of NCTC on 12.01.2012. Order regarding setting up of
NCTC was issued on 03.02.2012. As there were certain reservations/objections raised by some
States, the order regarding setting up of NCTC has been kept in abeyance. Subsequently, based
on their request for consultation with all the States/Union Territories, a meeting was held by the
Union Government with the Chief Minister/Administrators/Lt. Governors of all the States/Union
Territories on 5
th May, 2012. The matter is under examination.
4.2 BORDER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee notes that the Government is planning to bring the Border Infrastructure
Development Bill for long term solution to border infrastructure works. The Committee hopes that
enactment of the Bill would fast-track the activities undertaken for better Border Management and
desires that the Bill be brought at the earliest.
(Para 3.14.21 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The Draft Border Infrastructure (Development) Bill, 2013 was examined by the Ministry of
Law and Justice and forwarded to MHA on 20/03/2013. The same is under process in MHA.
4.3 CYBER CRIMES AND SECURITY
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee also recommends that the security agencies of the country should be vigilant
69

70
all the time in terms of checking suspicious profiles on social networking sites where rumour
mongers could create havoc in the mind of any particular group, community etc.
(Para 3.15.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The issue of monitoring the web and social media services for malicious content having
implications for law and order/Security is under consideration.
4.4 CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee is of the view that financial constraints should not come in the way of
raising of additional battalions. The Committee expresses its deep concern over drastic cut in
budget allocation for various Forces and Schemes under the Ministry of Home Affairs. The concern
expressed by the representatives of Ministry that this reduction would have an adverse impact on
various components of Police Forces expenditure such as vehicles, weapons, rations, clothing,
tentage, POL, etc. which are basic necessities of the personnel of Armed Forces, needs to be
addressed at RE stage.
(Para 4.1.8 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 The concerns of the Committee over drastic cut over CAPFs budget allocation will be
brought to the notice of the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission so that the urgent
requirement of funds for meeting the expenditure on vehicles, weapons, ration, Clothing and
tentage, Petrol oil Lubricants etc. are not affected.
4.5 ASSAM RIFLES
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee is constrained to express its anguish to observe that against total projected
demand of 
R 743.32 crore for Assam Rifles during 2013-14 the agreed amount allocated to Assam
Rifles is R 623.75 crore under Plan Scheme. As per the submission of the Ministry the allocated
amount is not sufficient to meet the requirement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government must consider enhancing the amount at RE stage as per the projection of Assam rifles.
Keeping in view the fact that the Assam Rifles is mandated for Border Guarding and conduct of
Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorism Operations in the North Eastern States and atleast 41
battalions are required to guard the Indo-Myanmar border, the Committee recommends that the 41
battalions as required for AR be sanctioned without any delay.
(Para 4.7.6 ibid)
Action Taken
4.5.2 Presently 15 out of 46 Assam Riffles (AR) Battalions are exclusively deployed in Border
Guarding (BG) role. Proposal for raising of 26 Additional AR Battalions (since 15 out of 41
Battalions required are already in BG role) is under consideration in MHA.
4.5.3 Further, the BE allocation of Assam Rifles stands at 
R 623.75 crore against the project
demand of R 878.48 crore. The requirement of additional funds under different Heads will be
submitted to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission at Supplementary stage/Revised Estimate
stage.

71
4.6 SHORTAGE OF IPS OFFICERS
Recommendation
4.6.1 The Committee is constrained to expresses its displeasure to find that there is a shortage of
1093 IPS officers in the country which shows lack of action on the part of the Government. The
role of IPS officers in the administration of the country is well known and need not be emphasized.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should explore the possibility
to overcome this shortage by filling up the vacancies on promotion from State Police Service
Officers and also on special recruitment drive from Central Police Forces.
(Para 4.12.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.6.2 In this regard, as on 01.01.2013 there are 1453 posts under promotion quota of IPS
offices, out of which 1063 officers are in position. Hence, there are 390 vacant posts under
promotion quota. In order to fill these vacancies, the Ministry of Home Affairs has already
determined 274 vacancies in 23 segments/cadres. The concerned State Governments as well as the
UPSC have already been intimated about these vacancies and the MHA has requested the concerned
State Governments and the UPSC to initiate the process of convening the Selection Committee
Meetings to fill these vacant posts. In some of the States seniority list as under litigation and the
process of induction could not be processed further.
4.6.3 As far as, the special recruitment drive from Central Police Forces is concerned, MHA in
consultation with UPSC has already conducted the first Limited Competitive Examination-2012.
However, the LCE Rules were quashed by the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal Guwahati
Bench in O.A. No. 112/2012 filed by Shri S. Deka. The same was challenged by MHA before
Hon’ble High Court of Guwahati. Hon’ble High Court has set aside the orders of the CAT. There
are some cases pending in various CATs related to LCE. A decision on declaring the final result
will be taken in consultation with UPSC.
4.7 TELEPHONE TAPPING
Recommendation
4.7.1 The Committee takes note of the incidents of unauthorized telephone tapping and getting
Call Data Records (CDR) of some prominent individuals including politicians in recent past for
ulterior motive. There were also alleged reports of the country’ s elite intelligence agencies involved.
In view of this, the Committee recommends that such incidents should not occur in future and
directs the Ministry of Home Affairs to issue a strict guideline in this regard. The Committee is
of the view that there should be a mandatory provision that before getting CDR or telephone
tapping of a sitting Member of Parliament, permission of the Presiding Officer of the concerned
House should be solicited. Similarly, in the case of other political leaders, the Chief of the Party
may be informed before taking any such action.
(Para 5.9.6 ibid)
Action Taken
4.7.2 In order to have an effective legal regime for seeing Call Data Records (CDR), a new Rule
419 B under the Indian Telegraph Rules, 1951 for calling message related information is under
consideration of DoT/MHA. Issue of seeking CDR or telephone tapping of a sitting Member of
Parliament or other political leaders with permission of the Presiding Officer of the concerned
House or Chief of the Party, as the case may be, is under consideration.

72
 4.8 JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Recommendation
4.8.1 The Committee is aware of the pitiable condition of the J&K migrants and note that much
progress has not been made in the implementation of Prime Minister Package except in respect of
employment and transit accommodation. The Committee notes that the migrants failed to reach any
consensus amongst themselves about the return to the Valley. The Committee understands that the
Government has not been able to create conducive environment in the valley so that the migrants
feel safe to return to the valley. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Government should create
a safe environment involving local communities in the valley so that these migrants could return.
The Committee notes that the Prime Minister Package framed in 2008 needs some changes and the
revision is already underway. The Committee recommends that the revised package may be finalized
at the earliest.
(Para 5.11.13 ibid)
Action Taken
4.8.2 A view for return to the Valley is to be taken by the migrants, in terms of the provision
of the PM’s package 2008. As per the information available with the Government, the security
situation in the Valley has improved considerably. Though the State Government has proposed a
revised package for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants, the financial implication for the
same is awaited from the State Government The revised package will be processed on receipt of
financial implications from the State Government.
4.9 LAKSHADWEEP (51st IR Battalion)
Recommendation
4.9.1 The Committee is pleased to note that a decision regarding detachment allowance on the
line of armed forces has been taken up. The Committee hopes that the matter would be seriously
pursued by the MHA with the Finance Ministry, so that final decision of the Government is taken
up on the issue.
(Para 6.2.6 ibid)
Action Taken
4.9.2 Details of pattern/parity/ration of the detachment allowance given in other CPMFs personnel
are being collected by UT of Lakshadweep. On receipt of the information, they will take up the
matter with competent authority.

73
73
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMETTEE — AT A GLANCE
TRENDS IN DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs which is in sync with
the observation of the Committee. At this juncture, reduction of budgetary allocation to the
Ministry of Home Affairs for projects pertaining to CAPFs would not be better in the
interest of national security. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the matter with the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance for grant of enhanced budgetary allocation. (Para 1.3.5)
TERRORISM IN J&K
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of all efforts undertaken.
(Para 1. 5.11)
COASTAL SECURITY
The Committee recommends that there should not be any delay in construction of
Coastal Police Stations etc. and procurement of vehicles. The Ministry may take it up with
the state.
(Para 1.6.4)
BORDER MANAGEMENT
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress of
construction of roads along the borders which India is sharing with its neighbours.
(Para 1.7.6)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that work will be completed as targeted.
(Para 1.7.14)
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
The Committee notes the reply and desires that outstanding amount along with penal
interest from Delhi Airport Metro Express Pvt. Ltd. May be recovered at the earliest.
(Para 1.13.5)
DELHI POLICE
The Committee notes the reply and strongly recommends that the Delhi Police
should fill up 6051 vacant posts at the earliest.
(Para 1.16.4)
HOUSING SCHEME
The Committee desires that remaining 2418 houses must be constructed without
further delay. (Para 1.18.3)

74
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee notes the reply and desires that remaining States may be persuaded
to raise SDRF. (Para 1.24.5)
LAKSHADWEEP (Agatti Airport)
The Committee notes the reply and desires that pro-active approach by Union
Territories administration should be continued. (Para 1.27.5)
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that almost half of the
amount allocated during Eleventh Five Year Plan under the Special Infrastructure Scheme
to the State Governments is lying unspent. The Committee understands that
implementation of development projects/schemes in LWE areas is a challenge for the
Government but partial completion of projects would frustrate the very purpose of the
allocations. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should impress upon the State Governments to put all out efforts for optimal
utilization of earmarked allocations in furtherance of execution of developmental projects/
schemes and submit the utilization certificate in time. (Para 3.1.8)
NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the non framing of Recruitment Rules
for some of the posts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Recruitment Rules must
be finalised without further delay. The Committee further recommends that the
Government should expedite filling up of 265 sanctioned posts for operationalisation of four
new branches of NIA at Guwahati, Lucknow, Mumbai and Kochi. Besides, inducting State
Government officials into IT and Legal posts on deputations should also be expedited. The
Committee is also of the view that various CAPFs should be advised to send nominations
of suitable officials to fill up the required posts. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation that Ministry of Finance should take necessary steps to provide requisite
fund for the three proposed regional offices of the NIA at the RE stage. (Para 3.2.6)
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE GRID (NATGRID)
The Committee is not convinced with the explanation and expresses its anguish over
inordinate delay in creation of infrastructure of NATGRID. Despite “in Principle” approval
by the Planning Commission in July, 2012 for the project and approval of Cabinet
Committee on Security of the ‘Detailed Project Report’ (DPR), the ground work is yet to
take off. The Committee, therefore, once again recommends that all official procedural
bottlenecks should be cleared at the earliest so that the creation of infrastructure for
NATGRID should be expedited. (Para 3.3.5)
CRIME AND CRIMINAL TRACKING NETWORK AND SYSTEMS (CCTNS)
The Committee notes the reply and observes that there has been delay on several
counts. The Committee desires that there should not be any further delay in the matter.
All efforts should be taken for completion as per schedule. (Para 3.4.7)
BORDER MANAGEMENT
The Committee is of the strong view that the concerns for national security cannot

75
wait too long and even compromise on account of forest/environment clearance. Therefore,
the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter with vigor and co-ordinate with
concerned State Governments and State Wild Life Board and National Board for Wild Life
for fencing, construction of roads along Indo-Bangladesh Borders. The Committee
recommends that MHA must undertake follow-up action with Land Revenue Department of
concerned State. (Para 3.5.10)
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
The Committee expresses concern that due to shortfall in allocation against the
projected demand meant for ITBP in BE 2012-13, the works of newly raised formation as
well as day-to-day requirement of augmentation of existing establishment suffered. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission
must keep in mind the actual requirement of forces while deciding demands of Ministry of
Home Affairs. (Para 3.6.4)
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
The Committee takes note that the inadequate budgetary allocation in 2013-14 under
Plan Scheme at Office Building and Residential Building is adversely affecting development
work of CISF. Therefore, the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter on priority
basis with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for their active
consideration and positive decision. The Committee also recommends that Government must
come forward with Modernisation Plan-II for CAPF as it has been approved by CCS in May,
2013 and operationalise the same without much delay. (Para 3.7.4)
DELHI POLICE
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that out of reduced amount
of 
R 0.22 crores, an amount to the tune of R 0.12 crore was still left unspent by Delhi Police
for induction of latest technology in the year 2012-13. The Committee would like to know
the reasons for this. The Committee, however, recommends that the Government should
ensure that the enhanced allocation for financial year 2013-14 for induction of latest
technology in Delhi Police is spent. A sincere monitoring is required in this regard.
(Para 3.8.3)
The Committee feels that women can participate in all walk of life at par with men
successfully and there are ample articles and studies to suggest this. The Committee is,
therefore, of the view that Government should bring forth necessary amendment in the
Recruitment Rules for paving way for employment of women in CAPFs. (Para 3.8.13)
HOUSING SCHEME
The Committee is constrained to note that the housing satisfaction level in CAPF is
dismally low i.e. 16% against the present norms of 25 per cent which has led to higher level
of stress amongst CAPFs personnel as they are not in a position to keep their families with
them. The Committee feels the nature of stresses under which the para-military personnel
perform in difficult terrains. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Finance
Ministry/Planning Commission should positively consider the additional requirement for
housing scheme at Supplementary stage/re-appropriation stage and also during mid-term
appraisal of the Plan scheme. (Para 3.9.4)

76
FORENSIC SCIENCES LABORATORIES
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must expedite the
processing of the Twelfth Plan Proposal of Directorate of Forensic Science Services (DFSS)
for strengthening and upgrading forensic Science Facility in the States. Keeping in view the
important role being played by Forensic Science Laboratories to investigate the complex
nature of crime the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Planning
Commission may consider to allocate requisite funds for opening of 06 RFSLs and
52 DMFUs during Twelfth Plan. (Para 3.10.3)
REHABILITATION OF REPATRIATES FROM SRI LANKA
The Committee is not at all satisfied with the reply. In spite of its recommendation,
no visit of Joint-inter-Ministerial delegation to the camps, till date, has taken place. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation and strongly desires that all necessary
steps be taken to mitigate the sufferings of Tamil refugees. (Para 3.11.3)
JAMMU AND KASHMIR
The Committee reiterates that remaining posts be filled up at the earliest. The State
Government may also be impressed upon the need to fill up 3000 posts on its part.
(Para 3.12.4)
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee is not satisfied with the vague reply submitted by the Government
with regard to raising more Battalions of NDRF for responding to disasters. The Committee
reiterates that there should not be conversion of SSB battalions or battalions of other para-
military forces as it would badly affect the working of SSB or other para-military forces.
The Committee is of the considered view that there should be other sources for creating
additional battalions of NDRF. (Para 3.13.4)
DAMAN AND DIU
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that despite its repeated
recommendations for timely completion of seven bridges across the rivers and one signature
bridge connecting Moti Daman and Nani Daman nothing substantial have been achieved. The
Committee is anguished to find that the construction of bridges at Jampore, Kadaiya,
Bamanpuja are yet to see the light of the day because land for the purpose could not be
acquired. While projects pertaining to construction of bridges at Magarwada and Kachigam
have been submitted to Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the matter with the
concerned authority and the earliest so that all the projects are completed without much
procrastination. (Para 3.14.3)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that the MORTH should
be persuaded to include the project on National Highway Connectivity in the next year.
(Para 3.14.7)
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
The Committee takes a very serious exception to the very casual reply of the
Ministry. The Committee had sought outcome of the meeting, but the Ministry, to the

77
reasons best known to it, choose to skirt the main thrust of the Committee’s
recommendation. (Para 3.15.3)
The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken as it seems that only Union
Territory administration of Andaman & Nicobar held review meeting with the concerned
public representative. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry of Home
Affairs to suggest to other Union Territory administrations also to hold review meeting with
the concerned Members of Parliament. (Para 3.15.6)

MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th December, 2013 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
3. Shrimati Kanimozhi
4. Shri Santiuse Kujur
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
9. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He,
thereafter, apprised Members of the following agenda of the meeting:–
(i) Consideration and adoption of 174
th Report on Action Taken by the Government the
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(ii) Consideration and adoption of 175
th Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its One Hundred and Seventieth Report
on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern
Region.
81

82
3.0 The Committee, then, took up draft 174 th Action Taken Report for consideration. After a
brief discussion, the Report was adopted.
3.1 The Committee, then took up the draft 175 th Action Taken Report for consideraton. After
a brief discussion, the Report was adopted.
4.0 The Committee then decided to present/lay the 174 th and 175 th Action Taken Reports  to the
Parliament on 13 th December, 2013. For the purpose, the Committee authorized its Chairman, and
in his absence, Dr. V . Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha and in their absence Shri Santiuse Kujur, MP,
Rajya Sabha to present the Reports to Rajya Sabha. The Committee also nominated Shri Pawan
Kumar Bansal, MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel, MP, Lok Sabha
to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
5.0 * * *
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 3.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

83

84

85
85
ANNEXURE
LIST OF REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
Report Title of the Report
No.
12
1
st On Demand Nos. 42 and 44 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs
for the year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
12th The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment Bill, 1995

86
12
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill, 1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
29th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
30
th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
31
st The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32
nd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill,
1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company
Affairs

87
12
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill, 1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company
Affairs
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi
High Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
68
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixtieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
69
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs

88
12
70th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Personnel, .Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
& Kashmir
92
nd The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme
97th The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002

89
12
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Home Affairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill,
2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003
109th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
111th Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third
Report of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of ‘Administration’ of Union Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs

90
12
125th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
126
th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in One
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Home Affairs
133rd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of Indo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
138th The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in One
Hundred Thirty-second Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-third Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration
143rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Home Affairs
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010

91
12
149th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the
country
153
rd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects along Indo-
Pak Borders
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-second Report on Implementations of Central Scheme of Modernisation of
Prison Administration
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Home Affairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o  DoNER
163rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth Amendment) Bill, 2012
165th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Sixty-first Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Home Affairs
166
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its One
Hundred and Sixty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
167
th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013

92
12
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Sixty-third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy, Hyderabad
173
rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
175
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176
th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
l77th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union Territories (Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli
and Chandigarh)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.