C. S. (H.A.) - 13 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (SECOND AME~MENT) BILL, 
1994 
(PRESENTED ON 13TH DECEMBER, 1994) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1994/AGRAHAYANA, 1916 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
Pages 
1. C omposition of the Committee ................................................................. (i) - (ii) 
2. Repon o f the Committee ............................................... ................................ 1 - 6 
3. Note Given By Shri Madan Bhatia, MP ................................................... 7 - 16 
4. Minutes of Dissent ....................................................................................... 17 - 25 
ANNEXURES 
I. Press Release inviting views on the Bill 
from interested individuals/institutions/o rganisations .............................. 26 
II. List o f individuals from whom memoranda on the 
Bill were received_.............................................................................. 27 - 28 
III. List of witnesses who appeared before the Committee ............. ... 29 - 30 
5. Relevant minutes o f the meetings of the Committee ............................ 31 - 60 

(\ - 1 •.. . , 
. ( 
' l' 
( 
' 
··- ' ......... 
' · 
. 
~~·,. 
-· ~ .· 
~! . ' 
' l 
. \ 
.. . .! 
. .. , 
•: 
/""' ''• . 
·' 
'J • 
... .. . 
! .. 
.;, 
I ' 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
* 1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri A~antray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R. K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. ~ Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
$13. Shri Raj Babbar 
$$14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
$$$15. Dr. lagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
* 
$ 
$$ 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
19. Prof. M. Kamson 
Appointed on July 5, 1994 in the vacancy caused by the retirement of Shri M. 
M. Jacob from the membership of Rajya Sabha from the 1st July, 1994. 
Nominated on May 2, 1994. 
Nominated on June 15, 1994 
$$$ Nominated on July 25, 1994 
(i) 

20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shanraram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M. 0. H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
*45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C. B. Rai, Committee Officer 
* Nominated on August 22, 1994 
(ii) 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, present this Twelfth report of 
the Committee relating to the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) 
Bill*, 1994. The Bill seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha referred** the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 13th June, 
1994, and pending in that House, to the Committee for examination and report. 
3. The Committee held 13 sittings in all. In its sitting held on the 18th July, 
~ 
1994, the Committee held preliminary discussions on the Bill and also discussed the 
procedure to be followed by it in regard thereto. The Committee decided that a press 
release inviting views, suggestions and comments from interested individuals, 
institutions, etc. be issued. A copy of the press release is placed at Annexure - I. 
4. In response to the press release, 25 memoranda containing views, suggestions 
etc. on the various provisions of the Bill were received by the Committee. A list of 
individuals etc. from whom memoranda were received is placed at Annexure - II. 
5. The Committee heard the views of various eminent persons. It also heard the 
Law Secretary in the matter. A list of such persons is placed at Annexure - III. 
6. In its sittings held on the 17th, 18th, 19th, 26th and 27th October, 1994, the 
Committee had clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held on the 
16th November, 1994. 
8. The Committee considered the various papers and memoranda placed before it 
and also the views expressed by the witnesses on the Bill. It also considered the 
viewpoints put forth by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
* Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section 2 dated the 13th 
1~ ~. 1994. 
** Lok Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, dated the 12th July, 1994. 
1 

9. The Committee makes the following recommendations/observations on the Bill:-
CLAUSES 2 & 3 
The Committee discussed these clauses at length. In this context, it also 
considered the situation that could arise in view of the Election Commission's letter 
dated the 28th August, 1993 addressed to the Chief Electoral Officers and the Chief 
Secretaries of all States/Union Territories (except Jammu and Kashmir) that no 
elections would be held in 543 parliamentary constituencies throughout the country 
after 1st January, 1995 unless all eligible electors were supplied with Identity Cards. 
In this connection, the Committee noted that on the one hand every citizen of this 
country had a right to vote as guaranteed by the Constitution, on the other it was 
the Executive which had to decide when the elections were to be held and the will 
of the Executive was reflected in the notifications issued by the President for Lok 
Sabha and the Governors for State Legislative Assemblies. In these circumstances, it 
could lead to a national crisis if the elections were withheld just on the ground of 
identity cards. It was the general feeling of the members that though identity cards 
were necessary and should be provided to all electors as expeditiously as possible, if 
in a given time frame that process was not completed due to administrative and 
practical difficulties, it would not at all be desirable that elections should be 
withheld. 
Be that as it may, the consensus is in favour of retention of the existing 
provisions. 
CLAUSES 
The Committee agrees with the provtston in the clause. It, however, feels that 
the National Song 'Vande Mataram' enjoys the same status as that of the National 
Anthem 'Jana Gana Mana'. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government 
should consider amending the Prevention of the Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 
to include the National Song also in the Act. 
CLAUSES 7 & 8 
These clauses relate to registration and deregistration of political parties. Some 
members felt that these should be deleted as they would not serve any useful 
purpose and on the other hand, they are likely to create more complications in 
practice. The consensus is, however, to retain these clauses. 
The Committee is of the view that feelings of enmity, hatred or disharmony 
between different classes of citizens can be promoted not only on grounds of religion 
but also many. other factors such as race, caste, creed, sex, community, language or 
place of birth etc. The Committee, therefore, has the consensus that all these factors 
should also be included in clause 8(c). 
2 

The Committee also feels that 'religion' has a wide connotation and is capable 
of being interpreted differently in the absence of any specific definition or 
clarification. It, therefore, suggests that this word needs to be amplified by way of 
an Explanation under Clause 7 or under the definition clause of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951. 
CLAUSE 10 
The clause seeks to restrict the nomination of a person as a candidate for 
election in more than two constituencies of the same class. 
Whereas some ·members are in favour of retaining the proposed proVISion, the 
Committee finds no justification for permitting nomination of a person as a candidate 
for election to two constituencies of the same class. It, therefore, recommends that 
the nomination be restricted to only one constituency of the same class. 
CLAUSE 13 
The Committee is of the view that the time-limit of seven days to run from 
the date of death of the candidate, proposed in sub-clause (2) for nomination of 
another candidate by a recognised political party in case of death of the earlier 
candidate is not realistic. It, therefore, recommends that the time-limit of seven days 
in this regard be reckoned from the date when the Election Commission calls upon a 
recognised political party to nominate another candidate. 
The Committee finds that the expression 'recognised political party' is 
occuring in more than one clause of the Bill. It is, therefore, of the view that this 
expression can more appropriately be put in the definition clause of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
CLAUSE 15 
This clause seeks to give statutory backing to certain provlSlons of Part VII 
of the Model Code of Conduct issued by the Election Commission for the guidance 
of political parties and candidates. 
Some members pointed out that the provtston, namely 'use of Government 
transport including official aircraft, vehicles, machinery and personnel for 
electioneering work' mentioned in the Model Code has not been included as an 
illegal practice under the clause. The Law Secretary clarified that the said provision 
had been omitted because of security perceptions relating to various public 
functionaries, which included the Prime Minister, the Home Minister and the Chief 
Ministers. 
The Committee is conscious of the fact that the security consideration of 
various public functionaries is of paramount importance ·and should in no case be 
3 

compromised. It, therefore, leaves to the Government to examine in depth the 
inclusion or otherwi se of the provision as one of the illegal practices taking into 
consideration the views expressed by the members and the security perceptions 
relating to the public functionaries. 
With regard to the wording of the clause, the Committee suggests that the 
word 'indulge' and the words 'in the following practices' may be substituted by the 
'commit' and the words 'any of the following practices', respectively. 
CLAUSE 16 
The Committee feels that the expression 'election matter' defined in sub-clause 
(3) can more appropriately be given by way of an Explanation under sub-clause (2) 
and recommends accordingly. 
ClAUSE 22 
The Committee feels that the proposed punishment in sub-clause (3) is not 
adequate. It, therefore, suggests that the punishment under the sub-clause should be 
enhanced to imprisonment upto 3 months or fine upto Rs. 5000/- or both to make 
the provision deterrent and effective. 
Under the proposed provision, an elector shall. not be granted a paid holiday 
on the day of poll in case his absence is likely to cause danger and substantial loss 
in respect of the employment in which he is engaged. The Committee feels that the 
proposed provision may interfere with the 'right to vote' of such an elector as he is 
required to attend to his work due to unavoidable circumstances/grounds mentioned in 
the sub-clause. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable mechanism needs to be 
evolved in this regard so that such an elector is not deprived of his 'right to vote'. 
At the same time, he is enabled to perform this duty which is necessitated by 
unavoidable circumstances. 
Under the proposed provision of Section 135 (C), no spirituous, fermented or 
intoxicating liquors shall be sold, given or distributed within a polling area on a 
polling day . . 
The Committee is not inclined to agree with the views of the Ministry of 
Law, Justice and Company Affairs that the object of preventing and checking 
electoral malpractices and violence is largely achieved by imposing a ban on sale 
and distribution of liquor on the day of the poll. The Committee, therefore, suggests 
that the provision should be made applicable in a polling area during the period of 
48 hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the poll for an election in 
a polling area. 
4 

10. In view of the above recommendations/observations some necessary changes of 
consequential or drafting nature may also have to be carried out in the Bill. 
11. The Committee agrees with the provisions contained in the remaining clauses 
of the Bill. 
12. The Committee during its consideration of the Bill received a number of 
suggestions relating to the Electoral Processes which are not directly related to the 
provisions of the Bill. These suggestions are set out hereunder :-
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
-
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Issue of multi-purpose Photo Identity Cards with holograph code. 
Speedy disposal of election petitions by simplifying the existing procedure 
which is quite time consuming and cumbersome. 
Declaration of assets by a ca~idate at the time of filing his nomination 
papers. 
Creating a common platform for election meetings for all political parties. 
Equal opportunity to all contesting candidates to address the people 
through radio and television during elections. 
State funding of elections. 
Number of proposers for a candidate for an Assembly seat should be 
rasied to ten and they should belong to different villages. Similarly, for 
the Lok Sabha the number of ~roposers should be at least five from each 
Assembly segment belonging to different villages. 
(viii) Rotation of seats reserved for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates. 
(ix) A candidate should not be declared elected unless he secures at least 50 
percent of the total votes polled and in case no candidate secures this 
percentage of votes, a repoll be conducted amongst the candidates who 
have secured the largest and the next largest number of votes in the frrst 
round. 
(x) Provision of repoll in a constituency where the total votes polled is less 
than 35 percent of the total number of voters in that constituency. 
(xi) Introduction of Electronic voting machine. 
5 
! 

(xii) Section 77 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 relating to 
account of election expenses should be restored to the position as existed 
prior to its amendment in 1974. 
(xili) Election Commission should be authorize!] to revise the ceiling on 
election expenses before every general elections. 
(xiv) Imposing restriction on the number of vehicles that can be used by a 
candidate during the election campaign. 
(xv) Banning the use of cut-outs and banners. 
(xvi) A person who is unauthorisedly occupying any Government building 
should be disqualified from contesting elections. 
(xvii) Qualifying date for enrollment as a voter should be 1st January, 1st 
April, 1st July and 1st October. 
(xviii) Elections to Lok Sabha, Legislative Assemblies and Panchayats should be 
held simultaneously. 
13. The Committee is of the op1mon that the above suggestions, though not 
directly connected with the Bill, are no less important and deserve to be examined in 
detail in the direction of effecting electoral reforms in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Government may like to consider appointing a high-
power Committee to examin~ the above issues. , 
NEW DELHI; 
NOVEMBER 16, 1994 
6 
MADHAVSINH SOLANKI 
CHAIRMAN 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 

NOTE GIVEN BY SHRI MADAN BHATIA, MP 
As a member of the Committee on Horne Affairs, I am in complete 
agreement with the Report on the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 1994, as submitted by the Hon'ble Chairman of the Committee on its behalf. I 
am writing this note in order to deal with certain legal issues involved in clauses 3, 
7, & 8 of the bill and dispel any misconception about those clauses. I am also 
taking liberty to refer to some aspects which, in my opinion, are covered by the 
intendment of those clauses, but do not form part of the same and may therefore 
need consideration. 
CLAUSE 3 
Clause 3 of the Bill does not in any manner impinge upon the constitutional 
power of the Election Commission under Article 324 of the Constitution of India. 
Nor does it curtail any power of the Election Commission to direct the issue of 
identity cards under the Representation Ol the People Act, 1951 or the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950. It is the Central\oovernment which conferred power on the 
Election Commission to give such directions in the exercise of its rule making power 
under section 28 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
It is the Central Government which framed Rule 28 of the Registration of 
Electors Rules 1961 in consultation with the Election Commission, as provided by 
section 28 of ,the Representation of the People Act, 1950, authorizing the Election 
Commission to issue notification for any constituency directing the Registration 
Officer to arrange for the issue of identity cards to electors of that constituency for 
preventing personation. It is from Rule 28 framed by the Central Government that 
the Election Commission derives its existing authority to direct the issue of identity 
cards. 
In fact, prior to 1958 the only proviSIOn which was made in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 to prevent personation was for the marking 
with indelible ink of the thumb or any other finger of elector. There was no power 
given to the polling officer to call upon elector to produce any identity card. It was 
in 1958 that the Representation of the People Act, 1951 was amended and such 
. power was given to the polling officer. but only in the event of any rules having 
been framed for supply of identity cards to electors under the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 and if the cards had been so supplied. In other words, if no such 
rules were framed by the Central Government, there would be no identity cards and 
no power with the polling officer to call upon electors to produce such cards. power 
to frame rules under section 28 of the Representation of the People act, 1950 vests 
in the Central Government alone, to be exercised by it in consultation with the 
Election Commission. Under section 28, the Central Government had the discretion to 
7 

frame rules for issue of identity cards and empower itself to give directions in this 
regard or vest such authority in any other person, including the Election Commission. 
The Central Government, in its wisdom, framed rule 28 empowering the Election 
Commission to issue notification for any constituency for applicability of that rule to 
the same, whereupon it would become incumbent upon the Registration Officer to 
arrange for the issue of identity cards to electors of that constituency. 
But for rule 28 of the Registration of Electors Rules framed by the Central 
Government under section 28 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and in 
view of the specific provisions of section 61(2) of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1951, the Election Commission would have no power to direct the issue of 
identity cards. Article 324 of the Constitution of India does not confer power on the 
Election Commission to transgress or supplant any Act of Parliament or any rule 
framed thereunder. 
The scope and ambit of Article 324 of the Constitution has been considered 
by the Supreme Court in a number of cases culminating in A. C. Jose Vs. Sivan 
Pillai reported in AIR 1984 SC 921. In that case the notification issued by the 
Election Commission for casting votes by means of electronic machines in a 
constituency in Kerala and the · consequent election were challenged by a defeated 
candidate on the ground that the notification of the Election Commission providing 
for use of electronic machines for casting votes was contrary to the provisions of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the rules framed thereunder. This 
challenge was upheld by the Supreme Court. Both the notification and the voting in 
the polling stations where the voting machines had been used were set aside and a 
repoll in those stations was ordered. The law relating to the power of the Election 
Commission under Article 324 of the Constitution was summed up as follows : -
"a) Where there is no Parliamentary legislation or rule made under the said 
legislation, the Commission is free to pass any order in respect of the 
conduct of elections. 
b) Where there is an Act and express rules made thereunder, it is not open 
to the Commission to override the Act or the rules and pass orders in 
direct disobedience to the mandate contained in the Act or the rules. In 
other words, the powers of the Commission are meant to supplement 
rather than supplant the law (both statute and rules) in the matter of 
superintendencce, direction and control as provided by Article 324; 
c) Where the Act or the rules are silent, the C·:;mmission has no doubt 
plenary power under Article 324 to give any direction in respect of the 
conduct of election; and 
8 

d) Where a particular direction by the Commission is submitted to the 
Government for approval, as required by the rules, it is not open to the 
Commission to go ahead with the implementation of it at its sweet will 
even if the approval of the Government is not given." 
It may be mentioned that prior to the issue of the notification for use 
of the voting machines, the Commission had sought the sanction of the 
Government of India which was, however, refused. 
The Supreme Court further observed, "It is true that Article 324 does 
authorize the Commission to exercise power of superintendence, direction and 
control of prepar:ation of electoral rolls and the conduct of elections to 
Parliament and State Legislatures, but then the article has to be read 
harmoniously with the articles that follow and the powers that are given to 
the legislatures under Entry No. 72 in the Union List and Entry No. 37 of 
the State List of the VII Schedule to the Constitution." 
Entry No. 72 of the Union List confers power on the Parliament to make 
laws relating to "elections to Parliament, all the legislatures of the States and to the 
Offices of the President and Vice President; the Election Commission." 
In another part of the same judgement, the Supreme Court further observed, 
"The Commission in the garb of passing orders for regulating the conduct of 
elections cannot take upon itself a purely legislative activity which has been reserved 
under the scheme of the Constitution only to Parliament and the State legislatures." 
The argument raised on behalf of the Commission was that Article 324 was 
the code in itself and was couched in a very plain and simple language which 
admitted of no ambiguity, and if so construed, it gave full power and authority to 
the Commission to give any direction in connection with the conduct of elections. 
This argument was stoutly rejected by the Supreme Court with the following 
strong observations : -
"If we were to accept the contention of the respondent, it would convert the 
Commission into an absolute despot in the field of election so as to give 
directions regarding the mode and manner of elections bypassing the provisions 
of the Act and the rules purporting to exercise power under cover of Article 
324. If the Commission is armed with such unlimited and arbitrary powers 
and if it ever happens, that the person manning the Commission shares or is 
wedded to particular ideology, he could by giving odd directions cause a 
political havoc or bring about a constitutional crisis, setting at naught the 
9 

integrity and independence of the electoral process, so important and 
indispensable to the democratic system." 
The proposed clause 3 puts the matter of issue of identity cards beyond the 
pale of the rule making power of the Central Government whkh carries with it, by 
virtue of section 22 of the General Clauses Act, power to modify or rescind any 
rule. It seeks to vest the power and initiative to direct issue of identity cards in the 
Election Commission through an Act of Parliament, to be exercised by it with the 
previous approval of the Central Government. As at present, the Election Commission 
derives its authority in this regard from the Rule made by the Central Government. 
On the enactment of Clause 3, the Election Commission will derive its authority 
from the Act of Parliament, to be exercised by it with the previous approval of the 
Central Government. The Central Government cannot withhold its approval arbitrarily. 
As held by the Supreme Court in a recent case, "Conferment of the power together 
with the discretion which goes with it to enable exercise of the power is coupled 
with the duty to shun arbitrariness in its exercise and to promote the objects for 
which the power is conferred." 
It is, however, in the fitness of things that there should be prior approval of 
the Central Government. The Election Commission is concerned solely with one 
function, namely conduct of elections. The perspective of the Election Commission is, 
therefore, confined to that function. The representatives of the people in Parliament 
and their elected Government, on the other hand, are concerned with much broader 
perspective, involving multifarious needs, requirements and ground realities of the 
nation, and they have to adjust its priorities accordingly, particularly when the 
resource crunch is being felt in this country in every area of national life as 
demands for higher allocations are coming up from all sections, including the social 
sectors. 
The Central Government has no power to amend Rule 28 retrospectively so as 
to nullify any existing notification already issued thereunder. That apart, as the issue 
of identity cards to electors has become a matter of momentous national importance, 
it was equally appropriate that it should have been resolved by the representatives of 
the people in Parliament on the basis of broad political consensus. Clause 3 of the 
Bill seeks to achieve that objective. 
When clause 3 is enacted, the aforesaid Rule 28 shall stand repealed to the 
extend of inconsistency. If any statute is enacted which is inconsistent with the 
existing law, the existing law stands repealed by virtue of the doctrine of implied 
repeal. The Courts, however, tend to lean against implied repeal by resort to another 
doctrine, namely the doctrine of harmonious construction. Therefore, to avoid any 
judicial controversy, it needs to be considered whether specific provision should not 
10 

be made in clause 3 specifically declaring Rule 28 void and inoperative. 
Clause 3 has been necessitated by the declaration of the Election Commission 
that there shall be no elections in t 995 unless the identity cards have been issued. I 
may, however, state that there is nothing in clause 3 which bars the Election 
Commission from taking such stand if he still chooses to do so after clause 3 is 
enacted. At the same time, there is no specific provision in the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951 which empowers the Election Commission to say that there shall 
be no election unless identity cards are issued to electors. However, under section 14 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 in the case of general election for the 
House of the People, the President can issue notification only on such date as may 
be recommended by the Election Commission calling upon parliamentary 
constituencies to elect members. Similar is the circumscribed power of Governors in 
the case of state legislatures. The Election Commission, therefore, can prevent the 
President or the Governor from issuing notification for elections even when the 
durauon of the House of the People or of a state legislature is expiring under the 
Constitution of India, by refusing to recommend any date. 
It therefore needs to be considered whether sections 14 and 15 of the 
Representation of the People Act" ~hould be amended to provide guidelines for the 
exercise of the recommendmg power of the Election Commission and in the case of 
election to the House of the People or a state legislature necessitated by the 
impending expiry of its duration, outer time limit should be provided for the issue of 
the notification making it incumbent for the Election Commission to recommend date 
before the expiry of outer time limit. 
The Election Commission may be given discretion not to recommend date 
before the expiry of the outer time limit in specified circumstances, such as for 
instance, if he is satisfied that on ground of wa:r, internal disturbances, civil strife, 
natural calamity or such like circumstances or even non completion of revision of 
electoral rolls it is not possible to hold elections after the expiry of the outer time 
limit and before the expiry of the constitutional duration of the House of the People 
or the state legislature concerned. 
The following observations of the Supreme Court in Election Commission of 
India Vs. State of Haryana , will be relevant in this regard 
"The Governor of ~aryana is undoubtedly in the best position to assess the 
situation of law and order in areas within his jurisdiction and under his 
control. But the ultimate decision as to whether it is possible and expedient to 
hold the election at any give point of time must rest with the Election 
Commission. It is not suggested that the Election Commission can exercise its 
11 

discretion in an arbitrary or malafide manner. Arbitrariness and malafides 
destroy the validity and efficacy of all orders passed by public authorities." 
"On an important issue such as the holding of election which is of great and 
Immediate concern to the entire political community, there can no question of 
any public official standing on prestige, an apprehension which was faintly 
projected in the state's argument. A sense of realism, objectivity and non­
alignment must inform the decision of the Election Commission on that issue." 
CLAUSE 7 
Clause 7 seeks to substitute the existing proviso of sub-section 7 of section 
29 (A) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
Sub-clause (a) of the substituted proviso provides that no association or body 
shall be registered as a political party if it bears a "religious name." More than 
quarter of a century ago, the Supreme Court observed in Kultar Singh V. Mukhtiar 
Singh case decided in 1965, as follows : -
" It is well known that there are several partie s in the country which subscribe 
to different political and economic ideologies, but the membership of them is 
either confined to or predominantly held by members of particular community 
or religion. So long as law does not prohibit the formation of such parties 
and in fact recognises them for the purpose of election and parliamentary 
life, it would be necessary to remember that an appeal made by candidates of 
such parties for votes may, if successful, lead to their election and in an 
indirect way may conceivably be influenced by considerations of religion, race, 
caste, community or language. This infirmity perhaps cannot be avoided so 
long as parties are allowed to function and are recognised when their 
composition may be predominantly based on membership of particular 
community or religion." 
The aforesaid proposed amendment for the first time seeks to grapple with the 
above infirmity pointed our by the Supreme Court. For the membership of a party, 
which carries a religious name, is bound to be confined or predominantly confined to 
members of the religion whose name it bears. 
It, however, needs consideration what other legislative measures can be 
prescribed to eradicate altogether the evil infirmity pointed out by the Supreme 
Court. 
1, may, however, add, that the expression "religious name" is capable of 
restrictive interpretation. 'Religious' can also mean "of religion". In that case 
12 

.. religious name" can be interpreted to mean "name of a religion" and it can be 
argued whether, for example, the word "Muslim" or "Christian" or "Hindu" or 
"Ram" is the name of a religion. 
CLAUSE 8 
Clause (c) of the proposed section 29 B has not come too soon. It has been 
held in recent decisions of the various American Courts that political parties are an 
instrumentality of the State by which the will of the people may be made vocal. In 
American Jurisprudence (Volume 25 under Charter Election) it has been stated as 
follows :-
"Political parties are institution of very great importance under our form of 
Government. They are, in fact, the effective instrumentality by which the will 
of the people may be made vocal and the enactment of laws in accordance 
therewith made possible. So potent they have become in determining the 
measures and in administering the affairs of Government that they are now 
regarded as inseparable from, if not essential to, a republican form of 
government. 
Although earlier decisions held that political parties were completely regulated 
by their party byelaws and constitution, and were not to be regarded as 
constituting a governmental agency or instrumentality, throughout the years 
there has been a marked change in the attitude of the courts towards political 
parties and their primaries, and later decisions indicate that political parties 
have come to be regarded by the courts as governmental agencies through 
which the sovereign power is exercised by the people". 
The Supreme Court has veered round to this view in S.R. Bommai's case' 
(relating to dismissal of certain State Governments). In separate speeches Mr. Justice 
K. Ramaswamy and Mr. Justice Jeevan Reddy have held that a political party which 
is formed and exists to capture or share state power and seeks to accomplish success 
at an election for governance of parliamentary form of Government, is bound by the 
Constitution of India, articles 14, 15, 25 enshrined therein, the basic structure of the 
Constitution, the directive principles and the fundamental duties of citizens contained 
in chapter IV A of the Constitution. 
Mr. Justice K. Ramaswamy held, "For a political party or an organisation that 
seeks to influence the electorates to promote or accomplishing success at an election 
for governance of parliamentary form of Government, the principles are those 
embedded in the Directive Principles of the Constitution vis-a.,vis the Fundamental 
Rights and the Fundamental Duties in part IV A and should abide by the 
Constitution and promote tolerance, harmony and the spirit of commonness amongst 
13 

all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic. regional or sectional 
diversities and to preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture, to develop 
humanism, spirit of reformation and to abstain from violence. Therefore, the 
manifesto of a political party should be consistent with these fundamental and basic 
features of the Constitution, secularism, socio-economic anc! political justice, 
fraternity, unity and national integrity." 
"It is, therefore, a mandatory duty of every political party, body of individuals 
or association and its members to abide by the Constitution and the laws". 
"A political party, therefore, should not ignore the fundamental features of the 
Constitution and the laws . . . Equally it/they should not sabotage the same 
basic features of the Constitution either influencing the electoral process or 
working of the Constitution or the law .... The political party or the political 
executive securing the governance of the State by securing majority in the 
legislature through the battle of baltot throughout its tenure by its actions and 
programmes is required to abide by the Constitution and the laws in letter and 
spirit". 
"A political party that seeks to secure power through a religious policy or 
caste orientation policy disintegrates the people on grounds of religion and 
caste. It divides the people and disrupts the social structure on grounds of 
religion and caste which is obnoxious and anthema to the constitutional culture 
and basic features." 
Mr. Justice Jeevan Reddy in his speech held as follows : -
"Given the above posltlon, it is clear that if any party or organisation seeks 
to fight the elections on the basis of a plank which has the proximate effect 
of eroding the secular philosophy of the Constitution it would certainly be 
guilty of following an unconstitutional course of action. Political parties are 
fonned and exist to capture or share State power. That is their aim. They 
may be associations of individuals but one cannot ignore the functional 
relevance. An association of individuals may be devoted to propagation of 
religion : it would be a religious body. Another may be devoted to promotion 
of culture; it would be a cultural organisation. They are not aimed at 
acquiring State power, whereas a political party does. That is one of its main 
objectives. This is what we mean by saying 'functional relevance'. One cannot 
conceive of a democratic form of Government without the political parties. 
They are part of the political system and constitutional scheme. Nay, they are 
integral to the governance of a democratic society. If the Constitution requires 
the State to be secular in thought and action. the same requirement attaches to 
14 

political parties as well. The Constitution does not recognise, it does not 
permit, mixing religion and State power. Both must be kept apart. That is the 
constitutional injunction. None can say otherwise so long as this Constitution 
governs this country. Introducing religion into politics is to introduce an 
impermissible element into body politic and an imbalance in our constitutional 
system. If a political party espousing a particular religion comes to power, 
that religion tends to become, in practice, the official religion. All other 
religions come to acquire a secondary status, at any rate, a less favourable 
position. This would be plainly antithetical to Articles 14, to 16, 25 and the 
entire constitutional scheme adumbrated hereinabove. Under our Constitution, 
no party or organisation can simultaneously be a political and a religious 
party. It has to be either. Same would be the position, if a party or 
organisation acts and I or behaves by word of mouth, print or in any other 
manner to bring about the said effect, it would equally be guilty of an act of 
unconstitutionality. It would have no right to function as a political party." 
The speech of Mr. Justice K. Ramaswamy and earlier judgements of the 
Supreme Court clearly show that activities of a political party promoting hatred or 
disharmony based on religion or caste have been placed at par. Mr. Justice 
Ramaswamy in fact quoted with approval that following paragraph from an earlier 
judgement of the court in Z. B. Bukhari Vs. Brijmohan ... 
"Our Constitution-makers certainly intended to set up a Secular Democratic 
Republic the binding spirit of which is summed up by the objectives set forth 
in the Preamble to the Constitution. No democratic, political and social order, 
in which the condition of freedom and their progressive expansion for all 
make some regulation of all activities imperative, could endure without an 
agreement on the basic essentials which could unite and hold citizens together 
despite all the difference of religion, race, caste, community, culture, creed 
and language. Our political history made it particularly necessary that these 
differences, ~hich can generate powerful emotions, depriving propel of their 
powers of rational thought and action, should not be permitted to be exploited 
lest the imperative conditions for the preservation of democratic freedoms are 
disturbed." 
By the aforesaid judgement, the Supreme Court has broken a new 
constitutional ground raising a question of far reaching importan~e ... namely, whether 
any Act of Parliament or any Rules framed thereunder can confer or continue to 
confer upon a body or association of persons the statutory status of a political party 
when its activities violate the Constitution of India, its basic features, its directive 
principles, the fundamental duties enshrined therein. Clause (e) of Article 51 A 
enjoins upon every citizen of India the duty "to promote harmony and the spirit of 
15 

common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic 
and regional or sectional diversities, to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity 
of women". 
Clause (c) of the proposed section 29 B of the bill and the suggestions 
contained in the Report of the Committee meet this very question. 
I may, however, add that deregistration of a political pany has to be 
prospective and cannot be retrospective. If during the process of any election a 
political party has indulged in activities contemplated by clause (c) and is 
subsequently deregistered, the havoc which it might have played during the process 
of election will remain undone. It therefore needs to be considered whether clause 
(3A) of Section 123 which defines corrupt practice as the promotion etc. of enmity 
or hatred between different classes of the citizens of India on ground of religion, 
race, caste, community, or language, by the candidate, or his agent or any other 
person acting with his consent should be amended to include the political pany to 
which be belongs. 
MADAN BHATIA, M.P. 
16 
I 
l 
1 

MINUTES OF DISSENT 
I 
The Statement of Objects And Reasons of the Bill under consideration claims 
that "keeping in view of the proposals received and the views expressed by the 
various political parties, it has been decided to bring about comprehensive 
amendments ... " l am afraid that the present Bill is not comprehensive at all and has 
not done justice to the proclaimed objectives. The Bill only deals with certain 
marginal issues and attempts to do a repair work to tinker with the electoral law. It 
does not really provide comprehensive changes even to the Representation of the 
People Act of 1950 and 1951 and wholly neglects the wider gamut of electoral 
reforms. Therefore an opinion is gaining ground that there is a certain powerful 
section of people who have a vested interest in the continuance of the present 
corrupt electoral system. 
CLAUSES 2 & 3 
2. The Report reveals that the on\_ and only reason for the above Clause is the 
Election Commission's threatening letter dated the 28th August, 1993 addressed to 
the Chlef Electoral Officers and the Chief Secretaries of all States/Union Territories 
that no elections would be held throughout the country after 1st January, 1995 unless 
all eligible electors are supplied with Identity Cards. Even though Identity Cards are 
desirable, it is wrong on the part of the Chief Election Commissioner (C. E. C.) to 
issue an ultimatum either. The duty of the C.E.C. is to conduct the elections; not to 
scuttle them. Neither the founding fathers of the Constitution nor the constitutional 
experts would have ever imagined a situation in which normal elections are not held 
because of a technical requirement such as the issuance of Identity Cards. Many 
legal experts have opined that C.E.C. has no powers to stop elections and create a 
constitutional crisis. It should not be forgotten that what the C.E.C. is asking for is 
not an unreasonable one. But instead of using other ways to deal with a recalcitrant 
authority and rectify the situation the Government though fit to bring in an ordinary 
piece of legislation to curtail the wings of C.E.C who derives his authority not from 
any simple law but from Article 324 of the Constitution. So, if there has to be any 
curtailment in his powers, it cannot be done by a simple law. We have to remind 
ourselves about the fate of ~he previous law which the Parliament has passed 
regarding the C.E.C. That law has been frozen by the Supreme Court for all 
practical purposes and the C.E.C. was told that he may exercise his pOY!~rs as he 
did before passing of the law. In that case it was not a direct curtailment of his 
17 

powers. In the present case there is curtailment of his powers so much so that in 
respect of Identity Cards it is said that any notification or order that has been issued 
by him since 1961, if it has been done without the pdor concurrence of the Central 
Government, is null and void. Therefore, prima facie I regard this particular clause 
as being ultra vires of the Constitution or the same fate which happened to the 
previous law would befall on the present piece of legislation also. The Government 
is well aware of the position. We all know that after the verdict of the Supreme 
Court the Government thought of amending the Constitution to that effect. But as it 
was assessed that the requisite majority cannot be obtained the particular 
Constitutional Amendment Bill was not introduced in Parliament, even though it was 
circulated. Therefore the Government cannot achieve through a simple law what it 
could achieve only through an amendment to the Constitution. If at all this is to be 
done it should be done by a Constitutional Amendment 
3. The scheme of giving Identity Cards to the voters is definitely a welcome 
measure; but it is not the be-ali and end-all of perfect elections as it is made out. 
In fact the scheme was tried in Calcutta during 1958. When tried later in 1979, 
1982 in Sikkim, Nagaland and Meghalaya it was not a success (vide Annual report 
of the Election Commission of 1980). As Mr. S.L. Shakdher observes : "I have 
myself advocated and I have done it, but it is not a fool-proof system of avoiding 
irregularities." It can surely help in curbing impersonation of voters which is now 
prevalent in urban constituencies. The malaise of capture of poJiing booths, 
intimidation of voters etc. are to be dealt with separately; they are not curbed by the 
issuance of Identity Cards. On the other hand, the Identity Cards of some vulnerable 
weaker sections of society may be 'hired or captured' for the duration of the date of 
the polling by the vested interest for a consideration or by threat, thereby preventing 
them going to the polling booth to exercise their franchise. This is the other side of 
the story which has to be tackled to make the scheme a success. Further, we have 
to address and find answers to many questions : For how long will the card be 
valid ? What will happen if a voter loses his Card ? And more than anything else, 
if some of the voters are issued I. D. Cards and some are not, what will happen 'to 
those voters who have no I. D. Cards ? Js it legal to refuse them their voting rights 
just because they have no Cards or lost their Cards ? - Finally it all depends on 
how intamperable the card is. Some would rather prefer a multipurpose card so that 
it is precious for the owner to keep it safely. To be sure, these are only issues 
related . to teething troubles and can be overcome. A scheme which envisages the 
preservation of people's right to vote is well worth a try. 
CLAUSES 7 & 8 
4. Clauses 7 and 8 are new additions to the Section 29 A of the 1951 Act. In 
my opinion even Section 29 A of the Act itself is redundant. Under Section 29A 
parties seeking registration apply to the Election Commission and produce their own 
18 

party Constitution, conforming to the provisions of the Constitution and they get 
registered automatically. Then there is no investigation or assessment made by the 
C.E.O or by any authority. (Registration and recognition of political parties are 
originally governed by the Election Symbols Order, 1968). The Attorney-General has 
given an opinion to the Goswami Committee in 1990 that the Section 29 A has not 
served any useful purpose. Therefore l would go by his opinion and plead for the 
very deletion of section 29 A. 
5. Now an effort is made to activate the said Section 29 A and a condition is 
stipulated that the political parties should not bear religions names and the 
memorandum, rules and regulations should conform to the provisions of sub-section 
(5). It is further stipulated that the registration of the political party will be cancelled 
by the High Court if the said party bears a religious name; or the memorandum or 
rules or regulations of the political party no longer conforms to the provision of 
Section 29 A (5); or the activities of the said party are not in accordance with the 
said memorandum, rules or regulations. 
6. I am totally against the said Clauses even though I am second to none in 
maintaining that the canker of communalism should be destroyed and religion has no 
place in politics. These provisions sound idealistic, but they cannot be implemented 
because they may open the floodgates of evasion. Further, there is no proper 
definition of religion itself. I think the drafters of the Bill have failed to target 
communalism exclusively, without mixing it up with anything else; and communalism 
must be precisely and sensitively defined. Even then evasion is possible to defeat its 
purpose. Moreover, we already have a given subject of laws to take care of the 
menance, the details of which are given in Para 8(2). 
7. Now let us take how the law would be circumvented and would remain as 
dead letter : what happens if a rank communal organisation which is not registered 
with the Election Commission supports during election time another party which is 
registered ? As one witness has put it, if a party is split and if a splinter group is 
headed by one Mr. Ram and if the party is called as 'Ram's Party' as it is our 
wont, can we punish it because it bears a religious name ? 
8. The Committee rt'" Jmmends as the 'consensus' that besides religion other 
factors such as race, :.dste, creed, community, language or place of birth etc. should 
also be included i.o clause 8 (c). - I strongly oppose this suggestion as well as the 
original provision on religion for the following reasons : 
(1) It should be noted that the Joint Committee that went into the 
Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Bill 1993 and the Representation of 
the People (Amendment) Bill, 1993, in its wisdom, has deleted the 
19 
.· 

other factors like, race, place of residence, language, caste or 
community from the said Bills. Within one year no need has arisen to 
include the same again by another Committee. 
(2) We have a number of laws to deal with the problems of misuse of 
religion, religious symbols and religious places for political or sectarian 
purpose. Likewise we have a number of laws for the problems created 
by race, caste, creed, sex, community, language or place of birth, etc. : 
(i) According to 123(3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 the 
appeal by a candidate on the ground of his religion, race, caste, 
community or language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols is a 
corrupt practice. High Courts will declare an election void on this ground. 
(ii) According to 123(3A) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 the 
promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between 
different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, 
caste, community or language by a candidate or his agent or any other 
person is a corrupt practice. High Courts will declare an election void on 
this ground. 
(iii) According to 125 of the Representation of the People Act 1951, 
promoting or attempting to promote feelings of enmity or hatred on 
grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language between different 
classes of citizens of India is an electoral offence and shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to· three years or with 
fine or with both. 
(iv) According to 153 A of the Indian Penal Code promoting enmity between 
different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, 
language, caste or community, etc. and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance 
of hannony is an offence. 
(v) Section 153 B and 505 (2) of the Indian Penal Code also deal with 
offences of this nature. 
(vi) Conviction under Section 153 A of the Indian Penal Code brings about 
disqualification. 
(vii) Under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 the meaning of an 
'unlawful association' has been widened to include any association which 
has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153 A 
20 

or 153 B of Indian Penal Code and such ~ association may be banned. 
(viii) Section 7 of the Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act of 
1988. 
(ix) Section 6 (Offence of Conversion of a Place of Worship) (Special 
Provisions) Act 1991. 
9. While there are so many laws to deal with the misuse of religion or for that 
matter race, caste, creed, community, language or place of birth if they create 
feelings of enmity, hatred or disharmony where is the need for one more Bill for the 
same purpose ? Therefore those factors need not be added and I strongly oppose 
their inclusion. Let us also remember that these laws are neither dead letters nor are 
they dormant. Many legislators were caught in the net of the above said laws and 
have been disqualified by the courts of laws all over India. Therefore I consider the 
present provisions as superfluous, unnecessary and redundant and so is the inclusion 
of other factors like race, caste, creed, sex, community, language or place of birth in 
the said Clause. 
10. Moreover, I think political parties should be allowed to function without 
hindrance from outside and I am a·~inst making the High Courts as the ideological 
' policeman to supervise political parties. If the State finances the elections as in 
Germany then it has a claim to ask some Ombudsman to monitor the activities of 
the parties to a limited extent. Otherwise the parties should be left alone and High 
Courts should not become vulnerable to the charge of partisanship. Further, Courts 
going into the activities of political parties would create untenable situations. Would 
the Courts hold that the 'new economic policy', with its faith in privatisation and 
market forces involving. disinvestment in public sector, is void as it goe.s against 
socialism which is in the Preamble of the Constitution ? Would the present day 
ruling party be de-registered on the ground that it no longer bears "true faith and 
allegiance to the principle of socialism" ? Adherence to such a faith is necessary 
under Section 29 A for registration and its deviation would invite de-registration 
under the new Section, namely, 29 B. Hence it is wrong to incorporate imprecise 
political concepts and doctrines in law and to saddle the Courts with the task of 
interpreting them. This would cause ample scope for harassment and misuse. It 
should not be forgotten that the merit of every piece of legislation must be judged 
not only by what it seeks to achieve, but also by the mischief it may create. 
CLAUSE 11 
11. An attempt is made to discourage the nuisance of frivolous or non-serious 
candidates. But mere increase of deposit amount for them alone would not serve the 
purpose; increase in the number of proposers may be added as a special requirement 
21 

for them which may work as an additional deterrent. 
12. This Clause deletes the section pertaining to the alphabetical list of candjdates 
in the ballot paper. No reason has been given as to why it is deleted. What will 
happen if this section is deleted ? Will the preparation of the list of candidates be 
at the sweet will of the Returning Officer ? What is to be done in the absence of 
the alphabetical list should be clearly spelt out in the parent Act itself as it is 
available now and such a substantive matter should not be left out to the rule 
making body. I strongly urge that Parliament should know about the alternative 
managements made while considering the Bill. 
13. During the discussions a suggestion was made that in the ballot paper the 
candidate of the recognised national party would appear first, the candidate of the 
state party second, and the names of the independent candidates after them. In this 
scheme of things a place of honour will be given to the national party candidates. I 
strongly object to this scheme. A caste system is sought to be created among the 
candidates and a superior position is given to the candidates of national parties and a 
secondary position is given to the candidates of state parties. Such a discrimination 
is unwarranted. If necessary the names of candidates of the recognised parties­
whether they are national or state is immaterial - should appear first in the ballot 
paper according to their alphabetical order and the names of the independent 
candidates should appear next according to their alphabetical order. No distinction 
should be made between candidates of national parties and state parties. 
CLAUSE 15 
14. This clause seeks to give statutory backing to certain provi sions of model 
code of conduct. But one item recommended for inclusion in the statute by the 
Goswami Committee has been excluded in the Bill. It is important and so I quote it 
: "(B) using Government transport, machinery and personnel in connection with any 
work relating to elections." The omission is striking and it should be incorporated in 
the Bill. The Report says that "the Law Secretary clarified that the said provision 
had been omitted because of security perceptions relating to various public 
functionaries ... " It appears as a lame excuse. Leaders of Opposition are also public 
functionaries and equal security measures should be given to them also. Therefore I 
would . plead for the inclusion of the said recommendation of the Goswami 
Committee in the Bill. 
15. I would also suggest that it is high time · that the Government should have a 
dialogue with all the parties and bring in a comprehensive electoral reform with their 
unanimous consent. 
MURASOLI MARAN, M.P. 
22 
l 
1 

ANNEXURE- I 
(See Para 3 of the Report) 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
PRESS RELEASE RAJYA SABIIA SECRETARIAT 
Parliamentary Committee on Home Affairs Invites Suggestions on the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994 
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its meeting held 
on the 18th July, 1994, under the Chairmanship of Shri Madhavsinh Solanki, M.P., 
considered the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994 and 
decided to invite suggestions thereon. 
2. The Bill seeks to introduce electoral reforms by way of further amendments in 
the Representation of the People Acts of 1950 and 1951. The Bill, which was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 13th June, 1994, has been referred to the Committee 
for examination and report. 
3. Interested individuals, institutions/organisations are requested to send their 
views on the subject so as to reach Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary, Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House, New Delhi latest by the lOth August 1994. 
Copies of the Bill can be obtained from Committee on Home Affairs, Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat, Room No. 535, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. Individuals who 
are interested to appear before the Committee may indicate their willingness. 
New Delhi; 
July 21, 1994 
26 
( 
~ 

and fair elections in the country. 
Here we would like to point out that unfortunately the Government did not 
think it proper '.> consult the Election Commission while . framing the bill which 
ultimately the Commission is expected to implement. Such an action endorses our 
apprehensions that the bill is being rushed through not with an honest desire to 
ensure timely and fair elections, but out of cenain prejudices against the Election 
Commission. 
CLAUSES 7 & 8 
We have reservations on clauses7 and 8 of the R. P. (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 1994 regarding registration and de-registration of political parties. In our 
considered opinion these clauses are superfluous and will not serve any useful 
purpose. On the contrary the provisions will hand over the authority of scrutinising 
the ideology and internal functioning of the political parties to the courts which is 
fraught with the dangerous consequences of creating more complications than solving 
any problem and is bound to open a pandora box of frequent litigation in the courts. 
We want that clauses 7 and 8 be deleted. 
However, we support the recommendations contained in para &, page 2 of the 12th 
report which proposes to add the factors of race, caste, creed, sex, community, 
language or place of birth etc. in clause 8(c). 
Krishan La! Sharma, M.P. 
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, M.P. 
Guman Mal Lodha, M.P. 
Ram Singh, M.P. 
Ram Nagina Mishra, M.P. 
Anantray Devshanker Dave, M.P. 
Vinnya Katiyar, M.P. 
Shyam La! Kamal, M.P. 
Vijaye>--Raje Scindia, M.P. 
25 

ANNEXURE • II 
(See Para 4 of the Report) 
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS FROM WHOM MEMORANDA ON THE BILL WERE 
RECEIVED. 
1. Shri Om Prakash Bhadoria, Plot No. 1449/1, Sector-3C, Gandhi Nagar, Gujarat 
- 382003. 
2. Shri Amar Nath Pruthi, 3/573, Malviya Nagar, Jaipur. 
3. Shri D. K. Chatterjee, President, All India Centre for Advancement of People, 
G-1375, Chittaranjan Park, New Delhi. 
4. Shri Bujhawan Prasad, Village - Panday Bigha, P.O. - Pandit Ganj, Via-Hajrat 
Sai (Patna), Bihar. 
5. Shri Mata Prasad, Governor, Arunacha l Pradesh. 
6. Col. I. Jayakm-an (Retd.), 27, Sasirakhamma Nagar, Madras. 
7. Shri Pradip Kumar Rastogi, C/o Shyam Vastralaya, Bazaza Bazar, Kayamganj 
- 207502, Distt. - Farrukhabad, U.P. 
8. Kaviraj Manswarup Sharma, Nauhariya Bazar, Sirsa, Haryana. 
9. Shri P. P. Rao, Executive Chairman , National Convention to Promo te 
Communal Harmony and Constitutiona l Objectives, New Delhi'. 
10. Shri P. S. Nair, "Sivarsree" Nilambur (R.S.) - 679330, Kerala. 
11. Shri H. K. Chandrashekhar, 639/ 1, Indira Nagar, I State, Banga lore - 38. 
12. Shri B. N. Arora, House No. 21, Shiv Kala Mandir Marg, Ram Nagar, Delhi - 51. 
13. Shri Manak Chand Soni, President, Block Congress Committee (1), Fatehpur -
Shek.hawati, Rajasthan - 33230 I. 
14. Shri Nandu Thapa, ex-M.P., New Sikkim House, 14, Panchshee J Marg, New 
Delhi - 110021. 
27 
. " -

)l 15. Shri K. Ganesan, Former Secretary, Election Commission of India. 
16. Snri Mahesh Srivas, Tirfra, Bilaspur - 495223. 
17. Shri Vinod Vasnik, President, Dr. Ambedkar Manch, Barghat, Sidhartha Sadan, 
Sanjay Nagar, Barghat, Distt. Savani, Madhya Pradesh. 
18. Shri M. Rafiq, Advocate, A-1/A, Hawa Sarak Opp. Chambal Power House, 
Near Civil Lines, Jaipur - 302019. 
19. Shri K. R. K. Mohan, H.No. 11-19, Plot No. 12, Pandit Colony Main Road, 
Dilshkhnagar, Hyderabad - 500660. 
20. Sardar Azad Patel, 100, Ambedkar Nagar, Nanakhera, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh. 
21. . Shri Haroobhai Mehta, Senior Advocate, Ex-M.P., C/2, Sunder Apartment, 
Behind High Court, Anmedabad-380009. 
22. Shri E. Sadasiva Reddy, Director, Rajaji International Institute of Public 
Affairs and Adminstration (Bhart iya Vidya Bhawan), Vishwaniketan, Bolarum, 
Hyderabad - 500010. 
23. Shri A. Surya Prakash, Political Editor, Eenadu Group, 505, INS Building, 
Rafi Marg, New Delhi - 11000 I. 
24. Shri Charti Lal Goel, Speaker, Delhi Vidhan Sabha, Delhi. 
25. Ms. Basavarajeswari, Minister of State in the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Women and Child Development). 
28 

ANNEXURE - III 
(See Para 5 of the Report) 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
Sl. No. Name of Witnesses 
1. Ministry of Law, Justice and Compa!ly Affairs 
2. 
(i) Shri K. L. Mohanpuria, Secretary, 
Legislative Department. 
(ii) Shri A. C. C. Unni, Additional Secrerary, 
Legislative Department. 
Shri S. L. Shakdher, Former Chief Election 
Commissioner. 
3. National Convention to Promote Communal 
Harmony and Constitutional Objectives, New Delhi 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
(i) Shri P. P. Rao, Executive Chairman 
(ii) Shri Jitendra Sharma, Convenor 
Shri Syed Shahabuddin, M.P. 
Shri Haroobhai Mehta, Ex-M.P. 
Shri K. Ganesan, Former Secretary 
Election Commission of India. 
Shri Madhu Limaye, Ex-M.P. 
Shri V. Kisohre Chandra S. Deo, M.P. 
Shri A. Surya Prakash, Editor, 
Eenadu and Newstime. 
29 
Date of hearing 
23.8.1994 
23.8.1994 
7.9.1994 
7.9.1994 
7.9.1994 
8.9.1994 
8.9.1994 
8.9.1994 
9.9.1994 
9.9.1994 
9.9.1994 

10. Centre for New Perspectives, New Delhi 
(i) Shri B. G. Deshmukh , Chairman 9.9.1994 
(ii) Shri V. S. Jafa, Hony, Secretary 9.9.1994 
(iii) Shri A. Ramaswamy, Hony. Treasurer 9.9.1994 
(iv) Shri M. S. Khera 9.9.1994 
11. Shri Chimanbhai Mehta, M.P. 19.9.1994 
12. Shri Era Sezhiyan, Ex-M.P. 19.9.1994 
13. Prof. Madhu Dandavate, Ex-M.P. 19.9.1994 
14. Shri La! K. Advani, M.P. 19.9.1994 
15. Ministry of Law, Justice, and Company Affairs 
(i) Dr. P. C. Rao, Secretary, 20.9.1994 
Department of Legal Affairs. 
I 
(ii) Shri A. C. C. Unni, Additiona l Secretary , 20.9.1994 
Legislative Department. 
·30 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 18th July, 1994 in 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan B~atia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Shanna 
7. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
9. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
10. Prof. M. Kamson 
11. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
13. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
14. Shnmati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
15. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
16. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
19. Shri Vinaya Kariyar 
20. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
31 
' ·J 

21. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
22. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
2. 
3. 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Sercretary 
* * * 
* * * 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman made brief introductory observation on the 
Representaiton of the People (Second Amndment) Bill, 1994 and the Committee held 
preliminary discussion on the procedure to be followed by the Committee in regard 
thereto. 
5. The Committee decided that a press release inviting suggestions, views and 
comments from the interested individuals, institutions I organisations be issued. 
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the list of witnesses to be 
heard by the Committee on the Bill and decide other procedural matters. 
7. The Committee also directed that the Report of the Committee on Electoral 
Reforms, 1990 may be circulated to members. 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Tuesday, the 19th July, 1994. 
*** Relate to matters not connected with the subject 
32 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 23rd August, 1994 in 
Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
9. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
15. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
16. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Dr. Girija Vyas 
18. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
19. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
20. Shri Rabi Ray 
21. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
33 

22. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
2. * * * 
3. After the opening observations of the Chairman, the Committee took up 
further consideration of the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 
1994. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, (Legislative Department) , 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs on the subject. The Committee 
directed him to expedite information I material on certain items relating to the Bill. 
5. The Committee decided to meet on the 7th, 8th and 9th September , 1994 for 
further consideration of the Bill. 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 p.m. to meet again at 4.00 p.m. on 
Wednesday, the 7th September, 1994. 
*** Relates to matter not connected with the subject. .. 
34 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 7th September, 1994 In 
Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chainnan 
RAJYA SABHA .· 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Ohawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri Gaya Singh 
10. Dr. Sanjay Singh 
11. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
12. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
13. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
14. Prof. M. Kamson 
15. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
16. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
17. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
18. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
21. Sbri Ram Nagina Misbra 
22. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
35 

23. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
24. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
25. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
26. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
27. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TilE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
WITNESSES 
I. Shri S.L. Shakdher, 
Former Chief Election Commissioner. 
II. Representatives of the National Convention to Promote Communal Hannony and 
Constitutional Objectives : 
(i) Shri P.P. Rao, Executive Chairman 
(ii) Shri Jitendra Sharma, Convenor 
2. After the opening observations of the Chainnan, the Committee heard the 
above witnesses separately and sought clarifications from them on the Representation 
of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on 
Thursday, the 8th September, 1994. 
36 

X · 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 8th September, 1994 in 
Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Mura soli Maran 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
9. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
10. Shri Gaya Singh 
11. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
LOK SABHA 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
15. Shrimati Bibbu Kumari Devi 
16. Shri Ram Singh 
17. Shri Sham Lal Kamal 
18. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
19. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
20. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
21. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
37 

22. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati V.S. Rama Devi, Secretary - General 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chanerjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPA~TMENT) : 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Shri Syed Shahabuddin, M.P. 
Shri Haroobhai Mehta, ex-M.P. 
Shri K. Ganesan, Former Secretary, 
Election Commission of India. 
2. The Committee heard the above witnesses separately and sought 
clarifications from them on the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 1994. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. 
on Friday, the 9th September, 1994. 
38 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 9th September, 1994 in 
Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Murasoli Maran 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
9. Shri Krishan Lal Shanna 
10. Shri Gaya Singh 
11. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
12. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
15. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
16. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
18. Dr. Girija Yyas 
Chairman 
19. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
20. Shri Ram Singh 
21. Shri Shyam La! Kamal 
22. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
39 

23. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
24. Shri Hari KewaJ Prasad 
25. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati V.S. Rama Devi, Secretary-General 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) : 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
WITNESSES 
l. Shri Madhu Limaye, ex-M.P. 
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo, M.P. 
3. Representatives of the Centre for New Perspectives 
(i) Shri B.G. Deshmukh, Chairman 
(ii) Shri V.S. Jafa, Hony. Secretary 
(iii) Shri A. Ramaswamy, Hony. Treasurer 
(iv) Shri Manjeet Singh Khera 
4. Shri A. Surya Prakash, Political Editor, Eenadu, New Delhi. 
2. The Committee heard the above witnesses and sought clarifications from them 
on the Representation of the people (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.05 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on 
Monday, the 19th September, 1994 to further consider the Bill. 
40 
• 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 19th September, 1994 in 
Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Murasoli Maran 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Shanna 
8. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABIIA 
9. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
10. Prof. M. Kamson 
11. Shri A. Yenkatesh Naik 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
14. Shri R Dhanuskodi Athithan 
15. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
16. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
19. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
20. Shri Yinaya Katiyar 
21. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
22. Shri Rabi Ray 
41 

23. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
24. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPR ESE NTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT ) : 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Addit ional Secretary 
Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary 
Shn P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
WITN ESSES 
Shri Chimanbhai Mehta, M.P. 
Shri Era Sezhiyan, ex- M.P. 
Prof. Madhu Dandavate, ex-M.P . 
Shri Lal K. Advani, M.P. 
2. The Committee heard the above witnesses separately and sought clarifications 
from them on the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. * * * 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 7.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Tuesday, the 20th September, 1994. 
*** Relates to matter not con nected with the subjec t 
42 
• 

XIII 
THIRTEE~TH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 20th September, 1994 in 
Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Murasoli Maran 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
9. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
16. Shri Ram Singh 
17. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
18. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
19. Shri Rabi Ray 
20. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
21. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
22. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43~ 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS 
Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
2. The Committee heard the Secretary and sought clarifications from him on the 
various legal issues pertaining to the Representation of the People (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee decided to meet on the 17th, 18th and 19th October, 1994 to 
further consider the Bill. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Monday, the 17th October, 1994. 
44 
' 
• • I 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 17th October, 1994 m 
Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Murasoli Maran 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
9. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
1 0. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
15. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
16. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
21. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
22. Shri Rabi Ray 
23. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
45 

24. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
25. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
26. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
2. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Representation of 
the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
CLAUSES 2&3 
Consideration was held over. 
CLAUSE 4 
The clause was adopted without any change 
CLAUSE 5 
After some discussion the Committee directed the Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs to examine the status of National Song under the law and the 
Constitution and furnish a note thereon to the Committee. 
CLAUSE 6 
The clause was adopted without any change. 
CLAUSES 7 & 8 
Consideration was held over. 
CLAUSE 9 
The clause was adopted without. any change. 
46 

CLAUSE 10 
The Committee was of the view that the nomination of a person as a 
candidate for election should be restricted to one constituency of the same class. A 
few members, however, favoured retention of the existing provisions. 
CLAUSES 11 & 12 
The clauses were adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 13 
The clause was adopted subject to the following :-
The Committee was of the view that the time-limit of 7 days prescribed in 
sub-clause (2) for nomination of another candidate by a recognised political party in 
case of death of the earlier candidate was not realistic. It was, therefore, felt that 
the time-limit of seven days should be reckoned from the date when the Election 
Commission calls upon a recognised political party to nominate anorher candidate. 
The Committee noted that as the term "recognised political party" was 
occurring in more than one clause of the Bill, it could more appropriately be put in 
the definition clause of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
CLAUSE 14 
The clause was adopted without any change 
CLAUSE 15 
The discussion on the clause remained inconclusive. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 p.m. to meet again at p.OO a.m. on 
Tuesday, the 18th October, 1994 to further take up clause-by-clause consideration of 
the Bill. 
47 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 18th October, 1994 m 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chainnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan La! Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Murasoli Maran 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
8. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
15. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhuri 
16. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athitban 
18. Dr. Girija Vyas 
19. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
20. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
21. Shri Ram Singh 
22. Shri Shyam La! Kamal 
48 

23. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
24. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
25. Shri Rabi Ray 
26. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
27. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
28. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
29. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
30. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
31. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS 
2. 
Dr. P.C. Rao, ~ecretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
* * * 
3. The Committee resumed clause-by-clause consideration of the Representation of 
the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
*** Relates to matter not connected with the subject 
49 

CLAUSE 5 
The Committee considered the note furnished by the Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs and adopted the clause without any change. The Committee, 
however, noted that the National Song "Vande Matram" enjoyed the same status as 
that of the National Anthem 'Jana Gana Mana". It, therefore, felt that Government 
should consider amending the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 to 
include the National Song also in the Act. 
CLAUSE 15 
The Committee funher discussed the clause. 
inconclusive. 
The djscussion remained 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Wednesday, the 19th October, 1994 to funher take up clause-by-clause consideration 
of the Bill. 
50 

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 19th October, 1994 in 
Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan La! Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Murasoli Maran 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
8. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
10. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
14. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhuri 
15. Shrimati Bibhu Kumar Devi 
16. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
19. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
20. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
21. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
22. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
51 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, . JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS 
Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
2. The Committee resumed further clause-by-clause consideration of the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. , 
CLAUSE 15 
Members expressed divergent views regarding non-inclusion of the item 
relating to Model Code of Conduct on the "use of Government Transport including 
official air-crafts, vehicles, machinery and personnel" for election campaign. . The 
Law Secretary clarified the position in this regard. 
The Committee felf that Government should examine the viewpoints expressed 
by the members taking in to consideration the security perceptions pertaining to 
various public functionaries. 
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted. 
CLAUSE 16 
The clause was adopted subject to the modification that the expression 
"election matter" defined in sub-clause (3) may be given by way of an explanation 
under sub-clause (2). 
CLAUSE 17 
The clause was adopted without any change. 
52 

CLAUSE 18 
The clause was adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 19 
The Committee considered the clause and· directed the Ministry of Law to 
examine the feasibility of applying the provisions for the "entire period of elections" 
in the "polling area" instead of the "polling day" and the: "neighbourhood of a 
polling station" respectively and furnish a note to the Committee for further 
consideration. 
CLAUSES 20 & 21 •' 
The clauses were adopted without any change 
CLAUSE 22 
The Committee felt that the punishment in sub-clause (3) was not adequate. 
If felt that the punishment should be imprisonment .upto 3 months or fine upto Rs. 
5,000/- or both to make the provisions deterrent. 
In regard to sub-clause (4), the Committee directed the Ministry of Law, 
Justice and Company Affairs to examine in what way the electors mentioned in the 
sub-clause could exercise their franchise. 
With regard to the proposed new section 135C, the Committee was of the 
view that the provisions under this section should be made applicable in a polling 
area during the period of 48 hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of 
the poll for any election in that polling area. 
I" 
CLAUSES 23 & 24 
The clauses were adopted without any change 
CLAUSES 2 & 3 
The Committee discussed the clauses. The discussion remained inconclusive. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on 
Wednesday, the 26th October, 1994. 
53 

I 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 26th October, 1994 in 
Committee Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
9. Shri Raj Babbar 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
15. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
16. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra 
17. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
18. Shri Ram Singh 
19. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
20. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
21. Shri Rabi Ray 
22. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
54 
Chairman 
" 
Khanduri 

24. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
25. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
26. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETAR.lAT 
1. Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
2. Sbri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
3. Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS. 
Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
2. The Committee resumed further clauses-by-clause consideration of the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
CLAUSES 2 & 3 
The Committee further discussed the clauses in the context of Election 
Commission's letter dated 28.8.1993 addressed to the Chief Electoral Officers and the 
Chief Secretaries of all States I Union Territories (except Jammu and Kashmir), that 
no elections would be held in 543 Parliamentary Constituencies after Ist January, 
1995 unless all eligible electors were supplied with Identity Cards. The members 
deliberated at length on the situation that could arise in such circumstances. In this 
context the Committee took note of the fact that the 'right to vote' was a statutory 
right and also guaranteed by the Constitution. The Committee also noted that a new 
Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies are to be constituted before the expiry 
of their duration or on dissolution. It was, therefore, the consensus that the elections 
should in no case be withheld after 01.0 1.95. The Committee also felt that 
necessary steps should be taken expeditiously for issue of Identity Cards to prevent 
impersonation of electors and facilitating their identification at the time of poll. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.40 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. 
on Thursday, the 27th October, 1994 to further take up clause-by-clause con·sideration 
of the Bill. 
55 

XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 27th October, 1994 m 
Committee Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Murasoli Maran 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
9. Shri Gaya Singh 
lO. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABRA 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri A. Yenkatesh Naik 
14. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
15. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
16. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
17. Shrimatf Bibhu Kumar Devi 
18. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
19. Dr. Girija Vyas 
20. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
21. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
22. Shri Ram Singh 
23. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
56 

24. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
25. Shri Rabi Ray 
26. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
27. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
28. Shri B.hubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
29. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Sbri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS : 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sa.karwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
2. The Committee resumed further clause-by-clause consideration of the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994. 
CLAUSES 7 & 8 
The Committee considered the clauses at length. Some members were of the 
view that as these clauses would not serve any useful purpose and would create 
more complications in practice, they should be deleted. However, a consensus 
emerged that feelings of enmity or hatred between different cJasses of citizens could 
be promoted on grounds of race, caste, creed, sex, community, language or place of 
birth etc., besides religion and it was therefore, felt that these grounds should also 
be mentioned in clause 8(c). 
The Committee also felt that the words 'religious na.me' mentioned in these 
clauses could be interpreted differently as the word 'religion' has a wide connotation. 
To avoid such a situation, the Committee, by and large, felt that the word 'religion' 
needed to be amplified by way of an explanation or definition in the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951. 
Subject to the above, the clauses were adopted. 
57 
' 

I 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
24. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
25. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS : 
2. 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
• * • 
3. The Committee then considered its draft Twelfth Report on the Representation 
of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994 and adopted the same with some 
minor changes. 
4. The Committee gave time upto 4.00 p.m .. on Monday, the 21st November , 
1994, for submission of notes of dissent, if any, by members. 
5. The Committee directed that the evidence tendered before it may be laid 
before Parliament and that two copies each of the evidence and the memoranda 
received may be placed in the parliament Library for reference. 
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to cause presentation of the Report 
and laying of the record of evidence in the two Houses. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Thursday, the 17th November, 1994. 
*** Relates to matter not connected with the subject. 
60 
·j 
! 
I 

24. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
25-. Shri Rabi Ray 
26. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
27. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
28. Shri B)lubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
29. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
- Sl)ri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS : 
Shri K.L. Monanpuria, Secretary . 
Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal. Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
2. The Committee resumed further clause-by-clause consideration of the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill,. 1994. 
CLAUSES 7 & 8 
The Committee considered the clauses at length. Some members were of the 
view that as these clauses would not serve any useful purpose and would create 
more complications in practice, they should be deleted. However, a consensus 
emerged that feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens could 
be promoted on grounds of race, caste, creed, sex, community, language or place of 
birth etc., besides religion and it was therefore, felt that these grounds should also 
be mentioned in clause 8(c). 
The Committee also felt that the words 'religious na_me' mentioned in these 
clauses could be interpreted differently as the word 'religion' has a Wide connotation. 
To avoid such a situalion, the Committee, by and large, felt that the word 'religion' 
needed to be amplified by way of an explanation or definition in the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951. 
Subject to the above, the clauses were adopted. 
57 

J 
CLAUSE 19 
The Committee considered the note furnished by the Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs and adopted the clause without any change. 
CLAUSE 22 
The Committee considered sub-clause (4) further and noted that under the 
propo sed provisions an elector whose absence might cause danger or substantial loss 
in respec t of the employment in which he was engaged would not be granted a paid 
holiday on the day of p.oll. The Committee was of the view that the proposed 
provisions might interfere with the right to vote of such an elector as he was 
requir~d to attend to his work due to unavoidable circumstances I grounds mentioned 
in sub-clause (4). The Committee while agreeing with the proposed provisions of 
sub-clause (4) felt that suitable mechanism needed to be evolved in this regard so 
that such an elector could also be enabled to exercise his franchise without affecting 
his duty. 
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted. 
3. The Committee, thereafter , adjourned at 2.10 p.m . to meet again at 3.00 p.m. 
on Wedne sday, the 16th Novemb er, 1994 to consider and adopt the draft report. 
58 

XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 16th November, 1994 m 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki Chainnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Ma.khan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Murasoli Maran 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
8. Shri Krishan Lal Shnnna 
9. Shri Gaya Singh 
10. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABIIA 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
14. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
15. Shri. R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
16. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
17. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
18. Shri Ram Singh 
19. Shri Ram Vilas Pas wan 
20. Shri Rabi Ray 
21. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
22. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
59 

I 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
24. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
25. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee , Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY 
AFFAIRS : 
2. 
Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
• • • 
3. The Committee then considered its draft Twelfth Report on the Representation 
of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994 and adopted the same with some 
minor changes. 
4. The Committee gave time upto 4.00 p.m .. on Monday, the 21st November, 
1994, for submission of notes of dissent, if any, by members. 
5. The Committee directed that the evidence tendered before it may be laid 
before Parliament and that two copies each of the evidence and the memoranda 
received may be placed in the parliament Library for reference. 
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to cause presentation of the Report 
and laying of the record of evidence in the two Houses. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Thursday, the 17th November, 1994. 
*** Relates to matter not connected with the subject. 
60 