27 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTY -SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS AND AGENCIES 
(REGULATION) BILL, 1994 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 1996/Magha, 1917 (Saka) 

RAJYASABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTY -SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS AND AGENCIES 
(REGULATION) BILL, 1994 
C.S.(H.A.)-43 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 28th Feb., 1996) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 28th Feb., 1996) 
RAJYASABHASECRETARJAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 1996/Magha, 1917 (Saka) 

CONTENT S 
P AGES 
1. CoMPOS ITION OF THE CoMMnTEE .•.•.•.• .. ••.••.•..•.•...• .•..•.••.••.•••.•.••.••••••.•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• (i)-(ii) 
2. REPORT ••••••••••••••••.•••••.•••.• .•••••••••.••••••••••••.•••••••..••••..•••••.••••••.••.•••••.•••••••••••••..•.•••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 1-2 
3. REu:vANT M INUTES OF THE MEETI NGS OF THE COMMnTEE •••••••..•.••••••.•••••••••••••••••• ••••••••••••••••••••••• 3-9 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMI1TEE 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
#4. Vacant 
5. Shri Mak.han Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
*7. Shri N. Rajendran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal.Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raaj Babbar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
**15. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
LOKSABHA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
***19. Vacant 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrirnati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
# Vacancy caused w.e.f. the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Shri R.K. Dhawan in the Union Council of Ministers. 
• Nominated on 17th August, 1995 in the vacancy caused by the retirement of Shri Murasoli Maran from the membership 
of Rajya Sabha. 
•• Nominated on 20th September, 1995 in the vacancy caused by induction of Dr. Jagannath Mishra in the Union Council of 
Ministers. · 
••• Vacancy caused w.e.f. the 13th September 1995 due to induction of Prof. M. Kamson in the Union Council of Ministers. 
(i) 

33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Pas wan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudtiury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubeneswar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Sectary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

REPORT 
I, the Chainnan of the Committee on Home AffairS, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, present this Twenty-seventh Report of the Committee, relating to the 
Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994* 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Chainnan, Rajya Sabha referred** the Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994, as 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 14tli December, 1994 and pending therein, to the Committee for 
examination and report. 
3. With the increase in th~ number of business establishments, growth in crime rate and increasing de­
mands for surveillance, there has been a oroliferation of private security agencies in the recent years. There 
has also been a growing concern about the mann~r of functioning of these agencies. Unless suitable safe­
guards are devised, their activities are likely to have wide-ranging security implications, including the 
danger of their employees encroaching upon the duties of police. The Bill, therefore, seeks to regulate the 
private security agencies, by providing for a controlling authority to be appointed by the State Govern­
ments. 
4. The Committee invited the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs to make a presentation on various 
provisions of the Bill. Accordingly, he made a presentation before the Committee on the 21st November, 
1995. During his presentation he explained salient features of the Bill and the circumstances necessitating 
the present legislation. He infonned the Committee that at present there is no law to regulate the functioning 
of private security agencies. Hence, this proposed Bill. 
5. The Committee took-up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on the 29th 
January, 19% . 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 9th February, 19%. 
7. The principal changes suggested by the Committee in the Bill and the reasons therefor are set out 
hereinafter:-
ClauseS 
Clause 5 of the Bill lays down the eligibility criteria to be a private security guard. Sub- clause (iii) 
provides that if any person has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for two years or more, he 
will not be eligible to engage himself as a private security guard. The Committee is of the view that 
conviction in itself should be deemed to be a disqualification and the provision of period of imprisonment, 
therefore, may not be necessary. Hence the Committee recommends that the words and sentenced to impris­
onment for two years or more in this Sub-clause be deleted. 
As regards Sub-clause (iv) of Clause 5, the Committee is of the view that to becoll1e eligible to be a 
private security guard, a person should have undergone at least three months' training instead of one 
month, as provided in this Sub-clause. The Committee also feels that mere mention of "train ing of the type 
imparted to Home Guards" will not be sufficient. Such training should be imparted by some recognised 
• Publithcd in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary part- U, Section 2, dated the 14th December. 1994. 
•• Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part ....II, dated the 16th December, 1994. 

2 
institute, on the pattern of that being provided by the Central Industrial Security Force, Home Guards, 
N.C.C., etc. Hence the Committee recommends that Sub-clause (iv) of this Clause should be amended 
suitably, to make provision to this effect. 
Further, the Committee feels that in this Clause, there is no mention of recruitment of private Security 
guards from amongst Ex-servicemen, as has been done in the case of Supervisors in clause 6. Hence, the 
Committee recommends that Clause 5 should be renumbered as Clause 5( 1) and another Sub-clause, i.e. 
Sub-clause (2), should be added to this Clause, to provide that a person who has served in one or more of 
the Forces like the Army; Navy; Air Force; any other Armed Force of the Union, Police; Home Guards and 
fulfils the eligibility criteria to become a private security guard under Sub-clause (1) above, should be 
given priority for engaging as a private security guard. 
Clause6 
Clause 6 provides that every private security agency shall employ a prescribed number of supervisors 
from amongst the persons who have served in one or more of the Forces like Army; Navy; Air Force; any 
other Armed Force of the Union; Police; Home Guards, for a minimum period of five years. The Commit­
tee feels that besides the minimum period of service, the persons to be employed as supervisor should also 
possess good character. His character and antecedents should be got duly verified. Moreover, eligibility 
criteria as in the case of employment of private security guards under Clause 5 should also be specifically 
prescribed. The Committee recommends that Clause 6 be modified accordingly. 
ClauseS 
Clause 8 of the Bill intends to make companies, not registered in India, eligible to obtain licences for 
private security agencies, after obtaining prior permission of the Central Government. The Committee is of 
the considered view that under no circumstances, a company not registered in India, should be permitted to 
get a licence for a private seturity agency. Hence, the Committee recommends that in Clause 8, the words 
"unless it obtains prior permission of the Central Government", be deleted. 
Clause 13 
Clause 13 provides that every private security agency shall maintain a register containing the names, 
addresses and salaries of private security guards under its control. Further it provides that every private 
securicy agency and private security guard shall furnish to the Controlling Authority the returns speeified 
by it. But there is no mention of the Supervisors . The Committee feels that a similar register pertaining to 
Supervisors should also be maintained and they should also be made liable to furnish the specified returns. 
Hence, the Committee recommends that Clause 13 be amended suitably. 
8. Clauses 2 to 4, 7, 9 to 12 and 14 to 20 were adopted by the Committee without any change. 
9. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which are of conse­
quential or drafting nature. 
10. The Committee recommends that the Bill, as reported by it, be passed. 
NEW DELHI; 
February 9, 1996. 
RAJNI RANJAN SAHU, 
Chairman, 
Comminee on Home Affairs. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMI1TEE 
XXIII 
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the 13th March, 1995 in Committee Room " A', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Murasoli Maran 
6. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
WKSABHA 
9. Prof. M. Kamson 
10. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
11. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
12. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
13. Kumari Mamta Banerjee 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Maj . Gen . (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
16. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati V.S. Rama Devi, Secretary-General 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. 
3. 
• 
• 
••• Relale to ·otber matters. 
3 
* • 
* • 

4 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regu­
lation) Bill, 1994, and after some discussion desired that notes on certain point.s/issues relating to the Bill 
may be obtained from the Ministry of Home Affairs . 
5. • • • 
6. • • • 
7. • • • 
8. • • • 
9. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 4.45 P.M. 
••• Relate to other matters. 

XXVII 
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21st November, 1995 in Committee Room "E', 
Basement, Parliament Haute Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri MakhaJ} Lal Fotedar 
4. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
5. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
LOKSABHA 
8. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
9. Shri Shantaram Potduk.he 
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
11. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
12. Shri Ram Singh 
13. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
14. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
15. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
16. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopherna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant K.aur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
2. Shri Arvind Verma, Special Secretary 
3. Shri H.H. Tyabji; Additional Secretary 
4. Shri V.K. Malho~ Joint Secretary 
5. Shri M.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. The Chairman welcomed the members and apprised them that the Home Secretary has beett 
asked to appear before the Committee to make presentation and clarify the queries of Members relating'to 
5 

6 
the (i) private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994; and (ii)••• 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary , Ministry of Home Affairs made a presentation on the Private Security 
Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994. Members sought some clarifiCations on the various provi­
sions of the Bill. The Committee directed the Secretary to furnish information on certain other points 
relating to the Bill, in writing , at the earliest. 
4. • • • 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 22nd 
November,1995 . 
•••Relate to other matters . 

XXXII 
THIRTY -SECOND MEETING 
The Comm ittee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the 29th January, 1996 in Committee Room "B' , Ground 
Floor , Parliament House Anne x e. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madhav sinh Solanki 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
6. Shri Krishan La! Sharma 
7. Shri Gay a Singh 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOKSABHA 
9. Shri Kirip Chaiiha 
10. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
11. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
12. Shri R. Dhanusk odt Athithan 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
14. Maj . Gen . (Retd .) BhuwNt Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Singh 
16. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
17. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
18. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
19. Shri Bhubeneswar Prasad Mehta 
20. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopema , Direct or 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Private Security Guards and Agencies 
(Regulation ) Bill, 1994. 
Clauses 2 to 4 
The clauses were adopted without any change. 
ClauseS 
The Commi ttee was of the view that persons from the categories mentioned in clause 6 should be 
7 

8 
given preference for engaging as private security guards. It, therefore, recommends that the clause may be 
amended suitably, the Clause 5 being renumbered as Clause 5 (I) and another Sub-Clause, i.e. sub-clause 
5 (2) should be added to this Clause to provide that a person who has served in one or more of the forces 
like the Army; Navy; Air Force; any other armed Force of the Union; Police; Home Guards, and fulfils the 
eligibility criteria to become a private security guard under Sub-clause ( 1) above, should be given priority 
for engaging as a private security guard. 
With regard Sub-clause (iii) of this Clause, the Committee felt that the words "and sentenced to 
imprisonment for two years or more" may lead to an inference that even a person convicted and sentenced 
to imprisonment for a period less than two years may become eligible to be a Private Security Guard, which 
is not desirable and may, therefore, be deleted. 
With regard to Sub-clasue (iv) of this Clause the Committee felt that one months' training was not 
adequate and it should be increased to at least three months. It also felt that such training should be 
imparted by a recognised institution. 
Clause6 
The Committee felt that no eligibility criteria are prescribed for supervisiors to be employed by 
Private Security agencies. Besides, specifically providing such eligibility criteria, the character and ante­
cedent s of the person to be appointed as Supervisor should also be taken into consideration . 
Clause7 
The clause was adopted without any change. 
ClauseS 
The Committee discussed the clause at length and expressed its apprehension th~t the words "unless 
it obtains prior permission of the Central Government", if ~II owed to retain, may make even a foreign finn, 
company or association of persons eligible for obtaining licence under this Act. It felt that under no circum­
stances, a company not registered in India, should be allowed to get a licence for a private security agency. 
H"ence, the words "unless it obtains prior permission of the Central Governmnet" be deleted. 
Clauses 9 to 12 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 13 
The Committee felt that this clause should be amended suitably to bring the Supervisors also within 
purview of this clause in respect of maintaining a register containing their names, addresses and salaries 
and requiring them also to furnish to the controlling authority the returns specified by it. 
Clauses 14 to 20 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, the Title 
In Clause 1 and the Title for the year '1994' the year '1996' may be substituted. Similarly, in the 
Enacting formula for the words 'forty-fifty' the words 'forty-seventh' may be substituted. These are con­
sequential amendments . 
3. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Thesday, the 30th January, 
1996. 

XXXV 
THIRTY -FIFrH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9th February, 1996 in Committee Room "A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Singh- in the Chair 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
3. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
4. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
5. Shri Gaya Singh 
6. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOKSABHA 
7. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
8. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
11. Kumari Mamta Banerjee 
12. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
16. Slui Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
18. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Sbrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Ram Singh was voted to the chair. 
3. The Committee took-up consideration of its draft Twenty-seventh Report on the private 
Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994. After some discussion, it adopted the same. The 
Committee decided that the Chairman may cause Presentation/Laying of the Report in the Rajya Sabha 
and lok Sabha, during the ensuing session of Parliament. 
4. • The Committee decided to meet next on Monday, the 19th February, 1996. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.00-P.M. on Monday, the 19th February, 
1996. 
9 