 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2019/ Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF WORSENING 
TRAFFIC SITUATION IN DELHI 
 
 (Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2020)  
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 
…..………NOVEMBER
….…NOVEMBER, 2011
 
REPORT NO. 
 228 

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
C.S. (H.A.)- 448     
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF  
WORSENING TRAFFIC SITUATION IN DELHI 
                                
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2020)  
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  ACRONYM (iii) - (iv) 
4.  REPORT      1 - 64 
 Chapter   -   I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
3 - 11 
 Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
12 - 33 
 Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
34 - 51 
 Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
52 - 64 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE-  
AT A GLANCE 
65 - 76 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
78 - 79  
7 ANNEXURE 81- 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. #Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. *Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi 
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
29. Shri Ravneet Singh 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer 
___________________________ 
* Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 4th February, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by resignation of  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas, 
MP, Rajya Sabha  from Committee w.e.f. 31st January, 2020. 
#  Shri Dinesh Trivedi nominated w.e.f. 22 nd July, 2020 consequent upon the vacancy arose  on the expiration of term of Shri Manish Gupta from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2020.  
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this Two Hundred Twenty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Second Report on 'The 
Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi '. 
 
2. The Two Hundred Twenty Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha 
on the 11 th December, 2019.  
 After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to 
the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations 
of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said 
report to the Committee on 9th March, 2020.
  
 
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated                              
24th September 2004.     
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Twenty-eighth Report and adopted the same 
at its meeting held on 11th September, 2020. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.  
 
 
 
 
11th September, 2020 
New Delhi 
Bhadra 20, 1942 (Saka)                                                
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary            
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
ACB Anti-Corruption Bureau  
CNCR Central NCR 
CCTV Closed-circuit Television 
CoTS Committee of Transport Commissioners/Secretaries  
CNG Compressed Natural Gas 
CRRI Central Road Research Institute 
DTC Delhi Transport Corporation 
DDA Delhi Development Authority 
DUSIB Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board  
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
DIMTS Delhi Integrated Mass Transit System  
EDMC East Delhi Municipal Corporation  
ECS Estimated Car Spaces 
EPE Eastern Peripheral Expressway  
EPCA Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Control Authority  
EVs Electronic Vehicles  
FAME-II 
Scheme 
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles in India 
Scheme 
GNCTD Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
GPS Global Positioning System 
HPC High Powered Committee 
ITS Integration of Transit Stations  
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India  
IIBI Insurance Information Bureau of India  
ITMS Intelligent Traffic Management System 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers  
IPT Intermediate Public Transport  
IDTR Institute of Driving and Traffic Research  
LED Light Emitting Diode 
MLCPs Multi-level Car Parking 
MoH&UA Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs  
MCD Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
MDTS Motor Driving Training School  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MMI Multi-Modal Integration  
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
NDMC New Delhi Municipal Council  
NCRPB Nation Capital Region Planning Board 
NGT National Green Tribunal  
NHAI National Highway Authority of India  
North DMC North Delhi Municipal Corporation  
NMT Non Motorised Transport   
OSVD Over Speed Violation Detection camera system 
(iii) 
PAMP Parking Area Management Plan  

PWD Public Works Department 
PPP Public Private Partnership  
RFP Request For Proposal 
RRTS Regional Rapid Transit System  
RLVD Red Light Violation Detection Camera  
STA State Transport Authority  
SDMC South Delhi Municipal Corporation  
SMS Short Message service  
TSS Total Station Survey  
UTTIPEC Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning & 
Engineering) Centre  
WRI World Resource Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the Manaementof 
Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi. The said Report of the Committee was presented to the 
Parliament on 11th December, 2019. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs in respect of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Report have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I: The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted by the Governme nt:  
Paras: 3.3.5, 3.5.5,  3.9.15, 4.5.7,  4.5.11, 4.5.14,  4.7.10, 4.9.9, 4.11.4, 4.11.5, 4.11.6, 5.1.8, 5.1.9, 
5.2.4, 5.2.5, 5.2.6 and 5.3.8 (of the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Report) Total 
recommendations- 17 Accepted.  
 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted 17 of its recommendations as 
mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: - Paras: 3.2.5, 3.9.14, 4.2.4, 4.2.8, 4.2.23, 4.2.24, 4.2.25, 
4.2.26, 4.2.27, 4.2.28, 4.2.34, 4.2.35, 4.2.51, 4.2.52, 4.2.54, 4.2.55, 4.2.67, 4.2.68, 4.2.76, 4.2.77, 
4.2.78, 4.2.83, 4.2.85, 4.4.8, 4.4.9, 4.4.17, 4.5.6, 4.5.8, 4.5.12, 4.5.15, 4.6.15, 4.6.16, 4.6.21, 4.6.23, 
4.7.11, 4.7.12, 4.7.14, 4.8.10, 4.8.11, 4.9.8, 5.2.8, 5.3.1, 5.3.3 and 5.3.4 (ibid
)  (Total 
recommendations- 44. Not to be pursued further.   
 
 The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry in respect of 44 
recommendations and, therefore, does not want to pursue such recommendations further. 
 
Chapter III: The observations/recommendations in respect of which the Committee is not  
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 3.4.3, 3.6.4, 3.7.5, 3.8.2, 3.9.12, 3.10.8, 3.11.5, 
4.2.3, 4.2.9, 4.2.20, 4.2.53, 4.2.73, 4.2.84, 4.4.10, 4.5.13, 4.5.23, 4.6.18, 4.6.20, 4.7.17, 4.7.19 and  
5.2.7 (ibid) Total recommendations- 21 Not convincing replies. 
  
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of 21 of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should take further necessary 
action and furnish convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of three 
months after presentation of the Report. 
 
Chapter-IV: The observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received:  Para: 3.8.3, 3.9.11, 3.9.13, 3.11.4, 4.2.42, 4.2.43, 4.2.44, 
4.2.45, 4.3.13, 4.3.14, 4.4.11, 4.5.19, 4.5.20, 4.5.21, 4.5.22, 4.6.6, 4.6.7, 4.6.8, 4.6.19, 4.7.4, 4.7.5, 
4.10.3, 4.10.4, 4.10.5, 5.1.7, 5.3.2, 5.3.5, 5.3.6 and 5.3.7 (ibid) Total recommendations- 29 To be 
pursued further. 
  
In respect of the 29 recommendations placed in Chapter IV, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry has either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
recommendations
 categorized in Chapter-IV as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of 
the Committee within three months. 
 

2 
 
 The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 

3 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 
1.1 Delhi Traffic Police 
 
Recommendation 
 
 1.1.1 The Committee observes that Delhi Traffic Police is mainly focusing and putting in efforts on 
regulating traffic at red-lights and intersections and little attention is paid towards violation of traffic  
rules on roads like not driving in the proper lane, changing lanes without indication, overspeeding, 
dangerous driving, etc. and enforcement of the various traffic rules at other places on roads of Delhi. 
The Committee therefore recommends that Delhi traffic Police should attach equal importance to 
enforcement related aspects on roads too and not restrict itself only to regulation of traffic at traffic 
signals. 
(Para 3.3.5 of 222nd Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.1.2 Delhi Traffic Police has reported that other than regulating traffic, equal emphasis is laid on 
prosecution of visible traffic violations having direct bearing on road safety. To ensure strict 
prosecution, traffic staff is deployed strategically at the congestion points and at the accident prone 
locations. The staff are deployed on motor patrols on the designated roads/road stretches to check 
violation of traffic rules and regulation. Prosecution drives are conducted regularly to enforce road 
discipline amongst the road users. The details of prosecution action undertaken by Delhi Traffic 
Police during the year 2019 are as under:-  
 
 
Offence 
No. of Challans  
Offence 
No. of Challans 
2019 2019 
Red light jumping 2,30,502 Not using seat belt 5,08,707 
Over speeding 1,04,450 Use of mobile phone while 
driving 
18,451 
Triple riding 1,62,182 Not driving in proper lane 4,431 
Rider Without helmet 10,36,151 Yellow line violation 52,776 
Pillion rider without helmet 4,54,912 Wrong overtaking 6347 
Dangerous driving 2,25,553 One way violation 2,93,698 
Drunken driving 36,065 Improper parking 9,34,699 
 
1.1.3 However, recommendations of the Committee have been noted by Delhi Traffic Police for 
compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.1.4 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
1.2 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) and National Highway Authority of 
India (NHAI)  
 
 
 
 

4 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.2.1 The Committee feels that the Government should not act hastily in planning as the automobile 
sector at the present stage should have the right balance. At this juncture, dependence on petrol and 
diesel vehicles cannot be eliminated. Rather, there remains an urgent necessity to go for cl ean diesel 
which Europe and other countries are doing. The Committee cautions that any proposal of completely 
switching over to EVs, if accepted, the entire automobile sector may collapse, since it has alread y 
started showing a down trend in terms of production and sales. The Committee therefore strongly 
recommends that the Ministry should take a holistic view; adopt a pragmatic approach and maintain 
the right balance of all type of vehicles which run on different fuels. 
(Para 3.5.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has informed that they have noted the 
observations. All the vehicles will continue to be registered as long as they meet the requisite safet y 
and emission standards. 
 
Further recommendations 
 
1.2.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
1.3 Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee recommends that EDMC make decongestion plans for other commercial areas 
of the region and search spots for multi-level car parking to take out vehicles parked on roads both in 
commercial and residential areas. 
 
(Para 3.9.15 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.2 EDMC has informed that they are making all efforts to create more parking spaces for 
movement and to accommodate forever increasing number of vehicles. At present, EDMC has allotted 
surface parking lots at 60 sites in different areas for accommodating 13,200 vehicles and 30 more 
surface parking spaces have been identified to accommodate about 6,000 vehicles. Apart from surface 
parking, one multilevel parking at Krishna Nagar having capacity of 200 ECS has been completed 
recently and opened for public. Tenders for construction of 3 multilevel car parking at Babarpur 
Road, Geeta Colony and at Nand Nagri for capacity of 645 ECS have been received and work is likely 
to be awarded by 31 st March, 2020. These parking lots are likely to be completed within one year. 
Tenders for construction of 2 more multilevel parking at Preet Vihar and GT Road Apsara Border 
having capacity 579 ECS are under preparation on PPP Model and work will be taken up 
accordingly. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.3.3 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. 
 
 
 

5 
 
1.4 Rationalization of Buses And Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.4.1 The Committee notes that the attempt to initiate the process of induction of 385 electric buses 
has failed as no bidder was found meeting the technical benchmarks and the tender process is be ing 
reinitiated. In this connection, the Committee fails to understand as to why the provision for land for 
parking has not been thought out before setting a target of inducting 1000 electric buses. The 
Committee feels that electric buses though may provide an alternative to fossil fuel but also is viewed 
as one of the most difficult sustainable public transport. So, the Committee strongly feels that the 
Govt. should wait for the successful running of the initial phase and then start processes involved in 
induction of remaining 615 buses. 
(Para 4.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 Transport Department, GNCTD has informed as under: 
 
(i) Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of M.C. Mehta versus Union of India 
&Ors in CWP No.13029/1985 vide its order of July 28, 1998 inter-alia directed 
Government of NCT of Delhi to augment the public transport (stage carriage) to 
10,000 buses by April 01, 2001.  The Hon‟ble Delhi High Court vide its order of 
August 23, 2007 (read with order of September 10, 2007) in the matter of Court on its 
own motion (Crl. W.P. No.878/2007) has further directed Government of NCT of 
Delhi to augment the city bus fleet up to 11000 buses by theend of March, 2009to 
ensure that the order of Hon‟ble Supreme Court is given full effect to. The 
Environment Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority (EPCA) vide its report of 
No.31 has prayed Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India to inter -alia direct Government of 
NCT of Delhi to add another 6000 buses by the end of 2009, so that the city bus fleet 
be augmented up to 16000 buses. Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its order of February 
01, 2008 has inter-alia sought the response of Government of NCT of Delhi. Pr. 
Secretary – cum - Commissioner (Transport) vide his affidavit has informed the 
Hon‟ble Court that Government is augmenting city bus fleet up to 11000 buses 
through cluster scheme in accordance with the orders of Hon‟ble Delhi High Court. 
The matter is still pending before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India for appropriate 
orders on EPCA plea. As such, Government of NCT of Delhi has to immediately 
augment the bus fleet up to 11,000 buses. The bus fleet could not be augmented 
primarily due to paucity of bus depots space.  
(ii) The matter of paucity of land for bus depots was also raised by the Amicus before the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of M.C. Mehta versus Union of India &Ors. (WP 
Civil No.13029/1985). The Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its order of January 21, 2016 
inter-alia directed EPCA to examine the matter of availability of lands for parking of 
buses and make recommendations t o the Hon‟ble Supreme Court for providing any 
further space for parking of buses.  
(iii) EPCA had meetings with all the stakeholders and finalized its recommendation in its 
meeting held on May 20, 2016. In addition to the land already available with DTC and 
Transport Department for bus depots, EPCA estimated that 134 acres and 341 acres 
additional land is required to augment the city bus fleet up to 11000 & 16000 buses 
respectively. The said assessment of DDA was excluding the Millennium Bus Depot 
complex consisting of 61.69 acres of land. The report was submitted in the month of 
May, 2016 and since then no additional land has been allotted by DDA to Transport 
Department/DTC for bus depots. The Millennium Bus Depot complex having capacity 
1200 buses was constructed by GNCTD during the Commonwealth Games – 2010. 

6 
 
The depot complex was vacated by DTC due to Hon‟ble Supreme Court orders on the 
matter of change of land use. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court has directed that Hon‟ble 
National Green Tribunal will take final decision in the matter regarding change of 
land use of the said depot complex by DDA. Hon‟ble NGT has constituted a 
Committee under the Chairperson of Smt. Shailja Chandra, Former Chief Secretary, 
Delhi to make its recommendations to Hon‟ble NGT for final decis ion. Further, 2 
parcels of land located at Vasant Kunj (11 acres) and Rohini Sector-32 (10 acres) 
could not be made available by DDA to Transport Department despite making full 
payments by Transport Department to DDA. According to DDA, both the parcels of 
land are under litigation and possession of the same cannot be given to Transport 
Department by DDA.  
(iv) The decision of inducting 1000 Electric Buses by Transport Department under the 
cluster scheme is of the Council of Ministers, Government of NCT of Delhi. The 
Council of Ministers has further decided to induct 385 electric buses in the first phase. 
The following views of the Committee shall be put up to Hon‟ble Minister (Transport) 
by the Cluster Branch for further orders, keeping in view the decision of the Council of 
Ministers. 
(v) That electric buses, though an alternative to fossil fuel, one also viewed as one of the 
most difficult sustainable public transport. 
 
1.4.3 So, the Committee‟s recommendation about waiting for the successful running of the initial 
phase and then start processes involved in induction of remaining 615 buses noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.4.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.4.5 The Committee takes note of the pilot projects for introducing electric vehicles. The Committee 
feels that with the advancement of technology and economy of scales, electric buses will become 
economically viable and sustainable in long run. 
 (Para  4.5.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.4.6 This has been noted by Transport Department, GNCTD  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.4.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.4.8 The Committee is of the view that though adding more vehicles to the public fleet is essential 
as high dependable public transport lead to lesser use of personal vehicles. But, the Committee is of 
the considered opinion that dependable public transports needs efficiency not only as how this operates 
but also by people too who operate the system. 
(Para  4.5.14 ibid) 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.9 The Transport Department shall ensure these aspects in totality. The installation of GPS 
devices/vehicle tracking system will further enhance the overall efficiency of the bus operation of DTC 
and Cluster scheme through effective monitoring. 
  
Further Recommendation 
 
1.4.10   The Committee takes note of the reply by the Ministry. 
 
 
1.5 Contribution of Metro in Reducing Vehicles on Roads 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.5.1 The Committee notes that over the years there is an incremental trend in the daily ridership of 
the Metro Rail. The Committee feels that this had made a positive impact on easing of the traffic 
congestion on the roads as more and more people are preferring to travel by Metro Rail due to comfort 
and viability thereby reducing the number of private cars on the roads. 
(Para  4.7.10 ibid) 
Action taken 
 
1.5.2 No comments. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
1.5.3 The Committee notes the reply as it was just an observation of the Committee. 
 
 
1.6 Improving Driving Capacity and the Fitness Capacity of the Vehicles and Establishments 
of Driver Training Schools 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.6.1 The Committee notes that privately running driving training schools are preparing the learner 
drivers for the driving test for issuance of driving license by the concerned authority. The Committ ee 
therefore, recommends that Government should at the earliest set up driving schools  under the 
jurisdiction of license issuing authorities across Delhi. The Committee further recommends that proper 
monitoring of these privately owned driver training schools needs to be ensured so that adequate and 
quality training can be imparted to the drivers learning driving skills from these centres. 
 
(Para  4.9.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.2 The GNCT of Delhi has set up three Institutes of Driving and Traffic Research (IDTRs) in 
association with Maruti and Ashok Leyland to give quality education to commercial drivers.  Motor 
Driving Training School (MDTS) policy will also be modified to incorporate the concerns of Hon‟ble 
Committee. 
 

8 
 
1.6.3 The Enforcement Wing of Transport Department keeps taking action against unauthorized 
MDTS Vehicles which are found plying on roads regularly.  As and when any complaint is received 
from any source, action is taken promptly. 
Further Recommendation 
  
1.6.4 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
1.7 Medium Term Plan 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.7.1 The Committee notes that the plan envisaged for the short-term plan will be completed by the 
year 2020 and that for the medium term planning for traffic management in Delhi, the timeline has 
been fixed upto the year 2025. 
(Para  4.11.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 No Comments 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.7.3 The Committee notes the reply as it was just an observation of the Committee. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.7.4 The Committee strongly believes that a plan is not good unless it has clear outcomes and clear 
timelines. Further, the experience gained in implementation of the short-term plan would pave a way 
for more efficient implementation of the medium term plan as the Committee observes that at present 
there is near complete lack of co-ordination among different agencies involved in the improvement of 
traffic situation in Delhi/NCR. 
(Para 4.11.5 ibid) 
 
1.7.5 The Committee, therefore, recommends that for the efficient and time bound achievements of 
the goals set under the two plans, the High Powered Committee (HPC) constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Home Secretary, should very closely monitor the progress of the works. The HPC 
should meet with all the agencies involved for completion of the projects at regular intervals as this 
will provide a common platform resulting in better co-ordination among all the agencies to sort out the 
problems/issues being faced by them in implementation of the plan. The Committee needs to be 
apprised by the HPC about the progress made on the short term plan scheduled to be completed by the 
year 2020 as also about the Medium term plan on regular basis.  
(Para  4.11.6  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.6 Action taken by all the stakeholders on the short term plan decided by the HPC has been 
elaborated in the 222 nd Report and the instant ATN.  The recommendation of the Committee is noted 
for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.7.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 

9 
 
1.8 Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.1 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should also convene a 
meeting of all institutions and nodal agencies to create an institutional mechanism for coordination and 
cooperation so that results of research work done by various institutions like IITs, CRRI etc., ca n be 
used towards finding solutions to the problems related to traffic management.  
(Para 5.1.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 CRRI is represented in the HPC.  Recommendation of the Committee is noted for complianc e. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.8.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.4 The Committee also notes that when a policy decision is taken, research institutions are not 
involved in the decision making. The Committee recommends that research institutions and other 
knowledge partners must be invited to meetings where a policy decision is being considered so that 
their suggestions and feasibility of their models could also be carefully examined at the apex level of 
knowledge sharing and decision making. 
(Para 5.1.9  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.5 CRRI is represented in the HPC. Knowledge Partners are invited for all the meetings related to 
HPC. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.8.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
1.9 Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.9.1 The Committee is pained to learn that no study has been done for the entire Delhi after the last 
Comprehensive Mobility Plan Study that was done in the year 2007. Thereafter, the Capital has 
expanded manifold, traffic has increased and metro operation has increased. There has been a massive 
change in the kind of travel patterns that Delhi is experiencing. The Committee strongly recomm ends 
that there is an urgent need to get comprehensive mobility plan study done for Delhi and if needed, for 
the entire NCR.  
(Para  5.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 Chief Secretary, Delhi has been requested on 19 th December, 2019 to issue necessary 
instructions to the concerned officers of Transport Department, GNCTD to get the comprehensive 
mobility plan study done for Delhi at the earliest and the outcome of the study shared with MHA.  In 
pursuance to the meeting held in MHA with Transport Department, CRRI and IIT, Delhi on 6.12.2019, 

10 
 
the Knowledge Partner, HPC has prepared the draft Terms of Reference of the Study and shared with 
Transport Department, CRRI and IIT/Delhi for comments.  CRRI has provided on 26 th February, 2020 
the Terms of Reference for the Study to be conducted by Transport Department, GNCTD.   The same 
has been shared on 02.03.2020 with Transport Department, GNCTD and Knowledge Partner, HPC. 
 
Further recommendation 
 
1.9.3 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.9.4 The Committee also notes that all stakeholders should be involved as policies cannot be made 
in isolation so there is a need to follow the principle of inclusion. As different organizations are inter-
connected like where NDMC area ends, other municipal corporation area starts; where that corporation 
ends, another corporation area starts; where a border ends, either U.P. or Haryana comes in. The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommends to  involve all the stakeholders like various Municipal 
Corporations of Delhi, DDA, MORT&H, Haryana Government, U.P. Government, IIT Delhi, CRRI, 
other research institutes and knowledge partners while making plans to manage traffic in Delhi and 
NCR. 
(Para  5.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.5 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders for 
compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.9.6 The Committee takes notes of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.9.7 The Committee further observes that there has been manifold increase in the registration of 
vehicles in the City of Delhi. There is also cross movements of traffic between Delhi and adjoining 
cities like Gurugram, Noida, Ghaziabad, etc., but there is hardly any expansion of the roads and there 
is urgent need to construct new flyovers to carry the traffic. The time has come when redundant service 
lanes needs to be developed as a measure to expand the existing roads to carry the increased volume of 
traffic and there is an urgent need to find low cost, space saving,  innovative solutions to decongest the 
roads of Delhi and NCR. 
(Para  5.2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.8 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders for 
compliance. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
1.9.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
 

11 
 
1.10 General Observations/recommendations 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.1   The Committee appreciates that immediately after Committee took this subject for 
examination, the Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted a High Power Committee (HPC) under the 
Chairmanship of Home Secretary for coordinating, finalizing and implementing meaningful and 
effective action points. The HPC in its meeting on 9 th October, 2018 shortlisted six short term plans to 
be completed during 2019-20. The Committee feels that since Home Secretary has number of other 
important jobs to handle, the HPC should concentrate on finalizing the policy decisions and periodic 
monitoring of the implementation of the project. The nitty-gritty of bringing all concerned 
departments/agencies together for finalizing action points should be handled by officers of the rank of 
Special Secretary/Additional Secretary of MHA. The approach of HPC should be to see that all 
departments/agencies work in tandem with full knowledge and support of one another. It should work 
as one point forum for resolving differences and taking a final view after taking all the inputs into 
considerations.  
(Para  5.3.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.2   The observations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.10.3   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the matter in 
view of the Government's Reply 
 
 
2.1 Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.1.1 The Committee notes that High Powered Committee (HPC) is headed by the Home Secretary 
and observes that he has other crucial responsibilities and his presence is required for many urgent 
issues/matters involving the internal security situation and other matters concerning several 
departments of MHA and other State Governments. The Committee feels that the Home Secretary 
cannot devote much time towards achieving the mandate of HPC. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the High Powered Committee should be headed by some other senior officer of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs other than Home Secretary. The Committee further recommends that a 
representative from the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRB) should be included in the 
HPC as its member. 
(Para 3.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.2 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee that the H igh Powered Committee (HPC) 
should be headed by some other senior officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs other than Home 
Secretary could not be accepted due to the following reasons: 
(i) The stewardship of Home Secretary (HS) lends credence, credibility and stature to the 
HPC.  In fact, the directions of the HPC assume importance because of the fact that it is 
a body headed by HS. 
(ii) The HPC has so far had two meetings on 9 th October, 2018 and 10 th April, 2019 
respectively.  However, the impact of just two meetings have been substantial and the 
list of the achievements in respect of public traffic management in NCT of Delhi have 
been presented before the Hon‟ble Committee and also included in the instant Action 
Taken Note. 
(iii) The argument that HS being extremely busy cannot do justice to the HPC is not valid 
since the HPC meetings are conducted only a few times in a year and there is no undue 
pressure of these meetings on HS‟s schedule. 
 
2.1.3 The other recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee that a representative fro m the National 
Capital Region Planning Board (NCRB) should be included in the HPC has been complied with.  A 
copy of the Order dated 28.02.2020 is at Annexure-I. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
 2.1.4 The Committee takes note of the intention of the Ministry that High Powered Committee  
(HPC) should be headed by Home Secretary and that in accordance with the reco mmendation 
of the Committee on Home Affairs, the composition of HPC has been modified by including 
Members Secretary, National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRB)  as a member in the HPC 
by issuing an order in this regard on 28th February, 2020 . 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
2.2 Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee observes that parking spaces planned by SDMC are not enough given the 
rapidly increasing population and number of vehicles. It, therefore, recommends that SDMC make 
provisions for creation of additional parking spaces to address the problem of parking crunch in the 
foreseeable future. To promote non-motorized transport and multi-modal integration, SDMC should 
increase the number of e- rickshaws, pay and use bicycles, etc. in the area. 
(Para 3.9.14  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 Multi-level parking in Lajpat Nagar market with capacity of 246 ECS undertaken by South 
MCD will be functional by 31 st March, 2020.  Valet parking is being run on DUSIB land in Lajpat 
Nagar II, which is being used to park the cars of the shopkeepers and is also available for the 
shoppers.   Parking Area Management Plan (PAMP) of Lajpat Nagar market planned and 
implemented by SDMC.  PAMP for residential area has been prepared and is being implemented for 
Lajpat Nagar-III as per the orders of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. 
 
2.2.3 SDMC has also informed that 12 e-rickshaws are deployed for the shoppers to commute 
between metro station and the market.   
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.2.4 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. 
 
 
2.3 Improvement in Parking 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee is aware that technology and innovation in the niche industry space of 
automated and multilevel parking systems (MLCPs) may address the problem of clogging parking 
spaces. The concept of MLCP refers to the system of automatically parking and retrieving vehic les 
using an extensive intelligent system of lifts, pallets, and sensors. Delivering advantages such as time 
and fuel savings, space saving, and safety, MLCPs can be solution to parking and traffic management 
problems. 
(Para  4.2.4 ibid) 
 
2.3.2 However, the Committee feels that time taken in parking vehicles in Multi-level Car Parking 
(MLCP) is little more than parking at surface parking. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
MLCP should be made less time consuming. Even the automated ones like MLCP at Sarojini Nagar 
needs to be modified to make it attractive. 
(Para  4.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.3 North MCD has informed that the matter of installation of automatically parking and 
retrieving vehicles using an extensive intelligent system of lifts, pallets and sensors etc. in multilevel 
parking at Kamla Nagar is under operation and at other multilevel sites will be made functional after 
directing the contractors. Multi level parking with capacity of 12,301 ECS (equivalent car space) at 
North DMC plots and Metro plots has been undertaken by North DMC. 
 

14 
 
2.3.4 East MCD has informed that EDMC is making all efforts to create more parking spaces for 
movement and to accommodate forever increasing number of vehicles. At present, EDMC has allotted 
surface parking lots at 60 sites in different areas for accommodating 13,200 vehicles and 30 more 
surface parking spaces have been identified to accommodate about 6000 vehicles. Apart from surface 
parking, one multilevel parking at Krishna Nagar having capacity of 200 ECS has been completed 
recently and opened for public. Tenders for construction of 3 multilevel car parking at Babarpur 
Road, Geeta Colony and at Nand Nagri with capacity of 645 ECS have been received and work is 
likely to be awarded by 31 st March, 2020. These parking lots are likely to be completed within one 
year. Tenders for construction of 2 more multilevel parking at Preet Vihar and GT Road Apsara 
Border having capacity 579 ECS are under preparation on PPP Model and work will be taken up 
accordingly.  
 
2.3.5 NDMC has informed that the work relating to finalizing technology for MLCPs in future is 
being looked into.  In so far as the MLCP at Sarojini Nagar is concerned, already there is an 
agreement with the concessionaire which includes the technology.  However, the Concessionaire will 
be asked to make some modifications within the existing infrastructure so that the consumer takes less 
time in parking and retrieval of vehicle. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
 2.3.6 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Lajpat Nagar (Market Area and Residential Area)
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.7 The Committee notes that Lajpat Nagar area encompasses both market area as well as 
residential areas. It also notes the various measures undertaken by the SDMC for easing the worsening 
traffic situation in both the areas. The Committee appreciates the move of the SDMC to engage the 
Lajpat Nagar Market Association in its efforts to ease out the traffic congestion in the Lajpat Nagar 
Market. The Committee feels that this move will cast positive impact on the grim situation as it will 
result in better management of the parking spaces, curbing the illegal parking mafia and providing 
facilities to the commuters and shopkeepers like e-rickshaw facility and free valet Parking facility. 
 
(Para  4.2.23  ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.3.8 SDMC acknowledges the appreciation made by the Hon‟ble Members of the Committee. SDMC 
is committed in its endeavour to ease out the worsening traffic situation in its jurisdiction by 
implementing the Parking Area Management Plan for enhancing the „ease of living‟ in the area. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.9 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.10   The Committee notes the measures taken by the SDMC towards implementation of the 
Parking Area Management Plan for developing 700 on-surface parking spaces. One hundred fifty 
parking places have been added on a land handed over by DMRC near Lajpat Nagar metro station for 

15 
 
providing free valet parking to shopkeepers. The Committee recommends that parking Area 
Management Plan should also be strictly implemented for the added spaces to utilize the space 
efficiently. 
(Para 4.2.24 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.11   SDMC has informed that Parking Management Area Plan is being implemented in the area. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.12   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.13   The Committee notices that Multi-level Car Parking for around 250 car spaces has been 
envisaged as a medium-term plan as it would take time for completion and implementation as many 
stages are involved in the process. The Committee recommends that the timeline decided for 
completion should be strictly adhered to and audit should be done at regular intervals to monitor the 
status of completion of the MLCP. 
(Para 4.2.25 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.14   SDMC has informed that construction of Multi-level Car Parking (capacity 246 ECS) is under 
way. The project is expected to be completed by 31st March, 2020. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.15 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.16 The Committee is deeply concerned at the huge gap in demand and availability of parking 
spaces as it was reported that more than 1572 cars had to be parked outside on the roads/back-lane of 
the plots. The Committee observes that taking on board the trend of exponential increase in vehicle 
volumes with passage of time, this gap between the stagnant number of parking space and increasing 
demand for parking space will widen. The Committee also feels that there will be a requirement of 
more parking spaces to meet the future demand for parking. The Committee strongly recommends that 
efforts should be made to complete the construction of the proposed multi-level parking at the earliest 
in order to meet the ever growing demand. 
(Para  4.2.26 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.3.17   SDMC has informed that construction of Multi-level Car Parking (capacity 246) is being 
done. The project is expected to be completed by 31st March, 2020. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
2.3.18   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.19    The Committee appreciates the plan for better vehicular circulation and parking whereby, 
some roads have been identified and earmarked for easy movement of vehicles in case of emerge ncy. 
However, the Committee earnestly feels that carriageways, roads, streets and back-lane of the plot s 75 
in the localities should not be used for parking purpose as it results in reduction of space for easy 
movement of traffic, induces congestion and restricts free movement of vehicles in case of emergency. 
 
(Para  4.2.27  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.20   SDMC will enforce Parking Area Management Plan made for Lajpat Nagar III. Emergency 
Vehicle movement has been given the utmost priority in the plan made for the area. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.21   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.22  Keeping in view of the various aspects placed before it, the Committee feels that a pragmatic 
approach to tackle the situation has to be taken. Although, the short term plan may be implemented for 
easing the present traffic situation, a broad and well visioned approach taking into account all the 
factors should be contemplated. The Committee recommends that concerted and continuous efforts 
should be made towards easing the present traffic situation. Every option must be explored for 
constructing multi-level automated parking to meet the future demand of Lajpat Nagar market area. 
 
(Para  4.2.28  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.23  SDMC has informed that multi-level parking with capacity of 246 ECS will be functional by 
31st March, 2020. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.24   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
Nehru Place
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.25   The Committee notes that the locality has insufficient space for traffic dispersal and all the 
open spaces have been taken over by parking and therefore vehicular movement in the area has been 
severely affected. 
(Para  4.2.34 ibid) 
 
2.3.26  The Committee notes that request for proposals for both the stages have been issued and the 
agencies to carry out the work envisaged in Phase-1 and Phase-2 have been selected. The  Committee 
recommends that regular monitoring of the work and concerted efforts should be made at appropriate 
level so that the plan would be completed as per the timelines. 
(Para  4.2.35 ibid) 

17 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.27   DDA has taken up the following Traffic Improvement Plan of Nehru Place: 
 
(i) For convenience of metro users a skywalk connectivity from Nehru Place metro 
station(on purple line) to podium area of Nehru Place.                                                
(ii) Up-gradation of circulation roads, footpaths and surface parking areas.                                                         
(iii) Provision of multi-level car parking infrastructure in existing surface parking space at 
one location for 676 Cars and 150 Two Wheelers.                                                                      
(iv) Improvement for pedestrians by way of lifts, escalators, toilet facilities, wi-fi, etc.      
 
2.3.28  Work for up gradation of main plaza area and surface parking, circulation roads etc. has been 
awarded on Oct-2019 and will be completed in 18 months.   
 
Further Recommendation 
  
2.3.29   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.   
 
 
Connaught Place
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.30  The Committee observes that due to paucity of land in the Connaught place area, the addition 
of more parking space by way of building Multi-level Parking is less probable. The Committee 
recommends the possibility of underground parking for the area at a suitable location should be 
explored. 
(Para 4.2.51 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.31  NDMC has informed that the underground parking in Connaught Place were to be constructed 
in the Inner Circle as well as below the parking area in front of blocks.  But during the implementation 
of Redevelopment of Connaught Place Project during 2009-2019, the same was not allowed by the 
New Delhi Traders Association and DMRC due to underneath tunnel in vicinity. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.32  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
   
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.33    The Committee appreciates the work done by NDMC in managing the available parking 
facilities in the area. The Smart Parking Management System being implemented in the North of 
Rajpath is working efficiently. The Committee therefore recommends that the same system should be 
applied to the other areas of Connaught Place to have effective parking management of the whole area. 
 
(Para  4.2.52 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.34  NDMC has informed that the Smart Parking Management System being managed in the North 
of Rajpath is equally applicable in the areas of Connaught Place and around.  For the remaining 

18 
 
areas of NDMC a RPF on the similar lines was floated.  However, it could not fetch any eligible 
bidder.  The NDMC is working on modification in the RFP and thereafter fresh efforts will be made to 
float the RFP. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.35  The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.36   The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the authorities for construction of NMT 
Lanes, cycle docking stations and providing cycles as an effort to provide last mile connectivit y to the 
metro stations. 
(Para 4.2.54 ibid) 
Action taken  
 
2.3.37   NDMC has informed that the seamless connectivity for pedestrian walkway / footpath and 
dedicated cycle tracks along the Avenue roads are to be planned in NDMC area.  The roundabouts 
and intersections will be retrofitted as a part of seamless connectivity for pedestrian, women, senior 
citizen etc and cyclist alongwith universal accessibility. The dedicated bicycle tracks are also being 
considered as per the site feasibility.  NDMC has already started the Public Bike Sharing System in 
NDMC area.  At present Metro Stations, commercial complexes, major markets, heritage / important 
buildings, tourist destinations, parks, religion places, schools and residential area are considered for 
installation of Smart Bike Stations and further more dense smart bike stations will be provided to make 
complete close network of last mile connectivity.   
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.38  The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.39  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends to improve pedestrian path and cycling zone in 
Delhi and NCR so as to increase non-motorized travel and reduce motor vehicles travel which will not 
only help to reduce carbon but will also promote healthy lifestyle and improve physical activity. 
 
(Para 4.2.55 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.40   NDMC has started that the Public Bike Sharing System in NDMC area by providing 500 Nos. 
State of Art Bicycles consisting important features like Gender friendly, GPS enabled and easy gear 
for smooth ride, in NDMC area.  49 Smart Bicycle Stations are setup through Private concessionaire 
on PPP Model for last mile connectivity as pick and use points / facility at all the stations.  The project 
is running successfully and satisfactorily.  There are about one lakh active users. 
 
2.3.41  East DMC has informed that considering the density of population about 40000 per sq. km and 
geographical condition of EDMC it is not feasible to construct cycle track and pedestrian spaces on 
roads having ROW less than 60 feet. 
 

19 
 
2.3.42  DDA has informed that in 1 st Phase 16 km stretch, in Metro Corridor of sec-12 & 13 and 
identified stretch up to NSIT, has been selected for laying side walks and facilities of non-motorized 
Transport (NMT) Cycle Track, providing the tactile tiles as round surface indicator for visually 
impaired persons. The work is in progress for 1st phase and will be completed by 15th June 2020. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.43   The Committee takes note of the reply the Ministry. 
 
Karol Bagh
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.44   The Committee notes that work on some of the tasks envisaged under the plans like for the 
stretch from Pusa Road to Arya Samaj Road and the stretch from Arya Samaj Road to D.B. Gupta 77 
Road have been developed for the use of pedestrians while other works are at the implementation 
stage. 
(Para 4.2.67 ibid) 
2.3.45  The Committee recommends that the task pertaining to Ajmal Khan road pedestrianization and 
One-way Traffic circulation system by Traffic Police for which action is pending on the part of 
Transport Department and Traffic Police be expedited to ensure its completion in a time bound 
manner. 
(Para 4.2.68 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.46  Delhi Traffic Police has informed that the project regarding pedestrianization of Karol Bagh 
market area has been mooted by North DMC. As far as Delhi Traffic Police is concerned, notification 
regarding restriction of parking of all types of vehicles on Ajmal Khan Road from Pusa Road Junction 
to Desh Bandhu Gupta Road Junction has already been issued by Delhi Traffic Police on 22.05.2019 
and the same is being implemented on ground.  One way traffic circulation plan on Tank Road, Padam 
Singh Road, Hardhyan Singh Road and Pyare Lal Road is also being run on trial basis to ascertain 
the impact of the one way traffic circulation and to know the response and acclimatization of road 
users and local resentments to the new scheme. Notification to this effect shall be issued as per the 
response and acceptance of the new scheme by road users. Adequate numbers of traffic police 
personnel are deployed along with Civil Defence volunteers for regulating traffic in the area. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.47  The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Krishna Nagar Market 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.48  The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the EDMC in involving Market Associations and 
RWAs in the implementation of the plan and holding regular consultations in their endeavor to run the 
trial successfully. 
(Para 4.2.76 ibid) 
 

20 
 
2.3.49  The Committee recommends that innovative measures may be taken such as enhancing parking 
charges for longer parking in line with parking rules in Central London and linking the purchase of 
vehicles with the availability of Parking spaces in house/accommodation. 
(Para 4.2.77 ibid) 
 
2.3.50   The Committee also recommends that for the areas where at-grade parking is not feasible, a 
proposal for building underground parking on a large scale should be mooted to meet the parking 
space requirement of these areas. 
(Para 4.2.78 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.51  EDMC has informed that they are making all efforts to create more parking spaces for 
movement and to accommodate forever increasing number of vehicles. At present, EDMC has allotted 
surface parking lots at 60 sites in different areas for accommodating 13,200 vehicles and 30 more 
surface parking spaces have been identified to accommodate about 6,000 vehicles. Apart from surface 
parking, one multilevel parking at Krishna Nagar having capacity of 200 ECS has been completed 
recently and opened for public. Tenders for construction of 3 multilevel car parking at Babarpur 
Road, Geeta Colony and at Nand Nagri for capacity of 645 ECS have been received and work is likely 
to be awarded by 31.03.2020. These parking lots are likely to be completed within one year. Tenders 
for construction of 2 more multilevel parking at Preet Vihar and GT Road Apsara Border having 
capacity 579 ECS are under preparation on PPP Model and work will be taken up accordingly. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.52   The Committee takes note of the efforts made by EDMC in filling up the gap of demand 
and available parking spaces in the area, by identifying more spaces for surface park ing and 
construction of five multilevel Car parking in the area.   
 
Drafting of Parking Rules
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.53  The Committee hopes that the parking rules will be implemented by the urban local bodies in 
right earnest to improve the worsening traffic situation and to fix the loopholes in the present parking 
system of the city. 
(Para  4.2.83 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.54  The Transport Department had already notified the “Delhi Maintenance and Management of 
Parking Places Rules-2019” on 23rd September, 2019. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.3.55  The Committee notes of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.56  The Committee is aware of the Orders of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) that vehicles 
(Diesel/Petrol) which are more than 10/15 years cannot ply on Delhi roads and are to be phased out. 
The Committee expresses its displeasure and recommends strongly that effective enforcement is 
needed to track and impound vehicles as per the orders of NGT. 
(Para  4.2.85 ibid) 

21 
 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.57  Transport Department/ GNCTD has informed that the teams deployed in the field have already 
been directed to take strict action against such vehicles which are found plying on roads and are more 
than 10 years old in case of diesel vehicles and more than 15 years old in case of petrol vehicles.  So 
far 452 numbers of such vehicles have been impounded since 2015.  The teams are directed to make 
the action more intensive in future. 
 
2.3.58 Delhi Police has informed that special drives are regularly conducted by Delhi Traffic Police to 
prosecute old age vehicles (10/15 years old diesel/petrol vehicles) found plying on Delhi roads. 
During the year 2019, a total of 337 such de-registered motor vehicles were prosecuted and 
impounded by traffic police. It is a continuous ongoing process to prosecute such offenders by 
enforcement officers of Delhi Traffic Police and the same is rigorously enforced. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
2.3.59  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
  
 
2.4 Retrofitting of 100 Junctions and 77 Identified Corridors  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.4.1 The Committee takes note of the work done at various locations like improvement at Adchini 
T. Point, PTS Chowk like construction of slip roads, relocation of the CNG stations and installation of 
iron grills and relocation of bus stops, etc. 
(Para  4.3.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that as regards 77 identified corridors, the matter is 
regularly taken up by DCsP/Traffic Ranges, who are the convener of the Task Force teams for their 
respective areas of jurisdiction, with the PWD and other concerned agencies to get the tasks 
completed as per specified timelines indicated by the agencies. Review meetings are also convened by 
Special CP/Traffic on regular basis with all concerned agencies to review the progress made by the 
agencies for completion of the identified tasks. During these meetings, the agencies are also requested 
to complete the identified tasks as per the timelines set by them. Overall status of the tasks on these 77 
corridors is as follows:- 
 
 Cate-gory ‘A’ Cate-gory ‘B’ Cate-gory ‘C’ Total 
Completed 162 51 29 242 
Regular & Continuous Action 37 12 9 58 
Not found feasible 56 22 15 93 
Under progress/ pending 95 80 52 227 
Total 350 165 105 620 
 
2.4.3 PWD, Delhi has informed that they carry out the improvement of junctions and corridors under 
its jurisdiction to the best possible for traffic/pedestrian movements in consultation with Delhi Traffic 
Police and the current status and targets are as under:- 
 
2.4.4 The high number of road accidents are not only due to faulty design of roads/intersection but 
also due to many other reasons like not following traffic rules, crossing the road at any location, 
frequent lane changing by two wheelers, rash driving bikes without helmets, etc. Delhi has the most 
mixed traffic on roads and nobody follow lane movement. Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 

22 
 
(IAHE) under MoRTH has engaged M/s Medulla Soft Technologies Pvt. Ltd as consultants to study 
roads of Delhi with following objectives: 
 
Short Term Objectives
 
 
(i) Identification of major traffic bottlenecks, testing and evaluating solutions. 
(ii) Junction design improvements including universal accessibility and safety features. 
(iii) Study of 128 accident prone locations (black spots) along with mitigation measures. 
(iv) Improved integration of Transit stations (metro, railways, major bus stops) and 
important activity centers for universal access, safe passage, non-motorized transport 
(NMT) and intermediate public transport (IPT) management. 
(v) Junction level signal optimization and Corridor level signal synchronization. 
(vi) Improved pedestrian, NMT and IPT mobility at locations where the modes are 
 heavily used. 
(vii) Identification of issues due to on street parking at key locations, and investigation of 
potential solutions. 
 
Medium and long term Objectives
 
 
(i) Testing, evaluation and optimization of all upcoming infrastructure development 
projects to ensure maximum efficiency and elimination of any lacunae at design stage. 
(ii) Proposals for grade separation and capacity enhancement where required (based on 
study of traffic bottlenecks, upcoming land use, etc.). 
(iii) Study and recommendations on transit corridors. 
(iv) Detailed objectives, requirements and expected performance of ITS solutions. 
(v) Reduction of emissions. 
(vi) Planning towards encouraging modal shift to Public Transportation. 
(vii) Parking policies. 
 
2.4.5 The study included 120 corridors consisting on 783 Km of roads and 918 major intersections.  
Retrofitting work on the basis of this study will start after acceptance of report and approval from 
Traffic Police and other concerned authority.  The work of streetscaping of seven stretches of roads on 
trial basis have also been taken up by PWD in which the improvement of intersections, islands, central 
verge etc. are being undertaken. The consultants for the streetscaping work have already been 
appointed and tenders have been received for execution of work. 
 
Further Recommendation 
   
2.4.6 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
2.5 Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.5.1 The Committee understands the importance of non-motorized mode of transport in terms of 
reducing pressure of vehicles on the roads. The Committee knows that in order to harness the benefit 
of non-motorized transport, infrastructure has to be developed to encourage the non-motorized mode 
of transport so that it can duly supplement the increasing pressure on the motorized forms of transport. 
 
(Para 4.4.8 ibid) 

23 
 
2.5.2 The Committee notes the timeline provided for completion of retrofitting of 70 Kms. of roads. 
The Committee observes that work was contemplated to be done in three phases. The Committee notes 
that as per the timeline first phase has been started from October, 2019 and the work would be 
completed by July, 2020. 
(Para  4.4.9 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.3 DDA has informed that as instructed by the High Powered Committee for Traffic Management 
of NCT of Delhi, in 1st Phase 16 km stretch, in Metro Corridor of sec-12 & 13 and identified stretch up 
to NSIT, has been selected in consultation with knowledge partner, HPC for laying sidewalks and 
facilities of non-motorized Transport (NMT) Cycle Track, providing the tactile tiles as round surface 
indicator for visually impaired persons. Some new roads, improvement of intersection, path 
connection and Ramp wherever required is also considered. The work is in progress for 1 st phase and 
will be completed by 15th June 2020. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
2.5.4 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Bicycle sharing Scheme  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.5.5 The Committee takes note of the plan by the SDMC to develop 250 bicycle stations at various 
locations in Dwarka area for accommodating 2000 bicycles having advance features like GPS, location 
devices to ensure safety of the cycles against theft for use within the Dwarka Area. The Committee 
hopes that the target date for introducing cycle sharing scheme i.e. September, 2020 should be met 
without time and cost overrun. 
(Para 4.4.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.6 DDA has informed that the tender for RFP for hiring of service provider for sharing of Bicycle 
system at Dwarka, New Delhi to undertake Design, Construction, Procurement, Installation, Testing, 
Operations, Maintenance and Management of the public Bicycle Share System was invited on 15 th 
June, 2019. The pre-bid meeting was held on 27 th June, 2019 but unfortunately no bid was received on 
the date of opening i.e 08 th August, 2019. After carrying out some modifications, now the revised bid 
documents for this work are being uploaded. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.5.7 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.    
 
 
2.6 Rationalization of Buses And Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.1 The Committee hopes that the timeline decided for 1000 Standard Floor height Non-AC CNG 
buses would be met by the Government of Delhi. Regarding, 1000 Low Floor height CNG AC buses, 
the committee took cognizance of the difficulties being faced in the process of induction of 600 buses 

24 
 
under cluster scheme viz. due to court case and not getting enough response from the bidder. The 
Committee notes that the induction of 250 buses depends solely on the outcome of the cases. The 
Committee also notes the efforts being made by the Government to make the scheme more lucrative 
for the bidder by dividing the bid into two parts. However, the Committee strongly feels that in 
addition to dividing the bid into two parts, the terms of the bid should also be revised to attract interest 
of the bidders. 
(Para 4.5.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 Transport Department/ GNCTD has informed that the Cluster consisting of 350 low floor buses 
was divided into two clusters namely Cluster 16A CLF & 16B CLF.  The composition of these two 
clusters is as under:  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Cluster No. Depot Name Number of buses to be 
inducted 
1 16A CLF Ghuman Hera-I 160 
2 16B CLF Ghuman Hera-II 190 
  Total 350 
 
2.6.3 Transport Department invited separate bids for the aforesaid clusters. The technical bids were 
opened on 03.01.2020.  Only 2 bids under Cluster 16A CLF & 1 bid under 16B CLF were received.   
The tender is at technical evaluation stage as on date. 
 
2.6.4 Cluster Branch will consider the recommendations of the Committee to revisit the terms of the 
bid document(s) to attract interest of the bidders. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.6.5 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.6 The Committee notes that the process of induction of 1000 buses for DTC has started and the 
tenders have been floated, the technical evaluation is under process and the induction of buses depends 
upon successful technical evaluation of the proposals. The Committee hopes that the timeline of 
February 2020 set for rolling out of the buses would be met. 
(Para  4.5.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.6.7 Transport Department, GNCTD has informed that the tenders floated by DTC for 1000 low 
floor air-conditioned CNG buses and 300 pure electric air- conditioned low floor buses (under FAME-
II Scheme) could not yield any responsive bids and, as such, both the tenders were 
foreclosed/cancelled by DTC Board. The bid documents are being revived by the officers of DTC and 
fresh bids will be invited by DTC shortly. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.6.8 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.9 The Committee suggests that the ‘ONE DELHI’app will be useful if it is applicable on 
multimodal basis covering all the public transports and providing the information on real-time basis. 
The Committee notes that the application uses mobile data and recommends that a strong data network 
should be put in place for seamless usage of the application. 
(Para  4.5.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.10   Transport Department and DTC has already signed Master Service Agreement(s) with M/s 
Telecommunications Consultants India Limited on 03.01.2020 for installation of CCTV, Panic Buttons 
and GPS devices (Vehicle Tracking System) in all the existing DTC and Cluster buses. The project 
inter-alia includes establishment of State of the Art Control & Command Center for monitoring of 
11000 buses and all the buses are equipped with these devices within 7 months from the date of the 
signing of agreement(s).  
 
2.6.11  The new 724 buses inducted under the cluster scheme during the last 3 months are already 
equipped with CCTV, Panic Buttons and GPS devices. As such, the information of buses on real time 
basis can be implemented in totality with respect to DTC and Cluster bus operations. One such App 
relating to cluster buses is already in operation through Delhi Integrated Multi Modal Transit System 
Ltd. (DIMTS). 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.6.12   The Committee takes note of the reply from the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.13   The Committee hopes that the plan to augment the strength of its existing fleet of buses would 
reduce the private vehicular population on roads. 
(Para  4.5.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.14  Transport Department, GNCTD has informed that it is expected that the augmented fleet of 
modern low floor air-conditioned buses under the DTC and Cluster scheme would definitely reduce 
the private vehicle population on roads. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.6.15  The Committee takes note of the reply by the Ministry. 
 
 
 
2.7 IT Based Management of Traffic 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.1 The Committee appreciates the technological interventions made in smooth movement of 
traffic, checking road accidents and disciplining of motorists. However, the Committee cautions the 
Government that a single yardstick should not be used for all the roads and intersections for limiting 

26 
 
the speed of the vehicles otherwise it is seen that speed limits of 50 Km/hr at a flyover will only 
slowdown the traffic leading to congestion instead. 
(Para  4.6.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that in order to review the existing speed limits on various 
Delhi Roads and to suggest changes, if any, required keeping in view the existing traffic scenario on 
Delhi roads, a Committee has been constituted by CP Delhi in October 2019, under the chairmanship 
of Spl. CP/Traffic comprising expert members from CRRI, SPA, IIT Delhi, WRI and members from 
Transport Department and other senior Traffic Police officers. First meeting of the Committee was 
convened on 19 th December, 2019 to start the process of review of existing speed limits on Delhi 
roads. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.7.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.4 The Committee also appreciates the move for acquiring the portable tripod mounted Radar 
Speed guns as it would ensure maintenance of discipline amongst the vehicle drivers on roads where 
the Gantry-mounted Radar based Over Speed Detection System has not been put in place. The 
Committee, however, recommends that plan should be made to cover the area/roads where the Gantry-
mounted system has not been put in place to avoid accidents due to over speeding by drivers on these 
roads. 
(Para  4.6.16  ibid) 
Action Plan 
 
2.7.5 Delhi Traffic Police has procured 55 more Portable Radar Speed Guns taking the total 
numbers to 110.  These Radar Guns are deployed to prosecute motorists found indulging in over 
speeding on high speed corridors. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.7.6 The Committee notes that 55 more Portable Radar Speed Guns have been  procured for 
deployment at high speed corridors to identify the motorists indulging in overspeeding and their 
subsequent prosecution.  The Committee is of the view that assessment of road stretches w here 
Portable Radar Speed Guns would be placed may be made and such more num ber of Portable 
Radar Speed Guns should be procured and deployed at such road stretches.   
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.7 The Committee strongly recommends that issuance of final Notification for making it 
mandatory to capture contact details of the vehicle owners at the time of pollution checking be ensured 
by the timeline of November, 2020. The Committee also recommends that all Vahan databases should 
be linked to all the possible sources through which the mobile numbers of the vehicles can be captured. 
The Committee specifically suggests to the Government to take up the issue with Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority of India (IRDAI)/ Insurance Information Bureau of India (II B) for 
capturing the mobile number of the vehicle owners and linking of the same with the Vahan Database. 
 
(Para  4.6.21 ibid) 

27 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.8  Transport Department, GNCTD had already issued a notification dated 17 th October, 2019 
vide which new clause has been added as under: 
 
“The person avail ing the pollution checking facility shall provide the mobile (cell phone) 
number of registered owner of the motor vehicle at the time of pollution checking and pollution 
checking centre shall record the same correctly in its data base.” 
 
2.7.9   The Vahan Data Base is linked to all possible sources through which Mobile number of the 
Vehicle can be captured. 
2.7.10  Delhi Traffic Police has informed that during the meetings held with IRDA/IIB, the Delhi 
Traffic Police has requested IRDA/IIB for linking of the mobile numbers of the registered owners of 
the vehicles with the Vahan data base. 
  
Further Recommendation 
 
2.7.11   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.12  The Committee observes that One-Way Scheme on 17 roads have been identified on the basis 
of a joint study carried out in association with the World Resource Institute. The Committee hopes that 
the pilot project will be successful and the timeline of December, 2019 for completion of the project 
will be met. 
(Para  4.6.23ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.13   Delhi Traffic Police has informed that out of the 17 roads / road stretches identified for 
introduction of „One Way‟ Schemes, Delhi Traffic Police has introduced „One Way‟ Schemes at 9 
roads / road stretches whereas at 6 roads / road stretches the scheme was dropped as the same was 
not found feasible from traffic point of view. As regards remaining 2 roads / road stretches, the studies 
are under progress by WRI, India. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.7.14   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
 
2.8 Contribution of Metro in Reducing Vehicles on Roads  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.8.1   The Committee acknowledges the contribution of the Delhi Metro in reducing the number of 
private vehicles on the Delhi roads and recommends that metro network needs to be extended to cover 
those areas in Delhi which have no connectivity to public transport or public transport is not the viable 
option forcing the people to use cars for their daily travel. 
 
(Para  4.7.11 ibid) 
 
 

28 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 DMRC has informed that Metro lines are planned as per Metro Rail Policy considering a 
variety of factors like demand, capacity, cost and ease of implementation. Presently, approximately 
347.97 km having 253 stations of DMRC network is operational in Delhi and NCR (excluding NMRC 
and Rapid Metro Gurugram lines).  Under Phase-IV of Delhi Metro,3 priority corridors of 61.679 km 
(48 stations) km have been sanctioned and 3 more corridors of 42.26 km (33 stations) are under 
consideration. Work on 3 sanctioned corridors already started in November, 2019. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
2.8.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.8.4 The Committee observes that the metro have been attracting only the population near the 
stations. This is largely due to lack of last mile connectivity. The Committee therefore, recommends 
that DMRC should provide subsidized transport service for bringing people to its stations from upto 3-
4 Kms. Further DMRC needs to reduce its parking rates at metro stations for metro commuters. The 
revenue thus lost may then be compensated through other sources like advertisements, amenities etc., 
at its parking places, train coaches, metro stations and on metro rails. 
(Para  4.7.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.5 DMRC has informed that passenger fares of metro feeder buses are fixed by State Transport 
Authority (STA)/GNCTD which are nominal. Further, DMRC is going to introduce 100 MIDI Air 
Conditioned Electric low floor buses for which 2 operators have already been finalized. For 
introduction of these 100 e-buses on 10 feeder routes, the fare for these services shall be as fixed by 
STA and shall need be subsidised by DMRC. These buses would therefore be subsidized services to 
passengers and would add convenience to the metro commuters in their last mile needs.   
 
2.8.6 Regarding reduction in parking rates at metro stations, the same are already on lower side as 
compared to other civic agencies like NDMC, EDMC and SDMC. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.8.7 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.    
 
 
2.9 Impact of Odd-Even scheme on Delhi Roads  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.1 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a study should be conducted at the 
earliest on the impact of Odd-Even Scheme on easing congestion on roads of Delhi and on pollution, if 
no such study has been conducted. 
(Para  4.7.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.2 M/s. DIMTS has conducted a study on the traffic assessment impact of „Odd -Even‟ scheme –  
2019 on the request of Transport Department. 

29 
 
2.9.3 Major findings of the study are as under: 
 
(i) Traffic data analysis indicated that during Odd –Even Scheme, about 30% personal car 
traffic reduced on road. However there was increase of 6.5% in 2 wheeler traffic, 
19.5% in Taxi, 7.5% in Auto and 4.7%% in Buses. 
(ii) The analysis indicates that net impact of traffic reduction on various roads in terms of 
total volumes ranges from 1% to18% as shown below. Highest impact of traffic 
reduction was seen on GT road (-18.1%) followed by Noida Link road (-15.4%). 
(iii) It has been estimated that average increase in the daily Bus ridership during scheme 
was about 2.8 Lakh amounting to about 5.39% increase. Similarly average increase in 
the daily Metro ridership was recorded about 1.7 Lakh amounting to about 3% 
increase in Metro journeys. Overall, total increase in the daily Public Transport (PT) 
ridership was about 4.5 Lakh amounting to 4.2% increase in PT journeys during the 
Odd Even period 
(iv) It is determined that due to reduction in traffic, average speed on road increased 
between 2% and 15% on various major roads in Delhi 
(v) It has been determined that incidences having speed less than 5 kmph reduced from 
13.7% to 12.4% and incidences having speed between 5-10 kmph reduced from 13% 
to 11.3%. On the other hand, incidences having speed more than 30 kmph increased 
from 21.2% to 24.1% showing lesser congestion during odd-even scheme 
implementation. 
(vi) traffic queue length at junctions were substantially lower during odd-even compared to 
normal days. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.9.4 The Committee notes reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
2.10 Multi-Modal Integration and Management of Traffic and Parking at Metro Stations  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.10.1 The Committed is of the opinion that the tasks of these types of multitude level need advance 
and continuous planning and monitoring. The Committee is of the opinion that with the expansion of 
metro rail network the cascading effects come into play which in many ways affect the social 
surroundings. The better facilities at the metro rail network, multi-modal integration and parking 
facilities for vehicle at the metro stations encourage commuters to opt for public transports and 
discourage the use of private vehicle for long distances. The infrastructure development around the 
metro stations for facilitating the metro rail users like making provision of pedestrian skywalks to 
connect markets plazas, etc., goes a long way in decongesting the roads as it provides better and 
comfortable option to commute in comparison to the use of personal vehicles. 
(Para  4.8.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2 Initially MMI planswere prepared and finalised by UTTIPEC when the Phase-III metro lines 
were under construction.  
 
2.10.3 Further, DMRC has modified the MMI plans and prepared the conceptual MMIplan of 59 
metro stations of Phase-III based on the latest Total Station Survey (TSS) of the area and  as per the 
ground reality and submitted again to UTTIPEC on 01.02.2020 for consideration and issuance.  
 

30 
 
2.10.4 Out of 59 metro stations, UTTIPEC has issued the Conceptual MMI Plans of 40 metro stations 
on 02.01.2020. Remaining 19 conceptual MMI plans will also be issued shortly. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.10.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.10.6 The Committee, therefore, recommends that special lanes and areas away from the main roads 
should be demarcated for picking and dropping of the passengers near metro station. Similarly, places 
near/under the bridges should be identified and shelter areas should be created for temporary sheltering 
of two wheelers and pedestrians so that main roads remain free for smooth movement of traffic. 
 
(Para  4.8.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.10.7 The recommendation of the Committee has been sent to all the stakeholders for consideration 
and decision. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.10.8 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
2.11 Improving Driving Capacity and the Fitness Capacity of the Vehicles and Establishments 
of Driver Training Schools  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.11.1 The Committee appreciates the endeavour to construct automated driving track to test the 
driving skills of the drivers of various types of vehicles. The Committee, however, observes that while 
designing these test tracks the actual vehicular movement on the roads and other traffic conditions 
prevailing thereon should be kept in mind as it will be helpful in reducing the number of road 
accidents. The Committee is of the opinion that fitness of vehicles is one of the most important factors 
that can impact the traffic flow as well as ensure safety on the roads. The Committee believes that fit 
vehicles on the roads reduce the number of breakdowns and hence, helps in the smooth flow of traffic. 
 
(Para  4.9.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.11.2 Transport Department, GNCTD has already set up an Automated Vehicle Fitness Center at 
Jhuljhuli, Delhi where all the passenger buses & luxury taxies are issued fitness certificate after 
thorough inspection through automated machine. 
 
2.11.3 Further, in this regard, the Transport Department, GNCTD intends to set up 06 Automated 
Inspection Test lanes at Burari through bidding process. In addition to this, there are 5 automated 
Inspection lanes at Burari which were functional up to the year 2013.  Due to a case registered at 
Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB), Delhi, these lanes remained unutilized.  The Transport Department 
intends to make these lanes functional.  Since, these lanes are lying unutilized, these may require 
fitment / replacement of various new equipment / parts for making these lanes functional.  

31 
 
Accordingly, Transport Department, GNCTD intends to hire an agency to provide consultancy service 
and the matter is presently forwarded to Law Department to provide legal opinion. 
 
2.11.4 Auto Rickshaw Unit of Transport Department is granting the fitness to Auto Rickshaws in strict 
compliance of rules made under Motor Vehicles Act, 1989 and after strictly checking all the 
prescribed parts of the Auto Rickshaws including Colour, Brakes, Tyres, Body, Steering system, Safety 
glass, Rear View mirrors, Signaling devices, windscreen wipers, Direction indicators, Electrical 
system, Indicators, Reflectors, Lamps, Parking light, Horns, Silencer and Stop Lights etc. for the safety 
of the general public. 
 
2.11.5 With regard to automated test tracks, the recommendations of the Committee has already been 
incorporated in the designing of the automated test tracks in Delhi.  So far, automated test tracks have 
been set up at five places. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.11.6 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
2.12 Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.12.1 The Committee understands that Delhi being the capital City of India has special issues related 
to traffic but due to negligence on part of the concerned agencies things have gone wors e and if the 
issues are not addressed in time it will become very tough to address the problem of traffic 
mismanagement in Delhi. The Committee further observes that innovations and designs of research 
institutes like IITs, CRRI, etc. have not been solicited in the decision making process while 
formulating plans for traffic management in Delhi. The Committee therefore, feels that the efforts 
made by the MHA and concerned agencies in managing traffic issues in Delhi are not enough and 
there is an urgent need to form a central coordinating agency with an institutional mechanism to 
prepare holistic plan for traffic management in Delhi which should be inclusive, innovative, 
sustainable and futuristic.  
(Para  5.2.8  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.2 The HPC has so far had two meetings on 9 th October, 2018 and 10 th April, 2019 respectively.  
However, the impact of just two meetings have been substantial and the list of the achievements in 
respect of public traffic management in NCT of Delhi have been presented before the Hon‟ble 
Committee and also included in the instant Action Taken Note.  Therefore, setting up of another 
central coordinating agency may not be the need of the hour. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
2.12.3 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
2.13 General Observations/recommendations 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.13.1 Some of the major issues with the management of the burgeoning traffic in Delhi are shortage 
of adequate road space, land not readily available for at-grade and multi-level car parking, 
inadequate pedestrian pathways & plazas, multi- modal transport mix, huge number of freight vehicles 
and personal vehicles entering and exiting Delhi from the NCR. A holistic traffic management plan has 
not been drawn up due to lack of coordination between a plethora of agencies who are directly and 
indirectly involved. Road spaces in proximity to Metro stations and markets are clogged with a variety  
of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Traffic management presently is a difficult task with hardly any 
elbow room for planning and execution. Traffic discipline is at a premium with improvement measures 
too slow to keep pace with increase in vehicles and pedestrian population.  Many areas in Delhi have 
large open spaces some owned by the Government and agencies working under it. If some of these 
spaces could be freed up then comparatively low-cost solutions for improvement of intersection 
geometrics, widening of roads & lanes and automatic multi-level car parking & underground car 
parking could be taken up. In the end analysis land would be the key and many public sector 
organisations and institutions may be required to part with the excess land being held by them. There 
may be hurdles in executing such a plan but a beginning should be made based on an objective survey. 
 
(Para  5.3.1 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders of HPC for 
further appropriate action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.13.3 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.13.4 The Committee strongly recommends that special provisions such as sign boards, ramps, 
special parking badges, passes should be made for person with special ability so as to have complete 
universal road infrastructure in Delhi and NCR. 
(Para 5.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.5 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders of HPC for 
further appropriate action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.13.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.13.7 Free movement of emergency vehicles is not available at present as emergency vehicles such as 
ambulances, police cars, fire engines, etc. get stuck in traffic jam and delayed in reaching their 
destination. It leads to avoidable loss of valuable lives and property. The Committee recommends tha t 

33 
 
the MHA should coordinate with concerned agencies to create dedicated lane/corridor that ensures free 
passage to emergency vehicles.  In case of non availability of dedicated lane/corridor, vehicle s on 
roads must give free passage to ambulances and other emergency vehicles. 
(Para  5.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.8 Delhi Traffic Police has been providing green corridors for quick transportation to save lives 
of patients on the requests received from Hospitals. The recommendations of the Committee have been 
circulated to all the stakeholders of HPC for further appropriate action. 
 
Further recommendation 
 
2.13.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  

34 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
 
3.1 Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoH&UA)  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.1 However, the Committee observes that due to lack of coordination amongst agencies like 
DDA, DMRC the project on Non Motorized Transport (NMT) on the Delhi roads has not materialised. 
There is absence of dedicated bicycle tracks on most of the Delhi roads and intersections have not been 
retrofitted to make them safe and suitable for use by the NMT. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
that there remains an urgent necessity to strengthen the existing coordination mechanism so that 
necessary infrastructure like dedicated bicycle tracks, pick and use cycle stations; and interventions at 
important intersections be developed. 
(Para  3.4.3 ibid) 
Action taken 
 
3.1.2 DDA has informed that as instructed by the High Powered Committee (HPC) for Traffic 
Management in the NCT of Delhi for providing facilities of street design, having pedestrian sidewalks 
and facilities for non-motorized and public amenities of 70 km of Dwarka Street, in the First Phase 16 
km stretch, in Metro Corridor of Sector-12 & 13 Dwarka and identified stretch up to NSIT, has been 
selected in consultation with knowledge partner to HPC.   The facilities will include laying side walks 
and provision for non-motorized Transport (NMT) Cycle Track, providing the tactile tiles as round 
surface indicator for visually impaired persons. Some new roads, improvement of intersection, path 
connection and Ramp wherever required is also considered. The work is in progress for 1 st phase and 
will be completed by 15th June 2020. 
 
3.1.3 DMRC has informed that pedal bicycle sharing services by 5 operators are operational from 
21 metro stations. 2 operators are providing battery operated cycle services from 26 metro stations 
(service yet to be operationalized at few stations). It is planned to extend the service from other 
stations also. 
 
3.1.4 NDMC has informed that NDMC‟s roads have service lanes along main roads and the 
footpaths are also wide enough for safe movements of pedestrians and cyclist.  The service lanes are 
comfortable for cycle riders / commuters at present.  The seamless connectivity for pedestrian 
walkway / footpath and dedicated cycle tracks along the Avenue roads is to be planned in NDMC area. 
In that, roundabouts and intersections will be retrofitted. The dedicated bicycle tracks are also being 
considered as per the site feasibility. 
 
Further recommendation 
 
3.1.5 The Committee takes note of the work being undertaken by DDA, DMRC and NDMC 
like work of improvement of 16 Km road stretch between Dwarka sector 12 and  13 and 
identified stretch up to NSIT by DDA. The Committee hopes that the works would be c ompleted 
as per the schedule and all the metro stations would be covered in near future. However, the 
Committee is pained to note that MHA has not furnished any information on the steps taken for 
better coordination amongst different agencies for smooth execution of work. The Com mittee 
reiterates its recommendation at para 3.4.3 on the need to strengthen the existing coord ination 
mechanism for development of necessary infrastructure. 

35 
 
3.2 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee is of the view that although Delhi metro has expanded rapidly but still lots of 
work needs to be done to ensure last mile connectivity to metro stations. The DMRC needs to 
undertake multi-modal integration measures at all metro stations. Furthermore, to address the rapidly 
increasing population and urbanization around Delhi, the DMRC also needs to take measures like 
increasing fleet of metro trains, increasing frequencies of trips, rationalization of ticket rates, raising 
awareness among people to use metro as it is the best available alternate mode of public transportation 
in Delhi. 
(Para  3.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 DMRC has informed the action taken as under: 
 
(i) Last mile connectivity
 
 
Though the subject falls in the ambit of concerned State Transport Authorities, concerted 
efforts are being made at DMRC to provide means of last mile connection to the commuters in 
Delhi/NCR. For the purpose, a wholly owned subsidiary company of DMRC “Delhi Metro Last Mile 
Services Limited” is registered on 13 th April, 2018. Various activities towards last mile connectivity 
undertaken by DMRC are as under: 
 
Metro Feeder Buses
 
  
Presently, 174 MIDI feeder CNG Non-AC buses are being run on 32 STA approved routes 
which connect 70 metro stations. DMRC is also in the process of deploying 100 AC e-buses to 
be operated on 10 new routes. Procurement order has already been placed in December,   2019 
and the e-buses are expected to be supplied within one year.  
 
E-Rickshaw Services
 
  
E-rickshawservices are operational from 15 stations.  Operators have been finalized for 
another 41 stations.  
 
E-Scooter Services
 
   
E-Scooter services by DMRC authorized operator are operational from 4 metro stations. The 
services will soon be initiated from 3 more metro stations.  
 
Cycle Sharing Services
 
  
Pedal bicycle sharing services by 5 operators are operational from 21 metro stations. 2 
operators are providing battery operated cycle services from 26 metro stations (service yet to 
be operationalized at few stations). It is planned to extend the service from other stations also. 
 
Cab Aggregator services
 
 
As on date, UBER (CAB Aggregator) kiosks are operational from 12 metro stations and it is 
planned to extend the services from 210 metro stations.  
 

36 
 
(ii) Multi-modal integration (MMI) 
 
For traffic management around metro stations, DMRC has a multi modal integration plan in 
place as detailed below: 
 
Kashmere Gate and Chhatarpur Metro Stations
 
 
MMI work at these stations has been taken up by DMRC. Work at Chhatarpur station is 
already commissioned and that at Kashmere Gate station is in progress and scheduled to be 
completed by June 2020. 
 
Another 96 stations
 
 
MMI scheme for another 96 identified stations is proposed to be implemented. The scheme is 
under finalisation in consultation with UTTIPEC (Unified Traffic And Transportation 
Infrastructure (Planning &Engineering  Centre). The implementation of the scheme will 
require Rs.496.90 Cr. and involvement of multiple agencies like DMRC, PWD, MCDs etc. 
DMRC has agreed to finance the cost of implementation in its own premises at a cost of 
Rs.182.21 Cr. and has approached MoHUA for provision of balance fund of Rs.314.69 Cr. for 
execution outside DMRC premises. 
 
(iii) Increasing fleet of metro trains and frequency of trips
 
 
DMRC has added total 346 train coaches in revenue services from 31 st March, 2018 till date to 
increase the fleet of metro trains and frequency of trips. Currently, 2206 train coaches are 
running in 10 lines of DMRC. 
 
(iv) Rationalization of ticket rates
 
 
Fare structure of Delhi Metro is decided by Fare Fixation Committee and recommendations of 
the Committee are binding on DMRC.For rationalisation of tickets rates, the proposal will be 
put up to next Fare Fixation Committee.  
 
(v) Raising awareness among people
 
 
DMRC is making people aware of metro services through electronic and print media. 
 
Further recommendations 
 
3.2.3 The Committee takes note of various steps undertaken by DMRC with regard to ensuring 
the last mile connectivity with the metro stations and for which a subsidiary company with the 
name “Delhi Metro Last Mile Services limited” has been established.  The Comm ittee also takes 
note of the proposal for procuring 100 AC E-buses to operate on the designate d route.  The 
Committee still feels that waiting time set for procuring buses is considerably high , the 
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be escalated  including e xpediting the 
procurement of the buses. 
  
3.2.4 The Committee notes that Multi-modal integration for management of traffic around  
metro stations has been envisaged for 98 stations out of which work is in progress at two stations.  
The Committee hopes that the scheme would be finalized and the balance funds of Rs.314.69 
crore would be sanctioned by the MoHUA.  The Committee however feels that pace of pr ogress 

37 
 
of MMI work at metro stations is very tardy and there is a need to accelerate the MMI work at 
the metro stations.  
 
 
3.3 Govt. of NCT of Delhi  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.3.1 The Committee expresses its concern that no procurement of buses has taken place since 2010. 
A huge demand and supply gap has emerged due to increased population during the said period as 
there has been no addition of buses to the existing fleet. The Committee feels that this is a serious lapse 
on the part of the Transport Department which has failed in procuring new buses during the last 10 
years. The situation is further aggravated by the fact that many buses that were operational have al so 
become obsolete. In view of the directions of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) to ban plying of 
diesel vehicles which have outlived their span of 10 years, the Committee strongly recommends to 
identify the obsolete and polluting buses and replace those with new ones, as also to fast track the 
procurement of new buses to meet the demand-supply gap. 
(Para  3.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 Transport Department, GNCTD has informed that DTC could not induct new buses in its fleet 
after augmentation of buses for the Commonwealth Games – 2010 as many tenders floated till date by 
DTC for procurement of buses could not succeed due to various constraints. However, Transport 
Department has inducted 2502 buses under the Cluster scheme during last 10 years. 
 
3.3.3 The Transport Department is endeavoring to procure following additional buses during the 
year 2020-2021: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Cluster/DTC  No. of  
Buses 
Remarks  
1 Low Floor AC Cluster Buses  250 Upto 24.6.2020 
2  Low Floor AC Cluster Buses  350 Bids already received, Bids Evaluation under 
progress.    
3  Low Floor AC Cluster Buses  250 Matter pending in High Court.  Buses may be 
inducted upto December, 2020 depending upon 
order of High Court. 
4 Low Floor AC Electric Cluster Buses  385 Fresh tender will be floated.  First lot to start in 
October, 2020.  
5. DTC Low Floor AC Buses 1000 Fresh Tender will be floated.  First lot to arrive 
in 41 weeks.  Completion in 65th week. 
6 DTC low floor AC Electric Buses 
under FAME – II Scheme of the 
Government of India 
300 Fresh tender will be floated.  First lot to arrive 
in September, 2020 subject to extension of 
FAME-II scheme by Government of India.  
 Total 2535  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.4 The Committee is still not satisfied with the response and the efforts made to procure and  
induct new buses in DTC fleet. The procurement process of buses has been  very slow and 
continues to remain so as only 2502 buses could be added during last ten years.  Th e Committee 
notes further
 that the matter is struck in court cases and observes that the Government has to 
find solutions, alternatives to avoid court cases in scuh matters. The Committee there fore once 
again, reiterates its recommendation for fast tracking the process of procurement of b uses in 
concrete terms with visible results. 

38 
 
3.4 Public Works Department  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the Public Works Department undertake simple 
alterations to junctions and corridors, which have so far remained a much neglected area of its activity 
but these can qualitatively impact the traffic situation in a positive manner.  
 
(Para  3.8.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
3.4.2 PWD, Delhi has informed that they carry out the improvement of junctions and corridors under 
its jurisdiction to the best possible for traffic/pedestrian movements in consultation with Delhi Traffic 
Police and the current status and targets are as under: 
 
3.4.3 The high number of road accidents are not only due to faulty design of roads/intersection but 
also due to many other reasons like not following traffic rules, crossing the road at any location, 
frequent lane changing by two wheelers, rash driving bikes without helmets etc. Delhi has the most 
mixed traffic on roads and lane movement is not following by many. Indian Academy of Highway 
Engineers (IAHE) under Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) has engaged M/s Medulla 
Soft Technologies Pvt. Ltd as consultants to study roads of Delhi with following objectives: 
 
Short Term Objectives
 
 
(i) Identification of major traffic bottlenecks, testing and evaluating solutions. 
(ii) Junction design improvements including universal accessibility and safety features. 
(iii) Study of 128 accident prone locations (black spots) along with mitigation measures. 
(iv) Improved integration of Transit stations (metro, railways, major bus stops) and important 
activity centers for universal access, safe passage, non-motorized transport (NMT) and 
intermediate public transport (IPT) management. 
(v) Junction level signal optimization and Corridor level signal synchronization. 
(vi) Improved pedestrian, NMT and IPT mobility at locations where the modes are heavily used. 
(vii) Identification of issues due to on street parking at key locations and investigation of potential 
solutions. 
 
Medium and long term Objectives
 
 
(i) Testing, evaluation and optimization of all upcoming infrastructure development projects to 
ensure maximum efficiency and elimination of any lacunae at design stage. 
(ii) Proposals for grade separation and capacity enhancement where required (based on study of 
traffic bottlenecks, upcoming land use etc.). 
(iii) Study and recommendations on transit corridors. 
(iv) Detailed objectives, requirements and expected performance of Integration of Transit Stations 
(ITS) solutions. 
(v) Reduction of emissions. 
(vi) Planning towards encouraging modal shift to Public Transportation. 
(vii) Parking policies. 
 
3.4.3 The study included 120 corridors consisting of 783 Kilometres  of roads and 918 major 
intersections. 
 

39 
 
3.4.5 Retrofitting work on the basis of this study will start after acceptance of report and approval 
from Traffic Police and other concerned authorities. 
 
3.4.6 The work of streetscaping of seven stretches of roads on trial basis has also been taken up by 
PWD in which the improvement of intersections, islands, central verge etc. are being undertaken.The 
consultants for the streetscaping work have already been appointed and tenders have been received 
for execution of work.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.7
 The Committee takes note that consultants have been engaged to study roads of Delhi to 
attain the identified short term and medium term objectives at 120 corridors consisting of 7 83 
km of roads and 918 major intersections.   But the Committee feels that studying 120 corridors 
consisting of 783 kms may take time.  Therefore, the Committee is of the considered view that 
instead of waiting for all the 120 corridors, the study should  identify corridors as territory- wise, 
severity-wise and give its report progressively instead of in one go. This will result in  
simultaneous work on corridors which have been studied.  This would expedite the process of 
improvement.   
 
 
3.5 Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.5.1 Further, there has been ongoing redevelopment of many colonies in the area hence, the NDMC 
should make provisions to address the increase in traffic load in near future. The Committee also 
recommends that NDMC provides necessary interventions at the rotaries in the NDMC area like at 
Tughlaq road, which is small, and cannot take heavy traffic. 
(Para  3.9.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 NDMC has informed that a number of redevelopment of colonies projects are undertaken by 
M/s NBCC and RVNL and also DMRC‟s project in NDMC area.   These agencies should have taken 
care of the traffic load in design during approval from UTTIPEC.   They have not informed NDMC for 
the required interventions due to their project at the rotaries/intersections in NDMC area.  However, 
NDMC had carried out  traffic study and simulation on some important corridor roads such as SP 
Marg, Simon Bouliver Marg etc as suggested by Delhi Traffic Police. The interventions as advised by 
Delhi traffic police are implemented / being implemented such as widening of Aurobindo Marg and 
dedicated Bus lane at INA market, SP Marg decongestion etc.  Due to the heavy traffic in peak hours 
and space limitations at Tughlak Road Rotary, further interventions may not be feasible.   
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.3 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure at the lack of  coordination 
amongst NDMC and various project executing agencies.   The NDMC being the nodal municipal 
agency in the area should have been a party to the projects undertaken by various agencies in 
the colonies falling under the NDMC area.  The NDMC in consultation with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs should have better coordinating mechanism with other agencies in its are a. The 
Committee takes note that a traffic study and simulation on some important corridor roads su ch 
as SP Marg, Simon Bouliver Marg had been conducted.   The Committee is of the view that a 
comprehensive study with participation of concerned agencies should be prefe rred than doing it 
alone.  Further, the view of the NDMC that intervention at Tughlak Road Rotary is not feasible 

40 
 
is defeatist.  The Committee recommends that some out of box idea needs to be explored to carry 
out intervention at the Tughlak Road Rotary.  
 
 
3.6 Delhi Development of Authority (DDA) and Unified Traffic and Transportation 
Infrastructure (Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.6.1 The Committee is of the view that the implementing agency needs to be more diligent and 
stringent. The accountability for implementing decisions with regard to removal of encroachments 
should be fixed by the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Police and officers of other c oncerned 
agencies entrusted with the work. 
(Para  3.10.8  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.6.2 DDA has informed that whenever complaint is received in STF Cell, the complaint is 
forwarded to the concerned STF Officer of the zone. After taking action by the concerned STF Officer, 
Action Taken Report is uploaded on portal. 
 
3.6.3 EDMC has informed that at Zonal level under the control of Deputy Commissioners, regular 
action for removal of encroachment of Pedestrian Spaces on Market Road by Hawkers / Vendors is 
being taken regularly.  Apart from this encroachment removal, action on 5 corridors falling in EDMC 
area (77 corridors in the matter of IA No. 34/1999 in CWP No. 13029/1985- M.C. Mehta Vs UoI & in 
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India) is being taken up regularly for decongestion of city roads to 
maintain the free movement of pedestrians as well as motor vehicles. 
 
3.6.4 North DMC has informed that the market area parking and traffic management plans of Karol 
Bagh area are being implemented.   The same is under process of implementation in Kamla Nagar 
Market area and plan for Old Delhi is under preparation. 
 
3.6.5 SDMC has informed that the parking area management plan (PAMP) of Lajpat Nagar market 
has been planned and implemented by SDMC.  PAMP for residential area has been prepared and is 
being implemented for Lajpat Nagar-III as per the orders of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. 
 
3.6.6 NDMC has informed that they had carried out  traffic study and stimulation on some important 
corridor roads such as SP Marg, Simon Bouliver Marg etc. as suggested by Delhi Traffic Police. The 
interventions as advised by Delhi traffic police are implemented / being implemented such as widening 
of Aurobindo Marg and dedicated Bus lane at INA market, SP Marg decongestion etc. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.7 The Committee is not satisfied with the evasive response of the NDMC, SDMC and North 
DMC as the details of the official entrusted with the accountability for implementing the decision 
with regard to removal of encroachments have not been provided.   
 
3.6.8 The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should furnish 
a status report regarding action taken by implementing agencies for removal of encroachments 
in EDMC, North DMC, SDMC and NDMC areas. 
 
 
 

41 
 
3.7 National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.7.1 Another important issue which remains unsolved is the taxation policy for inter-State 
movement of vehicles as States have failed to form a uniform taxation policy for seamless movement 
of vehicles in the region. Further, the States have failed to create high level of connectivity through 
ring and peripheral roads to prevent traffic from entering Delhi which is one of the biggest reasons for 
traffic congestion in Delhi. There is also an urgent need to promote affordable, fast, eco- friendly 
modes of transport to address the twin problem of traffic congestion and pollution in the region. 
 
(Para  3.11.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.2 National Capital Regional Planning Board (NCRPB) has informed that the matter regarding 
uniform taxation policy for seamless movement of vehicles is being followed up with the NCR States, in 
the meetings of the Committee of Transport Commissioners/Secretaries (CoTS) of NCRPB. (Last 
meeting held on 12 th December, 2019). With the efforts of the CoTS, two Reciprocal Common 
Transport Agreements (RCTA) have been signed and are in force to facilitate seamless movement of 
traffic in NCR. Further, the recent CoTS meeting also discussed aspects regarding tax exemption for 
buses in NCR. In this regard, Govt. of Haryana had suggested submission of a proposal on uniform tax 
pattern in NCR for buses, which is being perused. Both Govt. of UP and Rajasthan had indicated their 
agreement on the aspect provided by Govt. of Haryana. 
 
3.7.3 Further, NCR States are again being requested for urgent necessary action in reference to the 
suggestion of 222 nd Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs on “The Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi”.  
 
3.7.4 Apart from above, NCR Planning Board have also taken the following steps: 
 
(i) NCRPB have prepared Functional Plan on Transport-2032 for NCR and circulated it to 
the NCR participating States/concerned Implementing Agencies for implementation of 
the proposals related to Regional Rapid Transit System, New Rail Lines, Regional Mass 
Rapid Transit System, Up-gradation of Roads, Expressways, Bus Transport-System, 
Bus Terminals, Logistic hubs, Integrated Freight Complexes, Highway Facilities 
Centres and Airports including earmarking of required land. The provisions/proposal 
of FTP-2032 are being implemented by the participating State Govts./concerned 
implementing agencies. Further, NCRPB also assured to provide financial assistance in 
the form of soft loans for implementation of these proposals/projects. 
(ii) The implementation of Western Peripheral Expressway also known as Kundli Manesar 
Palwal Expressway was carried out by Haryana State Industrial Infrastructure 
Development Corporation, Govt. of Haryana. The part of WPE from Palwal to 
Manesar was commissioned in 2016 and the remaining part has been commissioned in 
November, 2018. The 135 Km. long Eastern Peripheral Expressway (EPE) was made 
operational in May, 2018. The Delhi-Meerut Expressway is under implementation by 
National Highways Authority of India. 
 
(iii) With regard to the Rail Network in NCR, the Functional Plan on Transport for NCR-
2032 recommends the fast and efficient eight RRTS corridors. Out of eight, three 
corridors viz. Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut, Delhi-Gurgaon-Rewari-Alwar and Delhi-
Sonipat-Panipat have been prioritized and are being taken up for development by the 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation which is a joint venture of GoI, and 

42 
 
States of Rajasthan, UP, Haryana and Delhi, established for planning and development 
of the RRTS projects in NCR. 
(iv) With regard to the extension of Delhi Metro Rail System to CNCR (Central NCR) towns 
and Mass Rapid Transit System in NCR, the MRTS (Metro) has been extended to the 
CNCR Towns namely Gurgaon, Noida, Greater Noida, Ghaziabad-Vaishali, Fridabad-
Ballabhgarh and Bahadurgarh by DMRC. 
(v) NCRPB is making efforts to resolve the fourteen issues of inter-state connectivity 
roads/linkages in NCR. Out of 14 issues, the two issues, namely, extension of Bawana 
Auchandi Marg as SH-18 in Haryana and construction of second bridge on Yamuna 
River near Kalindi Kunj-NOIDA, have been resolved. For remaining linkages, NCRPB 
is continuously pursuing with NCR participating State Governments and concerned 
Agencies/Departments of the Central Governments. 
 
3.7.5 In accordance with the thought of Parliament Standing Committee on Home Affairs to resolve 
the issues related to proper management and problem of worsening traffic situation in Delhi, NCR 
Planning Board in coordination with the participating States have been continuously taking their best 
of efforts. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7.6 The Committee takes note of the fact that matter regarding uniform taxation polic y for 
inter-state movement of vehicles in the NCR Region is being followed up in the me etings of the 
Committee of Transport Commissioners/Secretaries (CoTS) of the NCR States last meeting h eld 
on 12.12.2019.  The Committee is baffled to note that when the Committee has presented its  
report on 11.12.2019 how the matter can be followed up in the  meeting of CoTS held on 
12.12.2019.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation on need to have  uniform 
taxation policy for inter-state movement of vehicles from neighbouring States of Delhi. 
 
 
3.8 Improvement in Parking 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.8.1 The Committee notes that one of the major causes of traffic congestion at market/commercial 
places is because of difficulties faced by commuters to park their vehicles due to shortage of parking 
space and lack of information on availability of parking slots and knowledge of designated place for  
the same, especially when an unknown and new vehicle enters the market place. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a proper and visible signages should be placed for guiding vehicles to  the 
designated parking lot and Light Emitting Diode (LED) screens should be installed to give real ti me 
availability of parking slots at various parking venues. 
(Para  4.2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 North MCD has informed that the directions to parking contractors for fixing of LED boards in 
their parking sites for display of availability of parking slots will be issued shortly for implementation. 
 
3.8.3 DDA has informed that instructions have been given to all CEs to comply with the 
recommendations of committee. 
 
3.8.4 South MCD has informed that a live parking application has been developed by Lajpat Nagar 
Market Association, where the market area is geo-fenced.  The app shows the bays occupied and 
available for parking. 

43 
 
3.8.5 East MCD has informed that the directions to parking contractors for fixing of LED boards in 
their parking sites for display of availabilty of parking slots will be issued shortly for implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.6 The Committee notes that a live parking application has been developed  by Lajpat Nagar 
market Association to display the status of occupancy of the parking bays in the parking in  the 
market area which would be helpful to shoppers and traders in the matte r. The Committee, 
however, is dismayed that EMCD will issue the directions to contractors for i mplementation 
Committee's recommendations.  DDA has given instructions to CEs to comply with the 
recommendations of the Committee while North MCD will issue the directions to contractors for 
carrying out the recommendations of the Committee.  The Committee expect a bett er reply.  Not 
only instructions but actions must have been taken. The Committee therefore reite rates the said 
recommendations.    
 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.7 The Committee observes that improper parking, non planned expansion of infrastructure, 
buildings and encroachments of roads often lead to increasing bottlenecks on the roads and pathways 
leading to severe congestion and traffic snarls. The Committee strongly recommends that effective 
parking regulation and management plans for existing facilities and a comprehensive approach for 
planning for future facilities by assessing future demand should be prepared to combat this issue. 
Provision of Park-and-Ride facilities at public transport terminals will also make public transport 
system a better choice for the users. 
(Para  4.2.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.8 The Transport Department had already notified “Delhi Maintenance and Management of 
Parking Places Rules- 2019” on 23 rd September, 2019.  It inter-alia mandates preparation of Area 
Parking Plans by the Civic Agencies/Local bodies.  Therefore further action pertains to Civic 
Agencies/Local bodies. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.9 The Committee is perplexed by the reply that the Transport Department, GNCT of Delh i 
has notified the “Delhi Maintenance and Management  of Parking Places Rules, 2019” on 23 rd 
September, 2019  and civil agencies/local bodies are mandated to prepare Area Parkin g plans 
and further action pertains to  by these agencies.  If parking  Rules have been notified, are they 
cast in stone and no improvement therein possible.  The Transport Department of GN CT of 
Delhi should have applied its mind before furnishing a cryptic reply. The Commit tee, therefore, 
once again reiterates its recommendation at para 4.2.9. 
 
 
Lajpat Nagar (Market Area and Residential Area)
 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.10 The Committee appreciates that South Delhi Municipal Corporation has devised the plan to 
utilize the streets and places of common utilities like school, hospitals and commercial complexes to 
meet the demand for parking space in the area. The Committee however feels that efforts are 

44 
 
concentrated only on utilizing the street spaces for parking spaces, whereas efforts should also be made 
for enhancing the number of parking spaces by constructing more Multi-level Car parking (MLCPs). 
 
(Para  4.2.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.11 SDMC has informed that there is no requirement of taking up the shared spaces for parking. 
The back lanes are till now sufficient to accommodate the parking. However, SDMC is looking for the 
possibility of shared parking spaces for catering to the future demand. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.12 The Committee is aware of the trend of exponential increase in vehicle volumes and with 
the passage of time, the gap between the stagnant number of parking space and increase in 
demand for parking space will widen.  So, the Committee expresses its apprehe nsion that sooner 
than later the SDMC would be compelled to use the street spaces  and other utility spac es 
nullifying its effort of enforcing parking management in the area.  Also, the area wou ld become 
congested with cars and other vehicles parked on the road stretches restricting the movem ent of 
vehicles. The Committee therefore, once again reiterates its recommendation at para 4.2.20 and 
recommends that construction of MLCPs at suitable places should be taken up on priority.   
 
 
Connaught Place 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.13 The Committee notes that the problem of vehicles getting improperly parked around the Patiala 
House Court may be due to rush created by media when some important case is being heard in the 
Court and the people may not find it practical to park their vehicle in the automated parking facility 
opposite the High Court due to distance or lack of awareness about the availability of parking facility.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that separate designated parking for the Patiala House Court 
be provided to address the problem of on- road parking around the area. The Committee feels that due 
to ever increasing number of cars plying on road of Delhi for various places there is a need to e nsure 
designated parking facilities around prominent places like courts, hospitals, commercial complexes, for 
use by visiting vehicles, either on sharing basis or exclusively for that place. 
(Para  4.2.53 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.14 NDMC has informed that at present there is no designated parking near Patiala House Court 
being managed by the NDMC.  The NDMC manages such parking spots which are already identified 
and designated for parking. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.15
 The Committee is constrained to express its unhappiness with the reply that designated 
parking has not been provided around Patiala House Court.   The very purpose of making the 
recommendation of the Committee was that since there was no designated parking for Patiala 
House Courts therefore one is needed to be created/provided.  The Committee r eiterates its 
recommendation at para 4.2.53 for  construction of  designated parking facilities around 
prominent places either exclusively or on shared basis.  Meanwhile, appropriate arrangem ents 
may be put in place to ensure that vehicles are guided to the available parking places near the  
High Court so as to avoid traffic jams around Patiala Court. The Committee recommends that 

45 
 
the matter of providing a parking space and applying the Smart Parking Management System 
thereon should be taken up by the High Powered Committee. 
 
 
Kamla Nagar Market 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.16 The Committee recommends that the matter should be pursued with the Delhi government for 
expeditious allocation of funds for the project. The Committee appreciates the efforts made for 
comprehensive upgradation of the market for providing facilities for the shoppers and the proposal to 
reserve one street entirely for use by pedestrians. However, the Committee strongly feels that the three  
streets on which parking has been allowed should be freed. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
efforts should be made to identify space in the locality that could be developed as a Multi-Level 
Parking to free the three streets and to meet the future parking demands of the locality. 
 
(Para  4.2.73 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.17 North DMC has informed that the market area parking and traffic management plans are 
under process of implementation in Kamla Nagar Market area.  North DMC has also informed that 
the matter of installation of automatically parking and retrieving vehicles using an extensive 
intelligent system of lifts, pallets and sensors etc. in multilevel parking at Kamla Nagar is under 
operation. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.18 The Committee notes that market area parking and traffic management plans unde r 
implementation in the area and also the multi-level parking at Kamla Nagar is being installed 
for providing automatic parking and retrieving of vehicles. The Committee, however, finds that 
ATN is silent on its recommendation of expediting   allocation of funds for the project. 
 
 
Drafting of Parking Rules
 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.19 The Committee strongly recommends that provisions needs to be made to ensure that a new 
vehicle should be allowed on the road only if it has a parking space. 
(Para  4.2.84 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
3.8.20 Transport Department/GNCTD has informed that at present the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 and 
Rules made thereunder do not have the provision that new vehicle should be allowed on road only, if it 
has a parking space.  The state government does not have the power under the Motor Vehicles Act to 
make such a provision.  Once, the provision is made by Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, the 
Transport Department of GNCT of Delhi will implement it. 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.21
 The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that MHA should seek the 
comments of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, on the issue and apprise the 
Committee thereof. 
 
 
3.9 Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.9.1 The Committee is given to understand that the project is being taken on pilot basis and the 
experience gained would be used in other parts of the City. The Committee, therefore, suggests that 
work should be done keeping in view the future demands. The Committee was informed by 
representative of IIT, Delhi that in the past some flyovers had been constructed without making correct 
assessment of the future demand and these flyovers are unable to meet the present traffic demands 
hence are often clogged. 
(Para  4.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 IIT, Delhi has stated that Point No.4.4.10 says that “The Committee was informed by 
representative of IIT, Delhi that in the past some flyovers had been constructed without …………..”. 
 
3.9.3 This should be replaced by 
 
“the Committee was informed by representative of IIT, Delhi that in their view some flyovers 
had been constructed without….” 
 
Further Recommendation         
 
3.9.4 The Committee has noted the comments of the Ministry and recommends that ATN on  
the recommendation may be furnished without going into the semantics. 
 
 
3.10 Rationalization of Buses And Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.10.1 The Committee strongly recommends that shortage of 6000 buses in Delhi be filled up 
expeditiously with good quality buses. The Committee hopes that with the introduction of these 6000 
buses, public transport will improve considerably and loss of time in traffic jams and waiting for 
public transport will be curtailed. 
(Para  4.5.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.2 Transport Department/ GNCTD has informed that the Government of NCT of Delhi has 
already decided that the new buses inducted under the cluster scheme and DTC operation shall be low 
floor air-conditioned equipped with CCTV, Panic Buttons and GPS (Vehicle Tracking System). 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.3 The Committee feels that there is no relation between recommendation made by the 
Committee and ATN submitted thereon. The Committee therefore reiterates its 
recommendation. 
 
 
3.11 Fitting of security features like GPS and women helpline button in b uses for safety of 
women  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.11.1 The Committee observes that use of public transport is the best suited and possible solution to 
the present crisis of worsening traffic situation in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
considering demand of the time and people, mobile applications may be developed for providing 
information about different transport services and real time information about availability of buses at 
the bus stop. The concerned agency needs to ensure that the buses are GPS enabled, properly 
maintained and are equipped with the latest technology for safety and security of the passengers. The 
concerned agency should also ensure that other essential infrastructures like clean and properly 
maintained bus stops should also be provided so that commuters are comfortable and safe while 
waiting for bus. 
(Para  4.5.23 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.2 With the installation of GPS devices (Vehicle Tracking System) in existing buses of DTC and 
Cluster scheme (new buses being inducted are already equipped with Vehicle Tracking System) will 
definitely provide information to bus commuters on real time basis. The electronic ticketing machines 
being utilized by DTC and Cluster operations will also support the real time information. The 
Government of NCT of Delhi has to take a policy decision for installation of passenger information 
system in all the bus stops/bus queue shelters in the territory of NCT of Delhi to provide real time 
information of the bus arrival time at any particular bus stop. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.11.3 The Committee believes that installation of security devices like GPS in the buses and 
introduction of electronic ticketing machines would ensure security to the passengers and 
provide real-time information. However, the Committee finds the ATN evasive as no details o f 
policy decision on installation/ upgradation of bus stops have been provided.  The refore, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation.  
 
 
3.12 IT Based Management of Traffic 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.12.1 The Committee is aware that significant changes have been introduced by implementation of 
the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 and hopes that it will help in reducing road accidents and 
will also improve road discipline among the drivers of all ages and types. The Committee recommends 
that quantum of penalties should be relooked/revisited/rationalised so that the Motor Vehicle 
(Amendment) Act, 2019 is effectively observed and has wider public acceptance. 
(Para  4.6.18 ibid) 
 

48 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.2 Delhi Police has informed that Notification under section 200 (1) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988, authorizing traffic officers to compound the traffic offences at the spot is yet to be issued by 
GNCT of Delhi. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.3 The Committee feels that inputs for the said recommendation of he Comm ittee should 
have been taken from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH)and therefore  
reiterates its recommendation.   
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12.4 The Committee notes the proposal of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of 
India (IRDAI)/Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB) for linking of insurance premium to the  
rule violation and finds that such steps would act as a deterrent and a check for violation of traffic 
rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that insurance premium should be linked to traffic rule 
violation and an increase in premium should be made in case of violation of rules by the vehicles when 
the vehicle is either driven or occupied by the owner or is run under a contract. 
(Para  4.6.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.5 The lnsurance Regulatory and Development Authority of lndia (lRDAl) vide order dated 6 th 
September, 2019 formed a Working Group to examine establishing of a system of linking motor 
insurance premium with traffic violations. The Working Group has submitted its report. As a first step, 
Delhi is chosen to implement the system on a pilot basis before implementing it nationwide. In this 
regard, a presentation was made to the Delhi Government on the report on 3 rd February, 2020.On 
receipt of comments from Transport Department and Delhi Police, pilot project in certain areas of 
Delhi will be carried out by IRDAI. 
 
3.12.6 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that in the presentation made by IRDAI on 3 rd February, 
2020, IRDAI highlighted that many countries, such as South Korea, Taiwan, United Kingdom, 
Canada, Australia etc, have implemented linking of traffic violation with premium.  They have adopted 
different type of models which has had positive impact on traffic violators.  The IRDAI has 
recommended point based system for traffic violations such as drunken driving, dangerous driving, 
using mobile phone while driving, allowing under age to drive, wrong overtaking, over-speeding, 
driving without insurance, etc. The validity period of violation point is recommended as 2 years.  They 
have requested for a pilot project in GNCT of Delhi so that further fine tuning of the proposed system 
is carried out based on the feedback. The Delhi Traffic Police is actively assisting and coordinating 
with the officials of IRDAI/IIB. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
3.13 Diversion of non Delhi bound vehicles from entering Delhi  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.1 The Committee notes that there is to and fro movement of more than 12 lakh vehicles everyday 
from neighbouring States of Delhi. The Committee observes that less than one fourth of the total 
vehicular movement is attributed to the freight vehicles. The Committee also observes that the volume 
of both personal and freight vehicles is gradually increasing. The Committee is also aware of the fact 
that the addition of vehicles on the Delhi roads consumes not only road spaces but also affect the 
environment i.e. the emission from vehicles exhaust and their noise increases air and noise pollution in 
the area. The Committee is surprised to note that there is no planning to regulate or restrict the 
vehicular movement from the neighbouring States when the roads of the City are already reeling  under 
heavy stress because of traffic congestion and other related issues. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that there is an urgent need to formulate plan/policy to regulate the entry of the inbound 
traffic and ensure smooth exit of the outbound traffic by diverting the vehicles using Delhi roads only 
for bypassing via peripheral and ring roads. 
 
3.13.2 The Committee recommends restricting entry of freight vehicles to Delhi during peak traffic 
hours and vehicles which need to reach other destinations and passing through the roads of Delhi 
should be strictly diverted to take the peripheral and ring roads instead of entering Delhi. The 
Committee further recommends to categorise roads on the basis of "prohibit, regulate and restrict" to 
regulate the movement of traffic and to prevent congestion of roads within the limits of Delhi. The 
Committee further recommends that the proposal of patrolling of the border area by joint teams of 
Delhi and Haryana traffic police at the Delhi-Haryana border and at Delhi-Uttar Pra desh border by 
Delhi and Uttar Pradesh traffic police should be encouraged for better management of traffic in the se 
areas. 
(Para  4.7.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.3 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that formulation of plan/policy to regulate the entry of the 
inbound traffic and ensure smooth exit of the outbound traffic by diverting the vehicles using Delhi 
roads only for bypassing via peripheral and ring roads, is the subject matter of GNCT of Delhi. 
However, the Delhi Traffic Police is diverting non-destined goods vehicles from border entry points. 
Additional deployment of traffic staff has also been made at the borders to check and return non-
destined goods vehicles. During the year 2019, a total of 1,75,070 goods vehicles were checked and 
7,543 non-destined goods vehicles were returned from the border by traffic police.  It is an ongoing 
process for which necessary action is undertaken by Delhi Traffic Police. 
 
3.13.4 In addition, plying and idle parking of goods vehicles has been restricted by Transport 
Department, GNCT of Delhi and Delhi Traffic Police on specified roads during specified timings (24 
hours restrictions, day time restrictions and peak hours restrictions) for different categories of goods 
vehicles i.e. Heavy, Medium and Light Goods Vehicles to prevent congestion of roads within the limits 
of Delhi. The restrictions are being implemented on ground by Delhi Traffic Police. During the year 
2019, a total of 71,752 goods vehicles were prosecuted for violation of no entry timings.  Additional 
deployment of traffic police staff is also ensured at major border entry points for ensuring better traffic 
management in the area. 
 
3.13.5 Uttar Pradesh Traffic Police has informed that 8 districts of Uttar Pradesh (Ghaziabad, 
Gautam Budh Nagar, Bulandshahar, Hapur, Meerut, Baghpat, Muzaffarnagar and Shamli) fall in 
NCR region, in which the two districts Ghaziabad and Gautam Budh Nagar are adjacent to the 
National Capital Delhi.  Action taken on the recommendations contained in 222nd Report are as under: 
 

50 
 
(i) In the adjacent districts of Delhi, Gautam Budh Nagar and Ghaziabad and in the border areas 
of Delhi, the Traffic Police takes effective action against encroachment in coordination 
with other concerned departments as per the orders of the government/high officials. Due 
to the various programmes/events being organized in Delhi, appropriate action is taken in 
coordination with Delhi Police and concerned Departments. 
(ii) Often coordination meeting of all concerned departments is organized in the state of Delhi for 
smooth traffic system in NCR, in which the senior officers of concerned department of the 
State participate and outcome is conveyed to the ground level and complied. 
(iii)A major part of NH-09, NH-91, Noida-Greater Noida Expressway and Yamuna Expressway 
comes under the border district of Gautam Budh Nagar and NH-24, NH-58, NH-91 and 
SH-57 fall in the district of Ghaziabad. Goods carrier vehicles and passenger vehicles from 
all over the state are coming here day and night and there is a large number of movement 
of VIPs of the state in these districts. Due to all these, the pressure of traffic is constantly 
increasing in the state of Delhi as well as in the districts Gautam Budh Nagar and 
Ghaziabad. In spite of this, the traffic is being operated smoothly and actions are taken to 
divert vehicles going to other states through peripheral way. 
(iv) 6 routes going to Delhi from Gautam Budh Nagar (Kalindi Kunj border, DND, Chilla border, 
Mayur Vihar, New Ashok Nagar border, Vasundhra border, Jungpura border), heavy 
goods vehicles going to other states are diverted through NH-9, Yamuna Expressway and 
Eastern Peripheral way to their destination in the compliance of Hon‟ble National Green 
Tribunal (NGT) orders. 
(v) In district Ghaziabd, the heavy vehicles whose destination is not Delhi and going to Rajasthan, 
Haryana, Punjab are diverted and sent to their destination through Eastern Peripheral way 
by deputing of additional traffic police force in the compliance of Hon‟ble NGT orders. 
(vi) Continuous coordination has been maintained with the Traffic Police Delhi. The traffic is 
facilitated by coordinating according to the directions. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that co mments of 
GNCT of Delhi should have been obtained on this recommendation of the Committee. 
 
3.13.7 The Committee also desires to be informed about the coordination mechanism with state  
Government of Haryana like the one with Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
 
3.14 Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
 
Recommendation
 
 
3.14.1 The Committee observes that the agencies are lacking in efforts for providing viable traffic 
related facilities for differently abled people of the society and this is severely affecting their daily life 
as a commuter. There is an urgent need to safeguard the interests of the vulnerable Sections of the 
Society, therefore, while planning for any solution the interests of the vulnerable Sections of the 
Society must be taken into account.   
(Para  5.2.7  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders for 
compliance. 
 
 

51 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.14.3 The Committee notes the reply and feels that some mechanism needs to be institute d 
under the HPC to specifically scrutinise various proposal for development of infrastructure and 
sensitize those are making plan to assess the effect of implementation of the proposals on 
needs/mobility of these sections of the society. 

52 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government have not been 
received 
 
 
 
4.1 Public Works Department (PWD) 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.1.1 The Committee observes that in the absence of proper guidelines, road signage are placed on 
pedestrains footpaths, thus obstructing the free flow of pedestrians movement. This forces pedestrains 
to walk on the road which hinders the free flow of traffic. The Committee feels that putting road 
signage at parking places is vital for the smooth flow of traffic. The Committee therefore recommends 
that the MHA may take up with the PWD to place adequate and appropriate signage at proper plac es 
and frame guidelines in this regard. 
(Para  3.8.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 PWD, Delhi has informed that audit of signages on roads is being done which include checking 
of signages, their location, requirement etc. Appropriate signages at proper places are generally 
installed on PWD roads as per existing guidelines of Indian Road Standards (IRC-67) and wrong 
signages are proposed to be corrected by 31st March, 2021.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.1.3 The Committee takes note that the Indian Road Standards (IRC-67) guidelines are 
followed in installation of the signage and the audit of signage on roads is being done to asce rtain 
their utility by the PWD.  The Committee feels that in the first place wrong signages should n ot 
be placed and if it is found that it has been done then responsibility of both the contrac tor and 
concerned officer(s) needs to be fixed to obviate such wasteful/unproductive exercise.   
 
 
4.2 Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee recommends that the NDMC should increase the capacity of existing 
infrastructure and road network ensuring safe movement of pedestrians, cyclists, women and provide 
universal accessibility. Integration of different modes of transport should also be taken up by NDMC. 
The Committee observes that most of the important persons reside in and around Lutyen‘s Delhi which 
is under NDMC but there is no provision of separate lane to facilitate easy and free flow of traff ic 
resulting in traffic jams and also security concerns. Therefore, the Committee recommends that MHA 
should coordinate with Transport Department, PWD of Government of Delhi and Delhi police to 
ensure free and safe movement of important persons in the area and also to avoid any inconvenience to 
the commuters. 
(Para  3.9.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 NDMC has informed that NDMC‟s roads have service lanes along main  roads and the 
footpaths are also wide enough for safe movements of pedestrians, cyclist, women and important 

53 
 
persons.  The service lanes are comfortable for cycle riders / commuters at present.  The seamless 
connectivity for pedestrian walkway / footpath and dedicated cycle tracks along the Avenue roads is to 
be planned in NDMC area. In that, roundabouts and intersections will be retrofitted. The dedicated 
bicycle tracks are also being considered as per the site feasibility.  
 
4.2.3 NDMC has started the Public Bike Sharing System in NDMC area by providing State of Art 
Bicycles consisting important features like gender friendly, GPS enabled and easy gear for smooth 
ride, in NDMC area through Private concessionaire on PPP Model as last mile connectivity as pick 
and use points / facility at all the stations.  The project is running successfully and satisfactorily.  
There is about one lakh active user. 
 
4.2.4 Due to the space limitations along with the all major roads in NDMC and dense trees, the 
widening of carriage way are not feasible at all the locations.   
 
4.2.5 The footpaths are provided in all the avenue roads and main colony roads / streets with proper 
ramps and bollards for easy and comfortable access to pedestrian, important persons, woman, and 
senior citizen etc., to avoid inconvenience to the commuters. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.2.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry for various works under taken by NDMC 
for safe movement of pedestrians, cyclists, women and important persons in NDMC 
area/Luyten’s Delhi. However, the Committee recommends that planned seamless connectivity 
for pedestrian walkway/footpath and dedicated cycle track along the Avenue roads needs to be 
expedited and the Committee may be informed of the action taken. Similarly exercise  of 
dedicated cycle track needs to be put on fast track. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.2.7 The Committee is concerned that parking projects undertaken by North DMC will not be 
enough to address the parking issues in the area. Further, the North DMC needs to run regular drives 
for removal of permanent and temporary encroachments in the commercial area of the region. 
 
(Para  3.9.13 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.2.8 Multi level parking with capacity of 12,301 ECS (equivalent car space) at North DMC plots 
and Metro plots has been undertaken by North DMC. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.2.9 The Committee notes that the MLP project has been undertaken by North D MC and 
would like to be apprised about the details of places identified, timeline and cost in  this regard.  
Further, the Committee hopes that the multi-level car parking would be fitted with late st 
technology to save time and fuel of the motorists. 
 
4.2.10 The Committee expresses its disatisfaction over not providing any details of the action 
taken on removing encroachment in the Area.  The Committee is aware that  many comme rcial 
areas are located in North D MC and the menace of both permanent and temporary 
encroachments is rampant.  The Committee desires to be apprised about the statu s on removal 
of encroachment and the strategy being applied to deter the possible encroachments in future. 

54 
 
4.3 National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.3.1 The Committee observes that there is lack of coordination between the State Governments of 
Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and other concerned agencies in the NCR in management of traffic. 
The Committee recommends that the institutional mechanism should be further strengthened and 
representatives from the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) and Planning Boards from 
concerned States should be included as members in the High Powered Committee functioning under 
the MHA. 
(Para  3.11.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 Representative of National Capital Regional Planning Board (NCRPB) has been included as 
one of the members of the High Powered Committee vide Order dated 28 th February, 2020 
(Annexure-I). 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.3.3 The Committee takes note that a representative of the National Capital Regional 
Planning Board (NCRPB) has been included as one of the members of the High Pow ered 
Committee, in accordance to its recommendation.  However, the Committee find s that no reply 
in relation to its recommendations on lack of coordination amongst concerned States of 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan has been furnished.  The Committee expresses its  
displeasure over not apprising it about the action taken  for inclusion of representatives of 
Planning Boards from the concerned States in the High Powered Committee and recommends to 
furnish a reply therefor too. 
 
 
 
4.4 Improvement in Parking 
 
Bhikaji Cama Place
 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.4.1 The Committee notes that the locality is highly congested and due to on-street and at-grade 
parking, the vehicular movement in the locality was obstructed.  
(Para 4.2.42 ibid) 
 
4.4.2 Regarding general up-gradation plan, the Request For Proposal (RFP) for hiring agency has 
been received and referred to competent authority for allowing negotiations, as quoted rates are high.  
A time gap of more than six months has been kept for selection of the agency. The Committee 
recommends that the process of selection of agencies should be completed in shortest possible time so 
as to reduce the target. 
(Para 4.2.43 ibid) 
 
4.4.3 Regarding construction of multi-level parking in Phase-2, the Committee notes that issuance of 
RFP for hiring of agency has been issued and process of selection of work is likely to be completed in 
three months i.e. by February, 2020. The Committee recommends that the construction of multi-level 
parking in phase-2 should be completed without time and cost over run. The Committee feels that 

55 
 
freeing the streets and lanes of the locality is necessary for the easy movement of vehicles especially in 
case of emergency. 
(Para 4.2.44 ibid) 
 
4.4.4 The Committee recommends that the work of construction of multi-level parking be taken up 
on priority basis and revised schedule to pre-pone the construction of multi-level parking should be 
made so that the parking facilities in the area could be augmented which in turn will have a positive 
effect on the overall traffic situation in the area. 
(Para 4.2.45 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.4.5 DDA has taken up the following Traffic Improvement Plan of Bhikaji Cama Place: 
 
(i) Provision of Multi Level car parking Infrastructure at one location for total 445 cars + 156 
Two Wheelers.              
(ii) To facilitate pedestrian movement, provision of lifts, escalators, skywalks, toilets, wi-fi etc.           
(iii)Provision of additional roads linking between two ends of complex between Ring Road and 
August Kranti Bhawan for improving movement of motorised transport Work for up 
gradation of main plaza area and surface parking, circulation roads etc. has been awarded 
on December 2019.The work will be completed in 12 months.                                                                
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.4.6 The Committee takes note of the Traffic Improvement Plan of Bikhaji Cama Place taken 
up by DDA but the recommendation of the Committee was for expediting the Multi-Leve l Car 
parking. The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its recommendation. 
 
 
4.5 Retrofitting of 100 Junctions and 77 Identified Corridors 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.5.1 The Committee takes note of the work done at various locations like improvement at Adchini 
T. Point, PTS Chowk like construction of slip roads, relocation of the CNG stations and installation of 
iron grills and relocation of bus stops, etc. 
 
(Para 4.3.13 ibid) 
 
4.5.2 The Committee recommends that as per the target dates fixed by the Ministry as mentioned in 
the table above and the steps identified towards meeting that target, work should be completed. 
 
(Para  4.3.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.5.3 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that as regards 77 identified corridors, the matter is 
regularly taken up by DCsP/Traffic Ranges, who are the convener of the Task Force teams for their 
respective areas of jurisdiction, with the PWD and other concerned agencies to get the tasks 
completed as per specified timelines indicated by the agencies. Review meetings are also convened by 
Special CP/Traffic on regular basis with all concerned agencies to review the progress made by the 
agencies for completion of the identified tasks. During these meetings, the agencies are also requested 
to complete the identified tasks as per the timelines set by them. Overall status of the tasks on these 77 
corridors is as follows: 
 

56 
 
 Cate-gory ‘A’ Cate-gory ‘B’ Cate-gory ‘C’ Total 
Completed 162 51 29 242 
Regular & Continuous Action 37 12 9 58 
Not found feasible 56 22 15 93 
Under progress/ pending 95 80 52 227 
Total 350 165 105 620 
 
4.5.4 PWD, Delhi has informed that they carry out the improvement of junctions and corridors under 
its jurisdiction to the best possible for traffic/pedestrian movements in consultation with Delhi Traffic 
Police and the current status and targets are as under:- 
 
4.5.5 The high number of road accidents are not only due to faulty design of roads/intersection but 
also due to many other reasons like not following traffic rules, crossing the road at any location, 
frequent lane changing by two wheelers, rash driving bikes without helmets, etc. Delhi has the most 
mixed traffic on roads and nobody follow lane movement. Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
(IAHE) under MoRTH has engaged M/s Medulla Soft Technologies Pvt. Ltd as consultants to study 
roads of Delhi with following objectives: 
 
Short Term Objectives
 
 
(i) Identification of major traffic bottlenecks, testing and evaluating solutions. 
(ii) Junction design improvements including universal accessibility and safety features. 
(iii) Study of 128 accident prone locations (black spots) along with mitigation measures. 
(iv) Improved integration of Transit stations (metro, railways, major bus stops) and important 
activity centers for universal access, safe passage, non-motorized transport (NMT) and 
intermediate public transport (IPT) management. 
(v) Junction level signal optimization and Corridor level signal synchronization. 
(vi) Improved pedestrian, NMT and IPT mobility at locations where the modes are  heavily used. 
(vii) Identification of issues due to on street parking at key locations, and investigation of potential 
solutions. 
 
Medium and long term Objectives
 
 
(i) Testing, evaluation and optimization of all upcoming infrastructure development projects to 
ensure maximum efficiency and elimination of any lacunae at design stage. 
(ii) Proposals for grade separation and capacity enhancement where required (based on study of 
traffic bottlenecks, upcoming land use, etc.). 
(iii) Study and recommendations on transit corridors. 
(iv) Detailed objectives, requirements and expected performance of ITS solutions. 
(v) Reduction of emissions. 
(vi) Planning towards encouraging modal shift to Public Transportation. 
(vii) Parking policies. 
 
4.5.6 The study included 120 corridors consisting on 783 Km of roads and 918 major intersections.  
Retrofitting work on the basis of this study will start after acceptance of report and approval from 
Traffic Police and other concerned authority.  The work of streetscaping of seven stretches of roads on 
trial basis have also been taken up by PWD in which the improvement of intersections, islands, central 
verge etc. are being undertaken. The consultants for the streetscaping work have already been 
appointed and tenders have been received for execution of work. 
 
 
 

57 
 
Further Recommendation 
   
4.5.7 The Committee takes  note  that the task forces have been constituted by the Delhi Traf fic 
Police to carryout the various tasks in 77 identified corridors and the matter is being taken up 
with PWD and concerned agencies for timely completion of the tasks.  However, the Committee  
is constrained to note that the pace of work is slow and 454 tasks are still under progress as per 
the data furnished by the Delhi Traffic Police.  The Committee also takes note of the reply of the 
PWD, Delhi that a company viz. Medulla Soft Technologies Pvt. Ltd. has been engaged to study  
roads of Delhi with short-term, medium term and long term objectives.  The  Committee hopes 
that the retrofitting work would be carried out by obtaining necessary approval of the Delh i 
Traffic Police and other concerned authorities without any delay.  The Committee m ay be 
apprised on the progress made in this regard.  
 
 
4.6 Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.6.1 The Committee in its meeting held on 11th October, 2019 took note of the fact about the poor 
quality of work done on some flyovers. The Committee is anguished at the low quality of work done  
on some flyovers like poor sound barriers, riders feeling bumps due to uneven surface. The Committee 
therefore strongly recommends that there should be regular check on the quality of the work being 
done and a functional mechanism should be put in place to check the quality of work. 
 
(Para  4.4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6.2 The recommendation of the Hon‟bl e Committee has been sent to all the stakeholders for 
compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
4.6.3 The Committee takes note that recommendation has been sent to all the stakeholders f or 
compliance.  The Committee, however, observes that HPC should put in place a mechanism for 
regular quality check of the completed work by an independent agency and follow up the 
recommendation/report of that agency meticulously. 
 
 
4.7 Fitting of security features like GPS and women helpline button in b uses for safety of 
women  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7.1 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that installation of GPS devices is 
being delayed. The Committee fails to understand when other public vehicles like private taxis, cluster 
buses have the facility why the DTC buses have been left out. 
(Para 4.5.19 ibid) 
 
4.7.2 The Committee takes note of the plan made for installation of GPS devices, panic button and 
CCTV in all the buses for the safety of passengers. The Committee hopes that the work would be 
completed in time bound manner. The Committee further recommends that in addition to the GPS 

58 
 
devises, panic button, CCTVs cameras should be installed in all the buses to ensure security of the 
commuters including women and children. 
(Para 4.5.20 ibid) 
 
4.7.3 The Committee feels that the implementation of pilot projects is not going to solve the 
problem. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that regular assessment of number of buses 
required in proportion to the increase in commuting population and upgradation of security features 
should be taken up. 
(Para 4.5.21 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.4 Transport Department and DTC has already signed Master Service Agreement(s) with M/s 
Telecommunications Consultants India Limited on 03.01.2020 for installation of CCTV, Panic Buttons 
and GPS devices (Vehicle Tracking System) in all the existing DTC and Cluster buses. The project 
inter-alia includes establishment of State of the Art Control & Command Center and all the buses are 
equipped with these devices within 7 months from the date of the signing of agreement(s). The new 724 
buses inducted under the cluster scheme during the last 3 months are already equipped with CCTV, 
Panic Buttons and GPS devices. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.7.5 The Committee takes note that Master Service Agreements for installation of CCTV, 
Panic Button and GPS devices in the existing DTC and Cluster buses has been signed.  The  
Committee hopes that all the DTC buses and the remaining Cluster buses would be fitted w ith 
the security devices as per the set schedule.  The Committee would like to be  apprised about the 
status of completion of the work. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7.6 The Committee, therefore, recommends that some sort of mechanism needs to be developed to 
rationalize the routes of the existing fleet, to assess the need for more buses and to decide on 
procurement of buses on regular basis. 
(Para 4.5.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.7 Transport Department has already assigned a study to DIMTS on Route Rationalization and 
Last Mile Connectivity of all the bus routes for providing an efficient public transport through bus 
transport system. The report has been received from DIMTS and is under examination of the Transport 
Department for implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.7.8 The Committee notes that a study on bus Route Rationalization and Last Mile 
Connectivity for providing an efficient public transport system has been conducted b y DIMTS 
and the report is under examination of the Transport Department for its impleme ntation.  The 
Committee hopes that the implemention of the route rationalization based on the outcome of  the 
study, would help in managing the bus operations more efficiently.   The Committee  would like 
to be apprised about the outcome of the study. 
 
 
 

59 
 
4.8 IT Based Management of Traffic  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.1 Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) based on Signal Modernization Parking 
Application with Parking Guidance System. With the increasing population and increasing number of 
vehicles in Delhi, it has become very difficult to regulate the flow of traffic manually and therefore , 
the Committee strongly supports incorporation of Intelligent Traffic Management systems (ITMS) for 
better management of traffic. 
(Para 4.6.6 ibid) 
 
4.8.2 The Committee observes that computer-based Area Traffic Control System is operational in 
many South East Asian countries since last three decades but is anguished to learn that Delhi does not 
have any computer based system for managing the traffic on the Roads. For example in the 
Philippines, for traffic management, a computer-based induction and sensor-based intersection system 
was installed around 30 years ago. 
(Para 4.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.3 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that the pilot ITMS has been initiated and under this project 
Red Light Violation Detection (RLVD) cameras at 34 important intersections have been installed in 
Delhi based on State-of-the-art 3D Radar technology. Similarly, Over Speed Violation Detection 
(OSVD) camera system has also been installed at 100 locations all over the city. These systems are 
computer based and controlled from the Traffic Command Centre established at Traffic Police 
Headquarters, Todapur. Traffic violations such as violation of traffic signal, stop line, over-speeding, 
driving against the flow of traffic, etc. are detected by intelligent sensors and notices are sent to the 
violators through SMS. The violators have been provided facility of online payment through SBI e-pay 
gateway. The entire system is automated based on latest technology. The system is working 
satisfactorily and Delhi Traffic Police is considering to expand it at other strategic locations. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.4 The Committee feels that if the system is working satisfactorily then why it is still in pilot 
stage. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to expand the ITMS  to all the 
locations.  The Committee may also be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.5 However, the Committee feels that although ITMS projects have finally been envisaged for 
Delhi, the Committee is deeply concerned at the very slow pace of progress being made in devising the 
project and taking up just the pilot project. 
(Para  4.6.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.6 The project of Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) is planned to be implemented in a 
phased manner:- 
 
(i) Hiring of Consultant for ITMS project by May 2020. 
(ii) Preparation and approval of detailed project report (DPR) by September 2020 (16 weeks for 
finalization of DPR). 
(iii) Finalization/singing of contract with System Integrator (afterapproval/acceptance of the DPR 

60 
 
from Competent Authority-MHA) – April‟ 2021 (30 weeks from date of approval/acceptance of 
DPR). 
 
Phase-wise implementation of the Project: 
 
(i) Phase-I : Upto July 2021. 
(ii) Phase-2 : August 2021 to October 2022 
(iii) Phase-3 : November 2022 to July 2023 
 
4.8.7 The process of hiring of Consultant has been started as per approved „Terms of Reference‟ by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India. Expression of Interest (EoI) was floated and tender 
opened on 16th July, 2019. Four vendors have been shortlisted at EoI stage for providing the RFP. The 
RFP was uploaded and Pre-bid meeting held on 14 th November, 2019 and tender was scheduled to be 
opened on 22nd January, 2020. In the meantime, certain queries were received from 3 firms for which 
meeting of Joint Purchase & Technical Committee was held on 13 th January, 2020 for examination 
and to reply the queries. The reply has been prepared and DCP/P&L has taken up the matter with 
PHQ on 23 rd January, 2020 for obtaining approval of the competent authority regarding changes 
made in the RFP (as per the Pre-Bid meeting held with the firms).  All out efforts are being made to 
meet the target set for implementation of the ITMS Project. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.8 The Committee notes that the time for implementation of the ITMS project in phased 
manner has been decided.  The Committee notes that phase -1 of the project h as been slated to 
be implemented by July, 2020 and the hiring of consultants is to be done by May, 2020.  The 
Committee also takes note of the progress made so far on the implementation of the project.  The 
Committee hopes that the time lost due to the process initiated for revision of the RFP wou ld be 
made up and the first phase of the project would be implemented by Ju ly, 2020 and the 
consultants would be hired .  The Committee would like to be kept apprised about the progress 
made with regard to Implementation of the ITMS project. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.9 The Committee notes the efforts of Transport Department, GNCTD in capturing the mobile 
numbers of 79 lakh vehicles and issuing of draft notification and plan to issue a final notification in 
November, 2020. The Committee also notices that 28 lakh mobile numbers are to be verified by the 
NIC. The Committee is aware that the project is being taken up on a pilot basis and success of the 
project is entirely based on the collection of mobile numbers for effective monitoring. The Committee 
is concerned at the slow pace at which mobile numbers are being verified. 
(Para  4.6.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.10 The Transport Department, GNCTD has informed that the verification of the mobile numbers 
are to be carried out by the NIC/Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and they have been informed 
to do so. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.11 The Committee notes that the verification of mobile numbers of the motorists are  to be 
carried out by NIC/Ministry of Road Transport & Highways.  The Committee expects that suc h 
coordination amongst Ministries is needed if a recommendation is made by a parliame ntary 

61 
 
Committee which concerns the other Ministries then it is communicated to the concerned 
Ministry and its reaction is obtained for furnishing the same to the Committee. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the matter should be pursued with the agencies for ear ly verification 
of the mobile numbers. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
 
4.9 Reducing the Number of Registration of Vehicles  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.9.1 The Committee notes that the Government of NCT of Delhi has notified a parking policy-Delhi 
Maintenance and Management of Parking Places Rules, 2019 that prohibits parking on footpaths and 
allows municipal bodies to chalk out a plan for parking cars within residential areas. 
(Para  4.7.4 ibid) 
 
4.9.2 The Committee observes that in many cases the old cars are used very rarely by the owne r and 
are abandoned and remain parked. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
explore the possibility of registering a new vehicle only when the scrapping/disposal of the old 
vehicles have been done by the owner of the car and a certificate to that effect that s/he does not own 
any other car may be obtained from the competent authority for for the same.  the Committee further  
recommends that the Ministry should also take up the issue with the concerned authorities to make it 
mandatyory for the accupant of the house to have a parking space so that the new car pu rchased does 
not remain on the road. 
(Para  4.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.9.3 The recommendations of the Committee have been sent to all the stakeholders. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.9.4 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the stakeholders. 
 
 
4.10 Freight Management Plan  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.10.1 The Committee express its strong displeasure on the fact that freight management plan for 
Delhi has not been formulated till now. 
 (Para 4.10.3 ibid) 
 
4.10.2 The Committee observers that freight traffic on Delhi roads contribute more than 18 % of the 
total vehicular volume on Delhi Roads. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that after due 
study and assessment of management of freight traffic in other major cities, Government of Delhi 
along with other agencies should formulate a suitable plan for the freight traffic management in Delhi 
and NCR and this must be done keeping in mind the fact that least burden is felt during peak hours. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that infrastructure of suitable nature to commute, transport and 
dedicated places for boarding and de-boarding of freight materials needs to be earmarked on a priority  
basis and the timing of freight movement should be regulated/fixed keeping in mind the material being 
carried by it like whether it is perishable item like food or vegetables or building materials, etc,. 
 
(Para 4.10.4 ibid) 

62 
 
4.10.3 The Committee recommends the MHA to have a holistic approach by taking into consideration 
all the factors including restricting the number of vehicles registered, restricting the entry of vehicles in 
Delhi, managing the number of private and public vehicles which would have a major impact over the 
flow of traffic. The Committee strongly recommends that a suitable and sustainable freight transport 
policy needs to be devised on urgent basis. 
(Para 4.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10.4 The recommendation of the Committee has been sent to all the stakeholders for consideration 
and decision. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.10.5 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
stakeholders.   
 
 
4.11 Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.11.1 The Committee appreciates various models prepared by IIT, Delhi regarding decongestion and 
smooth movement of traffic. The Committee notes that there is lack of coordination among different 
agencies to the extent that the executing agencies are totally unaware of the research work done by 
institutes like IIT, Delhi. The Committee strongly recommends that central coordinating and various 
agencies should carefully consider the research works done by premier research institutes like the II T, 
Delhi while framing policies for traffic management in Delhi. 
(Para  5.1.7  ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.11.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been sent to all the stakeholders for consideration 
and decision. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.11.3 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that it maybe apprised of the 
decision/action taken by stakeholders. 
 
 
4.12 General Observations/recommendations 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.1 Besides, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need for more disciplined lane driving in 
Delhi. For this the width of lane to some extent seems to be responsible. There are situations when in a 
three lane road four vehicles run together. In this connection, the Committee recommends that there 
should be standardization of lane width. If required, situation prevailing in some other countries may 
also be studied. 
(Para  5.3.2 ibid) 
 
 
 

63 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders of HPC for 
further appropriate action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.12.3 The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its recommendation at p ara 5.3.2 regarding 
standardization of lane width and the Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the stakeholders in this regard.  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.4 In Delhi, number of two wheelers is huge and when they run parallel to the four wheelers the 
situation becomes dangerous. Therefore, Committee feels that feasibility study of having separate 
lanes for two wheelers may be undertaken. 
(Para  5.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.5 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders of HPC for 
further appropriate action. 
 
Further recommendation 
 
4.12.6 The Committee notes the reply that recommendation has been circulated  for appropriate 
action. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken by the stakeholders in the 
matter.  
  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.7 The Committee also finds it puzzling that sometimes traffic on roads are left without any signal 
and before flyovers traffic gets crowded because of merging traffic. It may be because of l ack of lane 
driving and sometimes more lanes merge into fewer lanes. For this concerned agency needs to think 
out of the box solutions. The role of road designing agencies/Research institutes becomes very 
important in this connection. 
(Para  5.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.8 The observations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders of HPC for 
further appropriate action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.12.9 The Committee notes the reply that recommendation has been circulated  for appropriate 
action. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.10 The Committee feels that the traffic coming from neighbouring States has fewer 
approach roads for entering into Delhi like there is only one road i.e. old Rohtak Road for entering into 

64 
 
Delhi from North East side. This is for traffic coming from Bahadurgarh side and for going to East, 
North and Central Delhi. Similarly, there is no approach road for traffic coming from Jhajjar/Badli, 
Haryana side. The traffic gets struck in Najafgarh as there is no outer/by-lane road to bypass the 
Najafgarh old city. The Committee therefore, recommends that there is urgent need for a outer road in 
Najafgarh for smooth passage of traffic entering Delhi. Many more bridges are needed on Najafgarh 
drain for smooth entry of traffic from that side. 
(Para  5.3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.11 The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the stakeholders of 
HPC for further appropriate action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.12.12 The Committee notes the reply that recommendation has been circulated for  
appropriate action. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter. 
 
***** 

65 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
 
 Delhi Traffic Police 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.                 
(Para 1.1.4) 
 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) and National Highway Authority of India 
(NHAI)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                            
(Para1.2.3) 
Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry.     
(Para 1.3.3) 
 
Rationalization of Buses And Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.      
(Para 1.4.4) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.      
(Para 1.4.7) 
 
   The Committee takes note of the reply by the Ministry.              
(Para 1.4.10) 
 
Contribution of Metro in Reducing Vehicles on Roads 
 
 The Committee notes the reply as it was just an observation of the Committee. 
(Para 1.5.3) 
 
Improving Driving Capacity and the Fitness Capacity of the Vehicles and Establishments of 
Driver Training Schools 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.6.4) 
 
Medium Term Plan 
 
 The Committee notes the reply as it was just an observation of the Committee. 
(Para 1.7.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.7.7) 
  
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  

66 
 
(Para 1.8.3) 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.8.6) 
 
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.9.3) 
 
 The Committee takes notes of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.9.6) 
  
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 1.9.9) 
 
General Observations/recommendations 
 
   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 1.10.3) 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
  The Committee takes note of the intention of the Ministry that High Powered Committee 
(HPC) should be headed by Home Secretary and that in accordance with the reco mmendation 
of the Committee on Home Affairs, the composition of HPC has been modified by including 
Members Secretary, National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRB)  as a member in the HPC 
by issuing an order in this regard on 28th February, 2020. 
(Para2.1.4) 
 
Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. 
(Para 2.2.4) 
Improvement in Parking 
 
  The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.6) 
 
Lajpat Nagar (Market Area and Residential Area)
 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.3.9) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.12) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.3.15) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
(Para 2.3.18) 
 

67 
 
 
   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.21) 
 
   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.24) 
 
Nehru Place 
 
   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.   
(Para 2.3.29) 
 
Connaught Place
 
 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.32) 
  
   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.35) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.38) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.43) 
 
Karol Bagh
 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.47 ) 
 
Krishna Nagar Market 
 
 
 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by EDMC in filling up the gap of demand  
and available parking spaces in the area, by identifying more spaces for surface parkin g and 
construction of five multilevel Car parking in the area. 
(Para 2.3.52) 
 
Drafting of Parking Rules
 
 
 The Committee notes of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3.55) 
 
   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 (Para 2.3.59) 
 
Retrofitting of 100 Junctions and 77 Identified Corridors  
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.4.6) 
 
 

68 
 
Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets  
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.5.4) 
Bicycle sharing Scheme  
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.    
(Para 2.5.7) 
 
Rationalization of Buses And Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.6.5) 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.6.8) 
 The Committee takes note of the reply from the Ministry.  
(Para 2.6.12) 
 The Committee takes note of the reply by the Ministry. 
 (Para 2.6.15) 
 
IT Based Management of Traffic 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.7.3) 
 The Committee notes that 55 more Portable Radar Speed Guns have been procured for 
deployment at high speed corridors to identify the motorists indulging in overspeeding and their 
subsequent prosecution.  The Committee is of the view that assessment of road stretches wh ere 
Portable Radar Speed Guns would be placed may be made and such more n umber of Portable 
Radar Speed Guns should be procured and deployed at such road stretches.   
(Para 2.7.6) 
 
   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry  
(Para 2.7.11) 
 
   The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.7.14) 
 
Contribution of Metro in Reducing Vehicles on Roads  
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.8.3) 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.    
(Para 2.8.7) 
 
Impact of Odd-Even scheme on Delhi Roads  
 
 The Committee notes reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.9.4) 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
Multi-Modal Integration and Management of Traffic and Parking at Metro Stations  
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.10.5) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.10.8) 
 
Improving Driving Capacity and the Fitness Capacity of the Vehicles and Establishments of 
Driver Training Schools  
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.11.6) 
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.12.3) 
General Observations/recommendations 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.13.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
(Para 2.13.6) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
(Para 2.13.9) 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoH&UA)  
 
 The Committee takes note of the work being undertaken by DDA, DMRC and NDMC 
like work of improvement of 16 Km road stretch between Dwarka sector 12 and  13 and 
identified stretch up to NSIT by DDA. The Committee hopes that the works would be c ompleted 
as per the schedule and all the metro stations would be covered in near future. However, the 
Committee is pained to note that MHA has not furnished any information on the steps taken for 
better coordination amongst different agencies for smooth execution of work. The Com mittee 
reiterates its recommendation at para 3.4.3 on the need to strengthen the existing coordin ation 
mechanism for development of necessary infrastructure. 
(Para 3.1.5) 
 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation  
 
 The Committee takes note of various steps undertaken by DMRC with regard to ensuring 
the last mile connectivity with the metro stations and for which a subsidiary company with the 
name “Delhi Metro Last Mile Services limited” has been established.  The Com mittee also takes 
note of the proposal for procuring 100 AC E-buses to operate on the designated  route.  The 
Committee still feels that waiting time set for procuring buses is considerably high , the 
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be escalated  including e xpediting the 
procurement of the buses. 
 (Para 3.2.3) 
 

70 
 
 The Committee notes that Multi-modal integration for management of traffic around 
metro stations has been envisaged for 98 stations out of which work is in progress at two stations.  
The Committee hopes that the scheme would be finalized and the balance funds of Rs.314.69 
crore would be sanctioned by the MoHUA.  The Committee however feels that pace of pr ogress 
of MMI work at metro stations is very tardy and there is a need to accelerate the MMI work at 
the metro stations.  
(Para 3.2.4) 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi  
 
 The Committee is still not satisfied with the response and the efforts made to procure and 
induct new buses in DTC fleet. The procurement process of buses has bee n very slow and 
continues to remain so as only 2502 buses could be added during last ten years.  Th e Committee 
notes further
 that the matter is struck in court cases and observes that the Government has to 
find solutions, alternatives to avoid court cases in scuh matters. The Committee theref ore once 
again, reiterates its recommendation for fast tracking the process of procurement of b uses in 
concrete terms with visible results. 
(Para 3.3.4) 
 
Public Works Department  
 
 The Committee takes note that consultants have been engaged to study roads of Delhi to 
attain the identified short term and medium term objectives at 120 corridors consisting of 7 83 
km of roads and 918 major intersections.   But the Committee feels that studying 120 corridors 
consisting of 783 kms may take time.  Therefore, the Committee is of the considered view that 
instead of waiting for all the 120 corridors, the study should  identify corridors as territory- wise, 
severity-wise and give its report progressively instead of in one go. This will result in  
simultaneous work on corridors which have been studied.  This would expedite the process of 
improvement.   
(Para 3.4.7) 
 
Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi  
 
 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure at the lack of  coordination 
amongst NDMC and various project executing agencies.   The NDMC being the nodal municipal 
agency in the area should have been a party to the projects undertaken by various agencies in 
the colonies falling under the NDMC area.  The NDMC in consultation with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs should have better coordinating mechanism with other agencies in its are a. The 
Committee takes note that a traffic study and simulation on some important corridor roads su ch 
as SP Marg, Simon Bouliver Marg had been conducted.   The Committee is of the view that a 
comprehensive study with participation of concerned agencies should be prefer red than doing it 
alone.  Further, the view of the NDMC that intervention at Tughlak Road Rotary is not feasible 
is defeatist.  The Committee recommends that some out of box idea needs to be explored to carry 
out intervention at the Tughlak Road Rotary.  
(Para 3.5.3) 
 
Delhi Development of Authority (DDA) and Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure 
(Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the evasive response of the NDMC, SDMC and North 
DMC as the details of the official entrusted with the accountability for implementing the decision 
with regard to removal of encroachments have not been provided.   
(Para 3.6.7) 
 

71 
 
 The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should fur nish 
a status report regarding action taken by implementing agencies for removal of encroachments 
in EDMC, North DMC, SDMC and NDMC areas. 
(Para 3.6.8) 
National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that matter regarding uniform taxation policy for 
inter-state movement of vehicles in the NCR Region is being followed up in the me etings of the 
Committee of Transport Commissioners/Secretaries (CoTS) of the NCR States last meeting he ld 
on 12.12.2019.  The Committee is baffled to note that when the Committee has presented its  
report on 11.12.2019 how the matter can be followed up in the  meeting of CoTS held on 
12.12.2019.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation on need to have uniform 
taxation policy for inter-state movement of vehicles from neighbouring States of Delhi. 
(Para 3.7.6) 
 
Improvement in Parking 
 
 The Committee notes that a live parking application has been developed  by Lajpat Nagar 
market Association to display the status of occupancy of the parking bays in the parking in the 
market area which would be helpful to shoppers and traders in the matte r. The Committee, 
however, is dismayed that EMCD will issue the directions to contractors for i mplementation 
Committee's recommendations.  DDA has given instructions to CEs to comply with the 
recommendations of the Committee while North MCD will issue the directions to contractors for 
carrying out the recommendations of the Committee.  The Committee expect a bette r reply.  Not 
only instructions but actions must have been taken. The Committee therefore reite rates the said 
recommendations.    
(Para 3.8.6) 
 
 The Committee is perplexed by the reply that the Transport Department, GNCT of De lhi 
has notified the “Delhi Maintenance and Management of Parking Places Rules, 2019” on 23 rd 
September, 2019  and civil agencies/local bodies are mandated to prepare Area Parkin g plan s 
and further action pertains to  by these agencies.  If parking  Rules have been notified, are they 
cast in stone and no improvement therein possible.  The Transport Department of GN CT of 
Delhi should have applied its mind before furnishing a cryptic reply. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
once again reiterates its recommendation at para 4.2.9. 
(Para 3.8.9) 
 
 
Lajpat Nagar (Market Area and Residential Area)
 
 
 The Committee is aware of the trend of exponential increase in vehicle volumes and with 
the passage of time, the gap between the stagnant number of parking space and increase in 
demand for parking space will widen.  So, the Committee expresses its apprehe nsion that sooner 
than later the SDMC would be compelled to use the street spaces  and other utility spac es 
nullifying its effort of enforcing parking management in the area.  Also, the area would  become 
congested with cars and other vehicles parked on the road stretches restricting the movem ent of 
vehicles. The Committee therefore, once again reiterates its recommendation at para 4.2.20 and 
recommends that construction of MLCPs at suitable places should be taken up on priority.   
(Para 3.8.12) 
 
Connaught Place 
 

72 
 
 
 The Committee is constrained to express its unhappiness with the reply that designated 
parking has not been provided around Patiala House Court.   The very purpose of making the 
recommendation of the Committee was that since there was no designated parking for Patiala 
House Courts therefore one is needed to be created/provided.  The Committee r eiterates its 
recommendation at para 4.2.53 for  construction of  designated parking facilities around 
prominent places either exclusively or on shared basis.  Meanwhile, appropriate arrangem ents 
may be put in place to ensure that vehicles are guided to the available parking places near the  
High Court so as to avoid traffic jams around Patiala Court. The Committee recommends that 
the matter of providing a parking space and applying the Smart Parking Management System 
thereon should be taken up by the High Powered Committee. 
(Para 3.8.15) 
 
Kamla Nagar Market  
 
 The Committee notes that market area parking and traffic management plans under  
implementation in the area and also the multi-level parking at Kamla Nagar is being installed 
for providing automatic parking and retrieving of vehicles. The Committee, however , finds that 
ATN is silent on its recommendation of expediting   allocation of funds for the project. 
(Para 3.8.18) 
 
Drafting of Parking Rules
 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that MHA should seek the 
comments of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, on the issue and apprise the 
Committee thereof. 
(Para 3.8.21) 
 
Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets  
 
 The Committee has noted the comments of the Ministry and recommends that ATN on 
the recommendation may be furnished without going into the semantics. 
(Para 3.9.4) 
 
Rationalization of Buses And Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses 
 
 The Committee feels that there is no relation between recommendation made b y the 
Committee and ATN submitted thereon. The Committee therefore reiterates its 
recommendation. 
(Para 3.10.3) 
 
Fitting of security features like GPS and women helpline button in buses for safety of women  
 
 The Committee believes that installation of security devices like GPS in the buses and 
introduction of electronic ticketing machines would ensure security to the passengers and 
provide real-time information. However, the Committee finds the ATN evasive as no details o f 
policy decision on installation/ upgradation of bus stops have been provided.  The refore, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation.  
(Para 3.11.3) 
 
 
 

73 
 
IT Based Management of Traffic 
 
 The Committee feels that inputs for the said recommendation of he Commi ttee should 
have been taken from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH)and therefore 
reiterates its recommendation.   
(Para 3.12.3) 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
(Para 3.12.7) 
 
Diversion of non Delhi bound vehicles from entering Delhi  
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that com ments of 
GNCT of Delhi should have been obtained on this recommendation of the Committee. 
(Para 3.13.6) 
 
 The Committee also desires to be informed about the coordination mechanism with state 
Government of Haryana like the one with Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
(Para 3.13.7) 
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and feels that some mechanism needs to be instituted  
under the HPC to specifically scrutinise various proposal for development of infrastructure and 
sensitize those are making plan to assess the effect of implementation of the proposals on 
needs/mobility of these sections of the society. 
(Para 3.14.3) 
Public Works Department (PWD) 
 
 The Committee takes note that the Indian Road Standards (IRC-67) guidelines are 
followed in installation of the signage and the audit of signage on roads is being done to ascertain 
their utility by the PWD.  The Committee feels that in the first place wrong signages should n ot 
be placed and if it is found that it has been done then responsibility of both the contr actor and 
concerned officer(s) needs to be fixed to obviate such wasteful/unproductive exercise.   
(Para 4.1.3) 
 
Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi  
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry for various works under taken by NDMC 
for safe movement of pedestrians, cyclists, women and important persons in NDMC 
area/Luyten’s Delhi. However, the Committee recommends that planned seamless connec tivity 
for pedestrian walkway/footpath and dedicated cycle track along the Avenue roads needs to be 
expedited and the Committee may be informed of the action taken. Similarly exercise  of 
dedicated cycle track needs to be put on fast track. 
(Para 4.2.6) 
 The Committee notes that the MLP project has been undertaken by North DMC an d 
would like to be apprised about the details of places identified, timeline and cost in  this regard.  
Further, the Committee hopes that the multi-level car parking would be fitted with late st 
technology to save time and fuel of the motorists. 
(Para 4.2.9) 
 
 The Committee expresses its disatisfaction over not providing any details of the action 
taken on removing encroachment in the Area.  The Committee is aware that  many comme rcial 
areas are located in North DMC and the menace of both permanent and temporary  

74 
 
encroachments is rampant.  The Committee desires to be apprised about the statu s on removal 
of encroachment and the strategy being applied to deter the possible encroachments in future. 
(Para 4.2.10) 
 
National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) 
 
 The Committee takes note that a representative of the National Capital Regional 
Planning Board (NCRPB) has been included as one of the members of the High Pow ered 
Committee, in accordance to its recommendation.  However, the Committee find s that no reply 
in relation to its recommendations on lack of coordination amongst concerned States of 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan has been furnished.  The Committee expresses its  
displeasure over not apprising it about the action taken  for inclusion of representatives of 
Planning Boards from the concerned States in the High Powered Committee and recommends to 
furnish a reply therefor too. 
(Para 4.3.3) 
 
Improvement in Parking 
 
Bhikaji Cama Place
 
 
 The Committee takes note of the Traffic Improvement Plan of Bikhaji Cama Place taken 
up by DDA but the recommendation of the Committee was for expediting the Multi-Leve l Car 
parking. The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its recommendation. 
(Para 4.4.6) 
 
Retrofitting of 100 Junctions and 77 Identified Corridors 
 
 The Committee takes  note  that the task forces have been constituted by the Delhi Traff ic 
Police to carryout the various tasks in 77 identified corridors and the matter is being taken up 
with PWD and concerned agencies for timely completion of the tasks.  However, the Committee 
is constrained to note that the pace of work is slow and 454 tasks are still under progress as per 
the data furnished by the Delhi Traffic Police.  The Committee also takes note of the reply of the 
PWD, Delhi that a company viz. Medulla Soft Technologies Pvt. Ltd. has been engaged to study  
roads of Delhi with short-term, medium term and long term objectives.  The  Committee hopes 
that the retrofitting work would be carried out by obtaining necessary approval of the Delhi  
Traffic Police and other concerned authorities without any delay.  The Committee may be 
apprised on the progress made in this regard.  
(Para 4.5.7) 
 
 
Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets 
 
 The Committee takes note that recommendation has been sent to all the stakeholder s for 
compliance.  The Committee, however, observes that HPC should put in place a me chanism for 
regular quality check of the completed work by an independent agency and follow up the 
recommendation/report of that agency meticulously. 
(Para 4.6.3)  
 
Fitting of security features like GPS and women helpline button in buses for safety of women  
 
 The Committee takes note that Master Service Agreements for installation of CCTV, 
Panic Button and GPS devices in the existing DTC and Cluster buses has been signed.  The  

75 
 
Committee hopes that all the DTC buses and the remaining Cluster buses would be fitted w ith 
the security devices as per the set schedule.  The Committee would like to be ap prised about the 
status of completion of the work. 
(Para 4.7.5) 
 
 The Committee notes that a study on bus Route Rationalization and Last Mile 
Connectivity for providing an efficient public transport system has been conducted b y DIMTS 
and the report is under examination of the Transport Department for its impleme ntation.  The 
Committee hopes that the implemention of the route rationalization based on the outcome of t he 
study, would help in managing the bus operations more efficiently.   The Committee  would like 
to be apprised about the outcome of the study. 
(Para 4.7.8) 
 
IT Based Management of Traffic  
 
 The Committee feels that if the system is working satisfactorily then why it is still in pilot 
stage. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to expand the ITMS to all the 
locations.  The Committee may also be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 4.8.4) 
 
 The Committee notes that the time for implementation of the ITMS project in p hased 
manner has been decided.  The Committee notes that phase -1 of the project h as been slated to 
be implemented by July, 2020 and the hiring of consultants is to be done by May, 2020.  The 
Committee also takes note of the progress made so far on the implementation of the project.  The 
Committee hopes that the time lost due to the process initiated for revision of the RFP wou ld be 
made up and the first phase of the project would be implemented by Ju ly, 2020 and the 
consultants would be hired .  The Committee would like to be kept apprised about the progress 
made with regard to Implementation of the ITMS project. 
(Para 4.8.8) 
 
 The Committee notes that the verification of mobile numbers of the motorists are to be 
carried out by NIC/Ministry of Road Transport & Highways.  The Committee expects that suc h 
coordination amongst Ministries is needed if a recommendation is made by a parliame ntary 
Committee which concerns the other Ministries then it is communicated to the concerned 
Ministry and its reaction is obtained for furnishing the same to the Committee. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the matter should be pursued with the agencies for ear ly verification 
of the mobile numbers. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
(Para 4.8.11) 
 
Reducing the Number of Registration of Vehicles  
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the stakeholders. 
(Para 4.9.4) 
Freight Management Plan 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
stakeholders.   
(Para 4.10.5) 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that it maybe apprised of the 
decision/action taken by stakeholders. 
(Para 4.11.3) 
 
General Observations/recommendations 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its recommendation at par a 5.3.2 regarding 
standardization of lane width and the Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the stakeholders in this regard.  
(Para 4.12.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply that recommendation has been circulated for appropriate 
action. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken by the stakeholders in the 
matter.  
 (Para 4.12.6) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply that recommendation has been circulated for appropriate 
action. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter. 
(Para 4.12.9) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply that recommendation has been circulated for appropriate 
action. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in the matter. 
(Para 4.12.12) 
 
***** 

77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

78 
 
XVII 
 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 11th September, 2020 in Room No. G-
074, Ground Floor, Parliament House Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. Anil Jain 
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
12. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
13. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the 
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following four draft Reports of the Committee:- 
(i) xxx   xxx    xxx; 
 
(ii) xxx  xxx    xxx; 
 
(iii) 228 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Second Report on the Management of Worsening 
Traffic Situation in Delhi; and 
 
(iv)    xxx   xxx    xxx. 
 

79 
 
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that the Committee has presented/laid six Reports in 
the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha during its tenure and thanked all the Members for cooperation, support and 
participation. 
4. The Chairman further informed the Committee that the last two meetings of the Committee 
held on 19 th August, 2020 for 4 hours 12 minutes and 27 th August, 2020 for 4 hours 45 minutes have 
set records as no Standing Committee has met for such a long time without a break. He also 
appreciated the work done by the officials in the Secretariat as they have worked for long hours to 
prepare the Reports despite the constraints. 
5. xxx   xxx    xxx.  
6.  xxx   xxx    xxx.  
7. The Committee took up the draft 228 th Report for consideration and adoption and adopted it 
without any change.  
8.  xxx   xxx    xxx.   
9. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
10. The Committee also appreciated the Report and the Action Taken Report on the subject 
‘Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’ and observed that it would prove to be a good 
Report in making Delhi a best city. 
11. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
12. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12:40 p.m. 
  
NEW DELHI 
11th September, 2020 
       
DR. (SMT.) SUBHASHREE PANIGRAHI   
DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx  Relates to other matters. 

80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 