Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
221
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, )2019
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 11th December, )2019
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on Working
Conditions in Border Guarding Forces (Assam Rifles,
Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border
Police and Border Security Force)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on Working
Conditions in Border Guarding Forces (Assam Rifles,
Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border
Police and Border Security Force)
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 11th December , 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 434


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv) -(viii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-79
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted .................. 3-19
by the Government
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does ............ 20-56
not desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of ............. 57-71
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply ............ 72-80
of the Government have not been received
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ......................................................... 81-92
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 93-96
7. A PPENDIX .............................................................................................................................. 9 7-101

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September , 2019)
1. Shri Anand Sharma  —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya
4. Shri Manish Gupta
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P .P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Additional Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
Ms. Naina Gupta, Assistant Research Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Twenty First Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in
the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on ‘Working Conditions in Border Guarding Forces (Assam Rifles,
Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border Police and Border Security Force)’.
2. The Two Hundred Fourteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 12 th
December, 2018.  After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of
Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee
on 3
rd July, 2019.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24 th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Twenty First Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 9th December, 2019.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
ANAND SHARMA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
9th December , 2019 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  18, 1941 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

          ACRONYMS
2 I/C : Second-in-Command
AC (DE) : Assistant Commandant (Directorate of Estate)
AR : Assam Rifles
AOR : Areas of Responsibility
ARGIS : Assam Rifles Group Insurance Scheme
ACP : Ambush cum Patrol
ARBF : Assam Rifle Benevolent Fund
ARESA : Assam Rifles Ex-Serviceman Association
ARSU : Assam Rifles Signal Unit
ADG : Additional Director General
ASI : Assistant Sub-Inspector
ANO : Anti Naxal Operations
AC : Assistant Commandant
AIRT : Annual Intensive Refresher Training
AC (MO) : Assistant Commandant (Medical Officer)
BFNA : Battle Field Nursing Assistants
BSF : Border Security Force
BGFs : Border Guarding Forces
BOP : Border Out Posts
BPRD : Bureau of Police Research and Development
BSNL : Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
CI/CT : Counter-Insurgency/Counter-Terrorism
CAPF : Central Armed Police Force
COB : Company Operating Base
CIJW : Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CIAT : Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorism School
(iv)

(v)
C/L : Casual Leave
CRPF : Central Reserve Police Force
CCS : Cabinet Committee on Security
CPC : Central Police Canteen
CPMF : Central Para Military Force
CIBMS : Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
CT : Constable
CPGRMS : Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System
DC : Deputy Commandant
DDA : Delhi Development Authority
DPC : Departmental Promotion Committee
DoPT : Department of Promotion and Training
DoE : Directorate of Estates
DIG : Deputy Inspector General
DIPAS : Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences
DPR : Detail Project Report
DACP : Dynamic Assured Career Program
E/L : Earned Leave
EHA : Extreme Hard Area
ECBI : Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure
EPIS : Employee Personnel Information System
ERE : Extra Regimental Employment
E-TAS : E-Transfer Application System
ETBPS : Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System
FSSAI : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
FGD : Focused Group Discussion
FRP : Fibre Reinforced Plastic
GD : General Duty

GDMO : General Duty Medical Officers
GeM : Government e-Marketplace
GIS : Geographic Information System
GJSPKK : Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach
GoM : Group of Ministers
GPS : Global Positioning System
GPF : General Provident Fund
GST : Goods and Services Tax
GSR : General Statutory Rules
HIV : Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HQ : Head Quarter
HRA : House Rent Allowance
HLEC : High Level Empowered Committee
HHTI : Hand Held Thermal Imager
HC : Head Constable
HA : Hard Area
IEC : Information Education Communication
ICBR : Indo-China Border Roads
IFD : Integrated Finance Division
IEDs : Improvised Explosive Device
IPS : Indian Police Service
IMB : Indian-Myanmar Border
IT : Information Technology
IS/CI(Ops) : Internal Security/Counter Insurgency (Operations)
IRP : Iron Removal Plant
ITBP : Indo-Tibetan Border Police
JCOs : Junior Commissioned Officers
KLP : Key Location Positions
KYP : Know Your Personnel
(vi)

KVA : Kilo Volt Ampere
LWE/IS : Left Wing Extremism/Internal Security
LDCE : Limited Departmental Competitive Examination
LC : Line of Control
LCD : Liquid Crystal Display
LAC : Line of Actual Control
LORROS : Long-Range Reconnaissance and Observation System
L&O : Law & Order
LIG : Low Income Group
MT : Motor Transport
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MEA : Ministry of External Affairs
MMG : Medium Machine Gun
MoDW&S : Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
MoD : Ministry of Defence
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MSP : Military Service Pay
MOSB : Medical Officers Selection Board
MACP : Modified Assured Career Progression
NIA : National Investigation Agency
NE : North East
NSG : National Security Guard
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NCC : National Coordination Committee
NGOs : Non Gazetted Officers
NOK : Next of Kins
NWNP : No War No Peace
NRDWP : National Rural Drinking Water Programme
ORs : Other Ranks
(vii)

OFC : Optical Fiber Cable
PFMS : Public Financial Management System
PICB : Permanent Integrated Composite Building
PMSP : Para-military Service Pay
PBOR : Personnel Below Officers' Rank
RR : Recruitment Rules
RO : Reverse Osmosis
ROP : Roll on Plan
RR : Recruitment Rules
SSB : Sashastra Seema Bal
SSC : Staff Selection Commission
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SOs : Subordinate Officers
SI : Sub Inspector
SPG : Special Protection Group
SSF : Secretariat Security Force
SSG : Special Security Group
SUVs : Sport Utility Vehicles
SoP : Standard Operational Procedure
SPARROW : Smart Performance Appraisal Report Recording Online Window
TCIL : Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd.
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
UA Vs : Unmanned aerial vehicles
USOF : Universal Service Obligation Fund
VSA T : Very Small Aperture Terminal
VIP : Very Important Person
W AN : Wide Area Network
W ARB : Welfare and Rehabilitation Board
WC & EC : Western Command & Eastern Command
(viii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the Working Conditions in Border Guarding
Forces (Assam Rifles, Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border Police and Border Security Force). The
said Report of the Committee was presented to the Parliament on 12
th December, 2018.
2. Action T aken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs in respect of the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report have been categorized
as follows:
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Paras: 2.7.3, 2.9.7, 2.10.2, 2.10.3, 2.11.3, 2.15.3, 2.15.4, 2.19.6, 3.5.10, 3.5.31, 3.10.8,
3.11.4, 3.14.8, 4.5.4, 4.6.3, 4.8.2, 4.11.4, 4.18.2, 4.19.5, 4.21.6, 5.5.1, 5.5.3, 5.5.7,
5.9.3, 5.10.4, 5.12.4, 5.12.5, 5.14.3 and 6.13.4. (of the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report)
T
OTAL-29.
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted 29 of its recommendations as mentioned
in Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter II: Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
Paras: 2.4.11, 2.4.15, 2.5.3, 2.6.3, 2.8.2, 2.9.9, 2.12.3, 2.13.2, 2.16.8, 2.16.9, 2.16.17,
2.17.3, 2.19.4, 3.4.4, 3.4.5, 3.5.3, 3.5.11, 3.5.14, 3.5.17, 3.5.20, 3.5.36, 3.7.6, 3.8.4,
3.9.7, 3.12.4, 3.14.9, 4.4.4, 4.5.3, 4.9.5, 4.10.2, 4.13.2, 4.14.12, 4.16.4, 4.17.2, 4.20.3,
5.5.6, 5.6.7, 5.6.10, 5.7.9, 5.8.5, 5.11.8 , 5.11.9, 5.14.8, 5.15.7, 5.17.6, 5.18.6, 5.18.9,
6.1.6, 6.1.7, 6.4.2, 6.4.3, 6.5.8, 6.6.5, 6.6.6, 6.7.4, 6.8.2, 6.10.6, 6.10.7 and 6.13.3. (ibid)
TOTAL-59.
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, does not
want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III: Recommendati ons/Observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry:
Paras: 2.4.10, 2.4.14, 2.18.4, 3.5.7, 3.9.6, 3.10.6, 3.13.4, 4.14.10, 5.5.5, 5.8.4, 5.10.3,
5.13.3, 5.16.3, 6.9.3, 6.10.8, 6.11.2 and 6.14.9. (ibid)
TOTAL-17.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of 17 of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should take further necessary action and furnish
convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of three months after presentation
of the Report.
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received:
Para: 2.4.9, 2.9.8, 2.14.3, 3.6.2, 4.12.3, 4.15.3, 5.7.3, 5.7.7, 5.16.6, 5.17.3, 6.2.4,
6.2.5, 6.3.3 and 6.12.5. (
ibid)
TOTAL-14.

2
In respect of the 14 recommendations placed in Chapter IV , the Committee feels that the Ministry has
either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Committee desires that the
Ministry s hould furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations
categorized in Chapter-IV as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee within
three months.
The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated above, in
the succeeding Chapters.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
ASSAM RIFLES
1.1 Basic amenities - Drinking Water
Recommendation
1.1.1  The Committee ta kes note of the Ministry’ s submission that providing clean drinking water to all
the personnel in the entire North-East is a challenge. The Committee is of the considered view that
providing clean and purified drinking water to every single personnel must be the top priority of the
Assam Rifles Establishment. Moreover , ensuring a continuous supply of water at all the company-operating
bases that presently is sourced from natural sources is also a challenge that needs to be addressed at the
earliest. The Committee, therefore, recommends that every effort must be made to ensure provision of
purified drinking water to all the personnel and establishing a functional water supply system at all the
Company Operating Bases (COBs). The Committee also recommends that the COBs may be asked to tap
the abundant rainfall by harvesting the rainwater and storing it in sufficient quantities for its utilization
at the time of need. (Para 2.7.3 of 214
th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2  A consolidated proposal has been moved with State Governments to provide drinking water for the
Company Operated Base (COBs). Case has been taken up by MHA with the Principal Secretary of Nagaland,
Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Tripura & Mizoram to provide the DPRs (Detail Project Reports) for
drinking water project to the COBs. Response from the States Govt has not yet been received. However, as
an interim measure, Assam Rifles HQ has projected the work for provision of water supply to some COBs.
Keeping in view, the temporary nature of COBs, RO plants and clean drinking water kits have also been
provided to the COBs.
Further Recommendation
1.1.3  The Committee notes the reply.
1.2  Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
1.2.1  The Committee takes note of the fact that the construction of 497 houses out of the approved 1467
is still pending even after five years. The Committee also understands the constraints in the North Eastern
region that can delay the construction process. Nonetheless, the Committee feels that the period of five
years is more than sufficient for completing the construction of all the approved houses. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the construction of the remaining houses must be expedited and completed
within a year . (Para 2.9.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 At present there are a total of 13089 dwelling units available with AR which is 51.37% satisfaction
3

4
level against authorised units. 497 houses are under construction presently and all efforts are being made for
completion of the project by December 2019.
Further Recommendation
1.2.3  The Committee notes the reply.
1.3  Grievance Redressal
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee feels that being in the Armed Forces, its personnel desist from expressing their grievances.
The Committee feels that an option to submit their grievances anonymously via application or website must
be provided to encourage them to express their grievances of general nature. This would enable the
commanding officers to get an honest feedback and allow the personnel to raise their grievances without
any fear of punitive action. (Para 2.10.2  ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 In Assam Rifles, if an individual feels aggrieved, a tab has been added in the Assam Rifles website to
enable serving personnel to upload their grievances. Regular monitoring on the grievances is being carried
out. Monthly progress reports on grievance are also forwarded to MHA every month. In addition, the Force
has instituted the concept of DG AR Open House/Forum wherein an individual can approach the DG AR for
a personal interview through his Chain of Command. A mobile phone based application is also under
development wherein serving and retired soldiers as well as war widows, widows and dependents will be
able to submit grievances to concerned authority and receive the reply on the same while at the same time
giving an opportunity to relevant HQ to monitor the grievances as well as resolution. An in-house organization
called Assam Rifles Ex-Serviceman Association (ARESA) has been setup to deal exclusively with problems
of Ex-Serviceman (ESM), Widows and dependents. Financial assistance from interest earned on monthly
subscription by serving soldiers is provided to ESM as per laid down criteria. ESM rallies are held to address
various issues E-mail and Whatsapp are also used for contact and resolution of problems.
Further Recommendation
1.3.3  The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
1.3.4  The Committee also feels that in order to ensure only genuine grievances are raised and addressed
adequately, a system must be evolved so that the identity of personnel are not known to their commanding
officers. To ensure this, the Committee recommends that for every battalion, a welfare officer may be
designated, from amongst the officers of the rank of 2IC or Commandant, belonging to any other battalion
in the same sector, to receive the grievances of personnel of that battalion. The Committee also recommends
that every Welfare Officer may be instructed to forward a report on grievances directly to the Sector
Headquarters, on a weekly basis, to ensure that the grievances are addressed expeditiously at the Sector
Headquarters level. (Para 2.10.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.5  Junior Commissioned Officer/Other rank have means of raising their problems both through the

5
channel and directly too, if the circumstances so warrant. These are not taken amiss and after verification
from Records and units, problems are settled in a pro-active manner. Many problems raised directly have
been settled. Almost all grievances are attended to except those which are obviously anonymous and malafide,
which may be investigated if the Competent Authority takes cognizance. The recommendation of the
Committee noted for guidance and improvements.
Further Recommendation
1.3.6  The Committee notes the reply.
1.4  Training Issues
Recommendation
1.4.1  The Committee is of the considered view that with the fast-paced advancements in technology, the
induction of advanced weapons, equipment and vehicles, has become inevitable. Specialized training of
personnel in various streams has a force multiplier effect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
AR besides imparting training continuously should also conduct a periodic review of the training modules
and redesign them to suit the changed circumstances to ensure that its force is kept abreast with the advanced
technologies and equipment. (Para 2.11.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 Assam Rifles is conducting state of the art training on advanced weapons, equipment and vehicles at
its training institute. Prior to induction of any modern and advanced technological weapons/ equipment/
vehicle, the training for the same is planned and executed to the concerned individuals who further impart
training to other individuals.
1.4.3 Assam Rifles is periodically reviewing its training/infrastructure/curriculum/ instruction capabilities
and taking necessary steps to upgrade required amendments owing to induction of new technology in the
Force.
Further Recommendation
1.4.4 The Committee notes the reply.
1.5 Casualties
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee is worried at the high rate of casualties due to heart, liver and HIV related problems.
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry needs to identify the major factors that have caused these
health issues. The Committee recommends that regular health checkups must be conducted for all the personnel
and preventive measures like yoga/regular counseling etc. may be proactively implemented to keep their
health issues in check. (Para 2.15.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 Annual Medical examination of all personnel is carried out annually as per existing policy to screen
for any life style chronic diseases.

6
1.5.3 Y oga, PT parade and Game parade are organized regularly at each unit.
1.5.4 Higher age profile and extended exposure to terrain and climatic conditions of the North East, especially
of troops from other areas, and the vigours of military service does result in higher non operational casualties.
This is actively tackled by regular medical screening and awareness programmes, thus keeping it in check.
It is a continuous effort.
Further Recommendation
1.5.5 The Committee notes the measures undertaken for keeping health issues in check.
Recommendation
1.5.6 The Committee also takes a serious view of the issue of high incidence of HIV in the Assam Rifles
and recommends that the Ministry should conduct an intensive awareness campaign among the personnel
of the Assam Rifles to inform them about the preventive measures that can be adopted/ taken to obliterate
HIV infection. (Para 2.15.4  ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.7 Regular counseling and lectures are being conducted by unit Medical Officers to create awareness
about the preventive aspects of HIV .
1.5.8 Adequate Information Education Communication (IEC) materials in the form of posters/display
boards are used at unit/Coy locations to increase awareness of the troops towards HIV/AIDS preventive
measures.
Further Recommendation
1.5.9 The Committee notes the reply.
1.6 Women Representation
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee notes the measures being taken to provide adequate facilities to the women personnel
for improving their working conditions and encouraging more women to join the Force. The Committee,
however , feels that women should be motivated to join the security forces as they not only pr ovide a
different perspective but also allow the forces to utilize the huge untapped pool of human resour ces in the
country. For this, it is essential to allay any fears and apprehensions that women may have relating to the
working conditions in the Force. The Committee, therefore, recommends that any grievances of women
personnel should be considered with utmost sincerity and seriousness by the Commanding Officers. The
Committee   also   recommends that the Commanding Officers should be regularly instructed to submit a
report on the challenges faced by women personnel in their respective battalions and the measures taken to
address them. (Para 2.19.6  ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 In Assam Rifles, the induction of women personnel has commenced with effect from Mar 2015.
This force follows ‘Vishakha Guidelines’ and the recommendations of the Committee on the “Problem faced
by Women personnel in the Police” matter raised under Rule 377 in Lok Sabha by Smt Anupriya Patel, MP.

7
1.6.3 An Internal Complaint Committee /Cell has been formed at Formation/Unit level for timely redressal
of any type of complaints related to women soldiers. It is also ensured that the Complaint Committee / Cell
is headed by a senior officer (lady officer wherever available).
Further Recommendation
1.6.4 The Committee notes the reply.
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
1.7 Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
1.7.1 The Committee takes note of the career growth chart of the Communication cadre and finds that
direct recruitment to this cadre is conducted at four levels viz. Head-Constable, Assistant Sub-Inspector
(ASI), Sub-Inspector (SI) and Assistant Commandant. Conducting direct recruitment at so many levels,
particularly in the successive levels of Head-Constable, ASI, and SI, needs to be revisited. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review the recruitment policy of conducting the direct recruitment
at three successive levels of posts in the communication cadre of SSB and explore the possibility of conducting
direct recruitment only at the levels of Head-Constable and Sub-Inspector for a majority of the posts at
those levels. (Para 3.5.10  ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.2 The Recruitment Rules of Combatised Communication Cadre have now been amended and notified
vide GSR 128, dated 23
rd April, 2018. As per the revised RRs, there are only two levels of posts in the
Communication Cadre of SSB for direct recruitment i.e. at the levels of Head Constable and Sub-Inspector.
Further Recommendation
1.7.3 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
1.7.4 The Committee finds the career growth chart of the Tech (Armament) cadre in SSB to be unusual
and feels that it needs to be reviewed considering the fact that there are just two posts at the level of
Assistant Commandant as compared to eight posts at the level of Deputy Commandant in this cadre.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review the structure of the Tech (Armament)
cadre which seems to be anomalous as the number of commanding officers at the level of Deputy
Commandant is four times higher than the number of junior officers at the level of Assistant
Commandant. (Para 3.5.31 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.5 02 posts of Assistant Commandant (Tech), 08 posts of Dy. Commandant (Tech) and 01 post of
Commandant (Tech) has been declared under “deemed abolished” category by DoE, MoF.  The department
is undertaking afresh proposal for revival/ creation of the technical posts in a manner to address the
observations of the Committee.

8
Further Recommendation
1.7.6 The Committee notes the reply.
1.8 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Food
Recommendation
1.8.1 The Committee observes that only 2,071 posts of Cooks are available as against the authorization
strength of 2,634 posts leading to more than 21 per cent vacancy in this cadre. The Committee is of the
considered view that filling up the vacancies in this cadre is vital for providing good food for the personnel.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that a special drive may be conducted by SSB to fill up the vacant
posts of Cooks in the Force. (Para 3.10.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 Direct recruitment drive of Constable (Cook) have been conducted and accordingly 388 vacancies
have been filled up during the year 2018.
1.8.3 Presently, 2422 Constable (Cook) are posted against the authorization of 2634. As on date, 212 posts
are vacant out of which 164 posts, which were vacant in May, 2018, have been notified and recruitment is
underway.
Further Observation
1.8.4 The Committee notes the reply.
1.9 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Drinking water
Recommendation
1.9.1 The Committee finds the submission of DG , SSB made in his oral evidence before the Committee that
all BoPs have RO water filter systems and the data furnished by the Ministry that around 134 BoPs do not
have any type of water filter system are contradictory. Moreover, even among the 509 BoPs claimed by the
Ministry to have ROs water purifiers, it is not known, how many of these are in working condition. The
Committee observes that around 134 out of 643 Border out Posts of SSB do not have any type of water
filtration system and seem to rely  on whatever quality of water is available to them. The Committee is
anguished to note that clean drinking water is not available to the SSB personnel posted at more than 20
per cent of the BoPs and considers this as a failure of the Ministry of Home Affairs to provide adequate
basic amenities to CAPF personnel. The high incidence of water- borne diseases, with more than 3,000
cases every year , is evidence of this failure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should ensure RO or other effective water purifying mechanism to all the BoPs are made available
expeditiously. (Para 3.11.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.9.2 The concern of the Committee has been noted.  It is intimated that all the BOPs including 134 BOPs
have been provided with potable water or water filtration system like RO, IRP, mechanical filtration &
conventional system so as to ensure that pure drinking water is provided to the troops. Further, time to time
the testing of water for its potability is also carried out. This area is under constant monitoring by the Force.

9
Further Recommendation
1.9.3 The Committee notes the effort of the Ministry in ensuring safe drinking water to SSB
personnel.
1.10 Grievance Redressal Mechanisms
Recommendation
1.10.1  The Committee appreciates the ‘E-Transfer Application System’ initiative that has made it easier
for the personnel to file applications and requests for transfers. However, the Committee is surprised to note
that a huge number of applications, i.e 12795, were received in a single year. This Committee notes that this
number is roughly around 13 per cent of the sanctioned strength of the Force and is worried to observe that
such a large number of personnel are dissatisfied with their postings. The Committee also observes that more
than 50 per cent applications have been denied and understands that the scope for granting transfer requests
is limited. The Committee, however, recommends that SSB should evolve a system so as to allow all the
personnel to forward their transfer requests along with proper reasons and justification so as to allow the
senior officers to understand the reasons behind the transfer applications and prioritize the requests that are
genuine and of urgent nature. (Para 3.14.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.10.2  The provision for allowing the personnel to forward their transfer requests along with proper reasons
and justification has already been incorporated in E-TAS. The applicant can now apply for transfer with
reasons and supporting documents.
1.10.3  Besides, the force personnel posted in remote areas can also apply for transfer in E-Transfer Application
System through MySSB Mobile App and special request through written application.  In emergent cases,
SSB personnel are free to apply for transfer any time which are considered on merit favorably.
Further Recommendation
1.10.4  The Committee notes the response of the Ministry. The Ministry is taking cognizance of the
concerns of SSB personnel in posting and transfer through E-Transfer Application system and hopes
that the dissatisfaction level in the force would diminish due to measures undertaken.
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
1.11 Recruitment
Recommendation
1.11.1 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that all the examinations conducted
by the Forces themselves should be conducted with utmost care and vigilance, within a stipulated timeframe
so as to have timely availability of the selected candidates to fill up the vacancies. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should keep a vigil on the discretionary tendencies that may arise in such
recruitment process and any final decision pertaining to final selection or cancellation of recruitment should
be made subject to the approval of the Ministry of Home Affairs. (Para 4.5.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.2  All efforts are made to conduct recruitments within a stipulated time frame. Due diligence is ensured

10
to conduct recruitments and vigilance representatives and observers are detailed in recruitments.
Recommendations of the Committee is noted for strict compliance.
Further Recommendation
1.11.3 The Committee notes the reply.
1.12 Attrition
Recommendation
1.12.1 The Committee understands that due to the implementation of the Seventh Central Pay Commission
there is a high rate of attrition in the year 2017. However, the Committee is of the view that if better working
conditions are created in ITBP that may reverse this trend of attrition. (Para 4.6.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.12.2  ITBP personnel leave the Force by way of voluntary retirement in favour of better opportunities and
due to personal reasons. ITBP has taken following steps to improve the working conditions and to make the
force more attractive:-
(i) Tenure of posting at one location has been fixed as two years in Extreme Hard Area (EHA),
three years in Hard Area (HA) and Soft Area and accordingly officers are being rotated every
year from EHA/HA to Soft Area and vice versa.
(ii) Couple cases are being considered for posting at same stations.
(iii) Requests for posting on compassionate ground are considered and in deserving cases officers
are given posting as per their request, to solve their problems.
(iv) Officers due for retirement within two years are considered for terminal posting near their
native places.
(v) They are given well working conditions by providing them accommodation/family quarters,
education facilities through Central Schools, entertainment service, cable, internet services
etc.
(vi) Sources of entertainment have also been provided in BOPs.
As regard Non Gazetted ranks, the following benefits are available to NGOs:
1.12.3  Benefits of MACP on completion of 10/20/30 years of regular service are granted to eligible NGOs
and opportunities for deputation to SPG, NSG, UN Mission/MEA and other departments are liberally offered
to them.  Also laid down transfer policy of 03 years, (except for Leh , which is 02 years) in  hard areas and
soft areas for proper rotation of troops, is strictly followed.  On request, couple cases are given posting at
the same station and posting on compassionate grounds, are also considered sympathetically. Opportunity
of terminal posting within 2 years of superannuation is being implemented.
Further Recommendation
1.12.4 The Committee takes note of the various measures taken for improving the working conditions
of ITBP personnel.

11
1.13 Promotional avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
1.13.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that ITBP is presently in expansion mode and sufficient numbers
of vacancies are available in almost all the ranks, due to which most of the personnel are receiving timely
promotions. The Committee, however, observes that there is still some stagnation at the rank of Constable in
GD Cadre. A Constable gets promoted to the post of Head-Constable in 12-13 years in contrast to the
required residency period of 5 years. This is a demotivating factor for the ITBP jawans more so when the
Force is in expansion mode. The Committee, therefore, recommends that appropriate measures including
cadre review must be taken to reduce the actual time for promotion at the CT(GD) level to boost the morale
of the personnel in ITBP. (Para 4.8.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.13.2  After re-structuring of the Force in 2011, 13 new units were raised and recruitment of Constable/
GD made in bulk. In view of bulk recruitment of Constable/GD in 2011, there is stagnation of 12-13
years. At present cadre review of the Force is in process, this situation is likely to be improved and CT/
GD having 10 years or more service held up, may get their promotion to the rank of HC/GD in the year
2019-20.
1.13.3  The Cadre Review proposal of Group ‘A’ Executive GD and Non (GD) Cadre of ITBP has been
approved by DoP&T and DoE. And Cabinet approval is being sought. However, sanction order for creation
of 68 posts of Group ‘A’ Non GD Cadre upto the level of DIG has been issued on 09
th May 2019.
1.13.4  The Cadre Review of Group B & C GD and Non-GD cadre is under process in the Ministry.
1.13.5  Cadre Review proposal of Group ‘C’ Tradesmen of ITBP is also under examination with this Ministry.
Further Recommendation
1.13.6  The Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry.
1.14 Basic Amenities-Food
Recommendation
1.14.1 The Committee takes note of the innovative ideas of serving ready-to-eat meals that has been
appreciated by the jawans. The Committee, keeping in view the difficult terrain and peculiar weather
conditions faced by the ITBP Force and their line of duty, hopes that items in the ready-to-eat meals would
meet the nutritional needs of maintaining the physical fitness of ITBP jawans. (Para 4.11.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.14.2  While procuring the ready-to-eat meal to be provided to the troops of ITBP, calorific value of such
meal and all aspects of nutritional requirement of a jawan at high altitude are being taken care.
Further Observation
1.14.3 The Committee notes the reply.

12
1.15 Mobility of troops
Recommendation
1.15.1 The Committee is of the view that movement of the ITBP personnel in the time of need from one
place to another is of high strategic importance. However, mobility must be hassle-free and swift. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposals for procurement of special vehicles must be considered
without delay and the actual procurement must be done in a time bound manner. (Para 4.18.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.15.2  ITBP has already created good mobility in term of vehicles in ensuing period. ITBP have incorporated
High Powered SUVs, Amphibious vehicles and plans are to procure more High Powered vehicle. MHA has
approved 18 Nos. High Powered vehicles under Mod Plan-III.
1.15.3  MHA has accorded approval for procurement of 20 Nos. Ford Endeavour for the sensitive BOPs of
ITBP vide letter No-44 dated 05
th January, 2018. These vehicles have been procured and allotted to various
BOPs. Besides, as per present requirement, sufficient various category of vehicles are available with ITBP.
Further Recommendation
1.15.4 The Committee notes the reply.
1.16 Modernization and Technological advancements
Recommendation
1.16.1 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Home Affairs is alive to the need for procurement of
modern and advanced weapons and deployment of the same to the ITBP personnel. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that all the recent initiatives taken in the field of IT infrastructure and software applications
must be taken to the logical conclusion to enable digitization of the processes and optimal utilization of
technology for the benefit of ITBP personnel. (Para 4.19.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.16.2 Following initiatives have been taken in the field of IT infrastructure and software applications in
ITBP:-
(i) Establishment of dedicated Force wide ITBP WAN network as a communication backup and
to mitigate cyber threats.
(ii)  Implementation of various applications introduced under digital India like Online Service V oter
and Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System (ETBPS), Government e-Marketplace(GeM),
Public Financial Management System (PFMS), Smart Performance Appraisal Report Recording
Online Window (SPARROW), Police.gov.in etc.
(iii) Implementation of In house Development and Online Recruitment Portal, Online Personnel
Information System (EPIS), Automated Transfer Software, Digital Budgeting System,  Online
Grievance redressal  Application, Leave Management System and Vehicle Management system
for helping in automation/digitization of various branches of the Force and to bring transparency.

13
(iv) Implementation of ITBP GIS Infrastructure solution made available through ITBP WAN.
(v) Procurement of Ruggedized Laptops,  Office Laptops, Computers and other IT equipments in
line with the requirements of the Force.
(vi) Successfully starting of weekly Live TV Telecast from ITBP HQ for broadcasting various
prominent events of ITBP to all locations of ITBP across India to reach upto last Border Out
Post.
(vii)  Successful Implementation and Management of Online Biometric Attendance System for Dte.
Genl and CRO.
In addition following Future Plan of digitization is being envisaged in ITBP:-
(a) Procurement of modern and latest equipments for modernization of IT infrastructure of
Force.
(b) Software development to aid in automation of various branches of ITBP in discharging
their Ops and Administrative requirements.
(c) Extending ITBP W AN network for coverage of new/relocated offices/formations of ITBP.
Enhancements of Online Recruitment software to make it more effective.
Further Recommendation
1.16.3 The Committee notes the initiatives taken in the field of IT infrastructure and software
applications in ITBP .
1.17 Grievance Redressal
Recommendation
1.17.1 The Committee desires that ITBP’s Grievance Cell must be robust and the mechanism should
reflect a system of speedy and fair adjudication of grievances without delay. It is worthwhile to mention
here that fair redressal of grievance of ITBP personnel would go a long way in motivating the force to
face the challenging task and discharge entrusted duties without any worry and concern. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that an effective and efficient grievance redressal mechanism may be put in place
quickly. (Para 4.21.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.17.2  Maximum efforts are made for  speedy and fair adjudication of grievance without delay. A Grievance
and welfare cell is functional at Dte. Gen. to monitor grievances of personnel. Apart from this, officers at
every level are designated as nodal officers for grievance redress and a grievance cell is functional in each
unit. At each level, there is a time bound system to address grievances. Personnel can also SMS their
grievances to DIG(Welfare), ITBP on his mobile No.9560070212 and can also register their complaints on
ITBP Grievance Portal, Through E-Mail and Dak. Personnel also have the facility to register their complaints
on MHA Grievance App and CPGRAMS . Senior officers take time out to meet personnel and their families
during their visit to field formation to dispose off their grievances. At unit level, personnel can also raise
their grievances in Sainik Sabha, roll calls or by seeking interview of the commanding officer for early

14
resolution of their problem and Company Commanders also regularly interact with personnel and solve their
problems.
Further Recommendation
1.17.3 The Committee notes the reply.
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
1.18 Attrition
Recommendation
1.18.1 The Committee observes that a major factor for attrition in 2017 has been voluntary retirements.
This may be due to implementation of 7
th Pay Commission. The Committee is concerned that such high rate
of attrition may create a large number of vacancies which the Force may not be able to fill soon. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may urge the recruitment agencies to fast-track the
recruitment exams to be conducted during this year as well as next year so as to address the situation arising
out of vacant positions to some extent. (Para 5.5.1 ibid)
Action Taken
1.18.2  As and when vacancies are received from the respective cadre controlling authorities, recruitment
processing is done in the shortest possible time. All efforts are made by BSF to complete the whole process
in a time bound manner.
1.18.3  From this Year, SSC is conducting Computer Based Written Examination for recruitment of Constable
(GD) in CAPFs, NIA & SSF and Rifleman (GD) in Assam Rifles, Examination – 2018, which is expected to
reduce time frame for the recruitment.
Further Recommendation
1.18.4 The Committee notes the reply.
1.19 Attrition
Recommendation
1.19.1 The Committee takes note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the personnel committing
suicide, some reasons are of a personal nature. However, the Committee finds that some reasons such as
punitive transfers, misuse of alcohol/drugs and humiliation in front of others should have been addressed at
the appropriate level of the Force. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry undertakes
measures to help the Commanding Officers to improve upon these aspects. The Committee also recommends
that consumption of alcohol by the personnel must be monitored by the Reporting Officers. The Committee
further recommends that the Force should adopt a zero-tolerance policy on the use of drugs by the personnel
and stern measures may be taken in case of any violations. (Para 5.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.19.2  The Parliamentary Committee noted several reasons for committing suicide; some reasons are of a
personal nature, punitive transfers, misuse of alcohol/drugs and humiliation in front of others. The instructions

15
on aforesaid measures already exists in the force and being implemented at all levels in the field formations
of BSF.
1.19.3  As part of the efforts to curb suicides, a study on “Holistic well-being interventions” was commissioned
in April’ 2018  for implementation in BSF and same is being implemented by field formation through SOP on
“Holistic well-being interventions” in which several directions have been given to BSF commanders to take
appropriate action on the matter. The study has focus to lay guideline for holistic well-being interventions at
various levels to check stress and suicides in the BSF. The SOP also enlisted various indicators and warning
signs which generally precede commission of suicide by an individual.
1.19.4  All Forces are advised to note the observations/recommendations of the Committee for compliance.
Various other interventions based on ‘Best practices’ may be adopted.  Forces are advised to submit an
Action Taken Note in a time bound manner. This Ministry will review the progress.
Further Recommendation
1.19.5 The Committee notes the reply.
1.20 Attrition
Recommendation
1.20.1 The Committee notes the measures taken by BSF to address the problem of suicide among BSF
personnel and hopes that those measures do not remain on paper and are implemented diligently at the
Company level in every battalion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake
sincere efforts to monitor the implementation of the stated measures. (Para 5.5.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.20.2  The instruction/SOP on holistic well-being measures to curb suicide among BSF personnel already
exists in the Force. It has been circulated to all field formations and implemented in the Force.
1.20.3  Besides above, the following preventive measures are being taken:-
(i) Yoga has been made compulsory for all ranks in the Force.
(ii) Group games, sports and athletic competition are regularly conducted at all levels.
(iii) Dietary and proper healthcare system is followed.
(iv) Meditation and counseling is done.
(v) Recreational exercises and grievance redressal system is strictly adhered to.
(vi) Strengthening social and economic conditions of the troops are also in place as per the following:-
(a) Buddy system
(b) Mentor and Mentee system
(c) GharkiBaat
(d) Measures to enhance social prestige

16
(e) Financial Literacy
(f) PrepMantra (Online study site for wards of BSF)
(g) Other welfare measures.
(vii) Regular interaction by Commanders at all level:-
(a) Through Sainik Sammelan
(b) Roll Call parade
(c) Know Your Personnel (KYP).
Further Recommendation
1.20.4  The Committee takes note of the measures taken.
1.21 Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
1.21.1 The Committee is disappointed to note that the housing satisfaction level in BSF is very low and
despite completing pending construction of 9156 houses, the satisfaction level will only become approximately
45 per cent, which is still quite low. The Committee finds it even more worrying that a bulk of the shortage
of houses is in Type-II and Type-III that cater to the non-gazetted ranks of the Force. The Committee feels
that a shortage of nearly 47128 houses in the Type-II category is especially worrisome as even the pending
construction projects may not be able to reduce it by any significant margin. The Committee feels that the
efforts of the Ministry to improve the housing satisfaction level are not sufficient. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should urgently draw a plan to reduce the housing shortage, particularly of
the non-gazetted personnel of BSF , by sanctioning sufficient number of houses in Type-II and Type-III
categories to achieve a satisfaction level of at least 50 per cent in both the categories. (Para 5.9.3  ibid )
Action Taken
1.21.2  Govt. is constantly endeavouring towards increasing housing satisfaction of the CAPFs. In 2018-
19, 2002 Nos of houses have been constructed for BSF and in 2019-20 the target is to construct 4829
houses. Further, Govt. is encouraging purchase of ready built flats to address the delay in getting houses
constructed. Recently, in February 2019, Govt. has approved the purchase of 453 LIG flats from DDA.
Further Recommendation
1.21.3  The Committee takes note of the ongoing housing project to improve the housing satisfaction
levels in BSF.
1.22 Shortage of Budget Provisions for Housing
Recommendation
1.22.1 The Committee also takes note of the other reasons viz. delay in acquisition of land through State
Governments and limited capacity of executing agencies, especially in remote areas, that have hampered
the pace of construction of housing accommodation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the

17
Ministry must constantly impress upon the State Governments and the executing agencies the importance
of constructing houses for the BSF personnel. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs must try to find innovative solutions to overcome the problem of land acquisition and consider
adopting the model of high-rise buildings even in the remote areas so as to minimize the requirement of
land and maximize the number of houses that can be constructed. The Committee also recommends that
the Ministry may consider utilizing the land available to the Force under the ‘Right of Way’ and adopting
a linear housing model based on the linear Border out Post (BoP) model to overcome the problem of land
acquisition. (Para 5.10.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.22.2  State authorities are being approached by BSF to acquire land as per authorization and need basis.
1.22.3  However, wherever, the organization is finding difficulty in acquiring land for composite BOPs, the
‘Right of way”/Linear Housing Model is being adopted.
Further Recommendation
1.22.4 The Committee notes the reply.
1.23     Training Issues
Recommendation
1.23.1 The Committee notes that certain kinds of training such as Induction Training before deployment for
particular duties are extremely important for the personnel to perform their duty. The Committee recommends
that all such Induction Training Programs should be meticulously designed and implemented so as to impart
necessary skills to the personnel. Furthermore, all other mandatory training viz. pre-promotional training,
coy collective training and on the job-training to enhance the professional knowledge must be imparted with
updated and latest curriculum. (Para 5.12.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.23.2  Pre-induction training is being imparted to all the Battalions before their deployment in different duty
scenarios, such as Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorism School (CIAT) Bengaluru which conducts
specialized training to inducting units in ANO theatre.
1.23.3  Specialized Pre-induction training is conducted for Bns moving for deployment from International
Border to LC and LC to International Border etc.
1.23.4  Apart from above, there is a well-organized system of providing updated training inputs to BSF pers
in the form of pre-promotional training, Coy collective training and on the Job training.
Further Recommendation
1.23.5 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
1.23.6  The Committee is of the view that the training system in BSF should be such wherein personnel and
officers, who are aware about their deficiencies or are inclined to improve certain skills, may voluntarily opt

18
for attending relevant training programs. The Committee, therefore, feels that BSF should also strive to
develop some short-duration training programs for the personnel who want to voluntarily acquire certain
skills. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should consider evolving a gamut of
specific short-duration training programs to allow the personnel to volun tarily opt for getting trained in
certain tasks. (Para 5.12.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.23.7  A number of specialized and skill enhancement training/programmes are conducted in the Force
itself as well as the opportunities to acquire the required skills are being extended to officers and men by
sending them for training in sister organizations as well as specialized schools regularly on their willingness
to fill the gap, if any exists. On-site and off-site short duration programmes are being organized for the
officers and men of the Force. E-learning is also being encouraged.
Further Observation
1.23.8 The Committee notes the reply.
1.24 Leave and Transfer Issues
Recommendation
1.24.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider reviewing the leave policy presently
in place for BSF in view of the fact that there is no rest or recuperation time for the jawans of the
BSF . (Para 5.14.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.2  60 days E/L and 15 days C/L are authorized to BSF personnel posted in Battalion/ Training Institutions
and 30 days E/L and 08 days C/L authorized to BSF personnel posted in static HQrs.
1.24.3  As regard to rest and relief of BSF personnel while posted at BOPs is concerned, the instruction on
the subject has already been issued for one day weekly rest.  However, keeping in view nature of duties
performed by BSF, the commitment of BSF personnel posted in static HQ is similar to personnel deployed
in Unit. However, efforts are being made to provide rest and relief within available limited leave quota.
Further Recommendation
1.24.4 The Committee notes the reply.
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
1.25 Electricity Supply
Recommendation
1.25.1 The Committee feels that the State Governments should be impressed upon to ensure that the
requisite infrastructure is in place for providing power supply to the Forces even in the remote
locations. (Para 6.13.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.25.2  The Ministry of Power has issued advisory to all the border states on 25
th June, 2018 to extend

19
support for providing electrification to the BOPs on priority basis as and when sought by the BGFs keeping
in view the functional necessity of guarding the International Border in their States.
Further Observation
1.25.3 The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
ASSAM RIFLES
2.1 Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee also observes anomalous situation at the rank of Subedar-Major, where there are
only 200 posts as compared to the 370 posts in the rank of Captain/Assistant Commandant above it and
1180 posts in the rank of Subedar below it. This defies the pyramidical structure of the force. The Committee
fails to understand the reasons for this anomaly and feels that such an anomaly would restrict the promotional
avenues of the lower ranks substantially. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the number of posts in
the rank of Subedar-Major should be enhanced adequately. (Para 2.4.11 of 214
th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.2 Reason for less Subedar Major than Subedars– or Assistant Commandant ranks are that there can
only be one Subedar Major (General Duty) in the Battalion by virtue of the nature of duties a Subedar Major
performs in the Battalion. He is at the apex of Junior Commissioned Officer/ Other Ranks of the Battalion
and is more of a father figure in the battalion than a functional commander of troops.
2.1.3 However, in the proposed cadre review it has been recommended to increase Subedar Majors in
those Assam Rifles establishments which do not have one as of now, e.g Minor Units of Assam Rifles such
as Assam Rifles Signal Unit (ARSU), Transit Camp (Guwahati, Silchar, Jorhat, Imphal, Dimapur), Liaison
Office (LOAR Delhi)  but it cannot be increased beyond one  per unit without affecting functioning of this
institution adversely.
2.1.4 It is further clarified that Assistant Commandant is an officer rank and is not a promotional rank for
Subedar Majors. Assistant Commandant are selected through Limited Departmental Competitive Examination
(LDCE) among the members of Assam Rifles who are having requisite qualification for the post. This post
is related to vacancies of Company Officers and Staff Officers available in the Force.
Further Recommendation
2.1.5 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
2.1.6 The Committee also takes note of the submission of the MHA that the Cadre review for the Assam
Rifles is presently under consideration. The Committee recommends that the recommendations made by this
Committee in this regard may be bought to the notice of the Cadre Review Committee so that it may be
considered while finalizing its recommendation. (Para 2.4.15 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.7 This is noted for compliance.
20

21
Further Recommendation
2.1.8 The Committee notes the reply.
2.2 Working Hours
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs regarding the stern
working hours of the Assam Rifles personnel and feels that the jawans may require adequate rest after long
range patrols and Border Pillar (BP) verification patrols that are usually conducted in tough geographical
and climatic conditions. The Committee, while taking note of the Ministry’ s submission that such operations
are compensated for by giving adequate time off, is of the view that the time-off given after such patrols
must be sufficient and without any exception. The Committee recommends that the MHA may constantly
review the actual situation on the ground and that the stipulated rest time is available to all personnel
without exception. (Para 2.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 Assam Rifles is fully operationally committed, however regular rest is being ensured for all the
troops on daily basis through rotation of static duties and operations (mostly on foot) and grant of regular
leave. Other facilities are also provided to its personnel to improve the working condition such as Family
accommodation, Health Care facility, Entertainment activity and rotation of the Battalions/Units between
Very Hard/Hard/Moderate and Good locations. Opportunity to stay with families is provided at select stations
where married accommodation has been made. Deputations, ERE (Extra Regimental Employment) and
attachments at softer stations, even outside of Assam Rifles are also provided. Spouse postings are also
provided within the organization.
Further Recommendation
2.2.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.3 Basic amenities - Food
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee is apprehensive that consuming the tinned food for extremely long monsoon period of
upto six months may have adverse impact on the health of the personnel. The Committee feels that to
alleviate the problem of shortage of fresh food, the option of constructing cold storage facilities must be
explored. These facilities could be of optimal size taking note of the number of personnel deployed in the
area. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may devise a plan to make
available optimal sized cold storage facilities at the posts that remain cutoff during the monsoon and are
unable to stock enough ration to meet the requirements. The Committee hopes that such an arrangement
would prove beneficial for providing nutritious food. (Para 2.6.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 Details of locations, types and size of cold storage facilities  in various locations of the Force is being
compiled based on their requirement keeping this as a basic amenity. The same will be included in ROP (Roll

22
on Plan) 2021-23. Notwithstanding the recommendation, it is pertinent to point out that troops prefer
cooked food made from dry rations and locally supplied fresh and freshly cut meat rather than frozen food.
Tetra pack milk has been a very good means of supplying good quality milk to forward areas as the North
East is milk deficient area and fresh milk is not available locally.
Further Recommendation
2.3.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.4 Medical facilities
Recommendation
2.4.1 The Committee observes that all the CGHS-empanelled hospitals in the North-East are located only
at Guwahati. The Committee feels that this restricted coverage of medical care for the Assam Rifles personnel
may have adverse consequences on their health. The Committee recommends that the Government should
increase its efforts to expand the coverage of medical facilities by empanelling more hospitals in the capital
city of North-East States. The Committee further recommends that the Assam Rifles should further strengthen
the existing medical division so as to provide immediate medical attention to the injured personnel at the site
itself as the area being covered mostly with dense forest and inaccessible by road. (Para 2.8.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 Assam Rifles has one Composite Hospital at Shukhovi and two Adhoc Multispecialty Hospitals at
Mantripukhri and Laitkor which have been established by Assam Rifles from own resources. All the specialty
hospitals are run by specialist/GDMOs (General Duty Medical Officer) of Assam Rifles with PG qualification.
In addition, the following private hospitals have been empanelled with Assam Rifles in the North East for
cashless treatment of Assam Rifles personnel and their dependents:-
(i) Shija Hospital, Imphal
(ii) Sky Hospital, Imphal
(iii) Oking Hospital, Kohima
(iv) Hayat Hospital, Guwahati
(v) ILS Hospital, Agartala
Further Recommendation
2.4.3   The Committee notes the reply.
2.5   Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
2.5.1 The Committee also exhorts the AR to explore the possibility of monetizing its existing land so that
their dependence on Home Ministry for funds to build houses may be reduced. (Para 2.9.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.2 Considering the commercial non-viability of the land and threat perception it is not advisable for
monetization of AR’s Land in the sensitive areas of the North East.

23
Further Recommendation
2.5.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.6 Attrition
Recommendation
2.6.1 The Committee observes the excessively high number of voluntary retirements in Assam Rifles during
the past two years. Although the implementation of the Seventh Central Pay Commission could have been a
reason for this unusually high number of voluntary retirements, the other factors that result in a high level
of stress and strain may also cause the high level of attrition. The Committee feels that such a high level of
attrition may indicate dissatisfaction with the working conditions in the Assam Rifles. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that urgent measures may be taken to improve the working conditions significantly to
motivate the personnel to stay, even when they are eligible for taking voluntary retirement, and thus stem
this trend of attrition. (Para 2.12.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.6.2 The following facilities are being provided in the Assam Rifles to its personnel to improve the working
conditions and to reduce the ratio of attrition:-
(a)
Health Care. All Battalions in Assam Rifles have their own Unit hospitals.  Medical Teams also
visit far flung operating bases and provide medical care regularly. Apart from these, Battle Field
Nursing Assistants (BFNA) are posted in adequate strength in each Company Operating Base
(COB).
(b)
Improvement of Living Conditions . Constant efforts are being made to improve the living
conditions of the Troops. Every Cook House has a Dining Hall with wall mounted LCD screens,
well laid out dining tables with adequate seating arrangements. The Living Barracks too are
well furnished with adequate beds, cupboards and linen. Facility of RO drinking water and
electricity is provided in each barrack.  The Force also has modern and dedicated Key Location
Plans (KLP) for housing of troops at most of the deployment areas.
(c)
Family Accommodation It is endeavored that maximum troops be provided with Married
Accommodation so that they can stay with their families. Towards this end, adequate Family
Accommodations have been catered for and some are under construction at new KLP locations.
When family accommodation is not provided then individual can claim HRA.
(d)
Catering of Spiritual Needs. All Battalions have a dedicated place of worship and each Unit
is also posted with a Religious Teacher to cater for the religious functions of the Unit.
(e) Rotation of Battalions. Assam Rifles being a North East Centric Force is continuously deployed
in Counter Insurgency environment. However, within the region, the Battalions are rotated
between good, moderate and hard locations.
(f) Ensuring Stress Free Environment. It is ensured that undue pressure is   not  put  on  troops
by  their  superiors. It is also ensured that no one is harassed or victimized.

24
(g) Rest and Recoup . Force is fully operationally committed, however adequate rest is being
ensured for all the troops on daily basis through rotation of duties and grant of leave.
(h) Leisure and Enter tainment Activity. All Battalions subscribe to magazines, News papers
and have well maintained libraries. Apart from this TVs in the Living Areas and at places
movies are also screened. Apart from these, all Units conduct outdoor and troop oriented
games   which   is   a big stress buster in operational environment. Adequate facilities for indoor
games are also provided.
(j) Regular Leave. It is ensured that every individual avails full leave as and when required. A
Leave Plan is prepared after considering the leave choices of all the individuals in a calendar
year. Due consideration is however, given to all emergency cases. It is being ensured that
maximum personnel while moving on leaves travel on confirmed reservation and by Air Courier
Service.
Further Recommendation
2.6.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.7 Deputation Opportunities
Recommendation
2.7.1 The Committee is concerned to observe the lack of sufficient opportunities for the Assam Rifles
personnel to go on deputation and feels that this may have adversely affected the ability to address issues
relating to their personal lives. The Committee feels that the dual control regime is one of the reasons due to
which the Assam Rifles personnel have very few deputation opportunities as they are unable to go on
deputation either to the Armed Forces or to the Central Armed Police Forces. The Committee is of the view
that the MHA should engage the Ministry of Defence to increase the deputation opportunities for AR personnel
and also explore the opportunities to increase deputation of AR personnel to the CAPFs. (Para 2.13.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.7.2 Assam Rifles personnel are being sent on deputation to various Organisation except Armed Forces/
CAPFs. As on date, 974 ORs, JCOs and Civilian staff of Assam Rifles are on deputation with various
organizations. Assam Rifles has been consistently trying to increase the deputation vacancies. Recently, an
NDRF battalion has been given for raising from Assam Rifles strength.
Further Recommendation
2.7.3 The Committee is convinced with the reply.
2.8 Welfare Schemes and Issues
Recommendation
2.8.1 The Committee notes that historically the Assam Rifles Force has performed the two primary roles of
conducting counter-insurgency operations in the Northeast and guarding the India-Myanmar border. The
Committee accepts the fact that the Assam Rifles is entirely different from the other border guarding Forces
such as BSF , SSB, and ITBP in as much as that these Forces are situated right on the border as per the

25
border-outpost based model, the Assam Rifles on the other has continued to follow the Company-operating-
base model, wherein the companies of the force are located near but not at the border. The Committee is of
the view that the dual role of the Assam Rifles must be performed by two separate forces specially trained
for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Assam Rifles should be assigned a single
specialized role of performing counter-insurgency operations in the North-East. The Committee also
recommends that possibility of a separate Indo-Myanmar Border Force, under the control of the Ministry of
Home Affairs, may be explored for the purpose of guarding the India-Myanmar border. (Para 2.16.8 ibid)
2.8.2 The Committee, in this connection, wishes to draw the attention of the Ministry towards the
recommendation made in para 2.14.3 of its 203
rd report on ‘Border Security: Capacity Building and Institutions’
and reiterate the said recommendation that an early decision should be taken by the Government on deployment
of a dedicated border guarding force for guarding the India-Myanmar Border. (Para 2.16.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.8.3 Assam Rifles (AR) is deployed on India-Myanmar Border to maintain its sanctity. This is an open,
porous and unfenced border with dense jungles in mountainous terrain. A large member of insurgent groups
are active in North East and Indian Insurgent Groups camps are established close to border in Myanmar as
well as in the hinterland (SOO camps). Insurgents attempt to infiltrate in small groups across IMB to linkup
with their camps in hinterland for their nefarious activities.
2.8.4 The Border Out Post (BOP) type of deployment is neither possible nor recommended because of the
dense jungles, mountainous terrain and lack of roads and tracks across large swathes of the area. The
distance between posts is not measured in kilometers but in time taken to traverse the distance and hence
reaction capability of battalions is limited due to spread of troops on ground. BOP concept is only possible
when the posts are well linked or there is no insurgency across the border as well as in hinterland.
2.8.5 Apropos concept of deployment of AR is on Company Operating Bases (COBs) so as to ensure
adequate strength of troops to be available for dominating the Area of Responsibility (AoR) as also ensure
security of post and lines of communication (road opening on katcha tracks).
2.8.6 The Company Operating Bases (COBs) are in tiers to cover all major routes of egress/ ingress of
insurgents as also to dominate sensitive areas. The operations are conducted by a number of COBs jointly
and in coordination with each other in total synergy as the same battalion may be deploying COBs starting
from the IMB to depth areas depending on routes used by insurgents or could be a different battalion of the
same AR formation. Therefore, the counter Insurgency (CI) operations in hinterland are inextricably linked
to the counter infiltration operations being undertaken at the border as the intelligence inputs are shared in
real time and modus operandi is similar for all COBs.
2.8.7 Hence, to ensure timely and correct reactions/ operations, the two aspects of countering infiltration
at the IMB and Counter Insurgency operations in hinterland cannot/ should not be separated and given to
two different Forces.
2.8.8 AR has been successful in countering insurgency in the NE due to above mention reasons of COB
concept and unity of command on IMB and hinterland which is evident from op results (attached as Appendix-A).
In the interest of combating the menace of insurgency, this successful model must not be changed.

26
2.8.9 Intelligence based operations are key to success and continuous efforts are being made to enhance
intelligence.
Further Observation
2.8.10 The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
2.9 Welfare Schemes and Issues
Recommendation
2.9.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that the personnel of the Special Fr ontier Force, which is a
paramilitary force like the Assam Rifles, have already been accorded parity with Group ‘Y’ ‘Personnel
Below Officer Rank’  of the Indian Army for the purpose of pay, allowance and pension. The Committee
wonders as to why the Assam Rifles personnel have been deprived of such benefits. The Committee feels
that this has caused undue discrimination towards the personnel of the Assam Rifles, who have been
deprived of the benefits accorded to other paramilitary forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Assam Rifles may be immediately given parity with Group ‘Y’ ‘Personnel Below Officer Rank’
of the Indian Army for the purpose of pay, allowance and pension on the lines of the Special Frontier
Force. (Para 2.16.17 ibid)
Action Taken
2.9.2 PBORs of CAPF and AR are getting the same pay and allowances. The rank structure of CAPFs/AR
and Army are different.  Hence their pay scales are also not comparable. However, personnel in the rank of
Constable, SI, Inspector and SM(PBORs) in the CAPF/AR and equivalent rank in the Army are getting same
pay scales except Military Service Pay.
Further Recommendation
2.9.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.10 Welfare Schemes and Issues-Benevolent Fund
Recommendation
2.10.1 The Committee feels that the amount of 
` 1 lakh being provided as an immediate financial assistance
to the next of kin of the Assam Rifles personnel from Assam Rifle Benevolent Fund (ARBF) on their
death is paltry and not in keeping with the needs of the family. The Committee also notes that this amount
was last revised in 2013, almost five years ago. The Committee feels that this amount is too little even
for the purpose of providing immediate financial assistance. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that this amount of 
` 1 lakh should be immediately revised to at least ` 2.5 lakh w.e.f the beginning of
the year 2018. The Committee also recommends that this amount should be periodically revised every
three years. (Para 2.17.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.10.2  It is intimated that following monetary benefits are being provided to the Next of Kins (NoK) of the
deceased as immediate relief while death on service. Details are as under:-

27
Sl. No. Death Benefit to the Next of Kin Remarks
Assam Rifles Benevolent Assam Rifles Group Insurance *For AR personnel
Fund* Scheme including Army personnel
on deputation
(i) Officers Officers 50,00,000/
(ii) Junior Junior
Commissioned 1,00,000/- Commissioned 30,00,000/-
Officers and Officers and
other ranks other ranks
2.10.3  In addition to above, the following monetary benefits are also being provided to Next of Kins of the
deceased through other sources:-
Sl. No. Type of Benefits to Next Amount ( `````) Remarks
of Kin
(i) Invalidment Benefits 25,000/-Disability Pension In a ll cases except self induced/
self inflicted diseases
(ii) Death Benefits from ARGIS 50 Lakh (Officers) -
30 Lakh(JCOs/OR)
(iii) Ex-Gratia 35 Lakh -
(iv) Under “Bharat Ke Veer” 15 Lakh -
from MHA
(v) Defence Salary Account From 30 Lakh to 01 Crore Varies from Bank to Bank
2.10.4  From the above mentioned facts, it can be seen that adequate money is being released to the Next of
Kins of the deceased and also in case of invalidment. As an immediate relief, a sum of ` 1,00,000/- is being
provided to the Next of Kins of the deceased. The current financial state of ARBF fund does not permit any
additional increase in the benefits without increase in the subscription rate which will put additional strain on
serving soldiers.
Further Recommendation
2.10.5 The Committee notes the reply.
2.11 Women Representation in Assam Rifles
Recommendation
2.11.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the efforts being made to increase the representation of women
in Assam Rifles. The Committee observes that at present only 360 women personnel have been recruited
and this number is very low as compared to the percentage of women employees stipulated as per the
guidelines i.e. 5 per cent of total strength of ‘General Duty’ personnel or around 2400 women. The Committee,

28
therefore, recommends that the Assam Rifles should conduct a special recruitment drive to induct more
women in the Force. (Para 2.19.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.11.2  As per MHA guidelines, 5% of total GD strength i.e. 2430 to be filled up by women. Total 364
Mahila(GD) have been enrolled through SSC/ Rallies. The strength of women in this force is 846 (364
Mahila(GD) & 482 women employees in other trades). In addition, the following recruitment rallies are
under progress:-
(i) 1500 vacancies for enrolment of Rifleman (GD) submitted to SSC and rally is under progress.
(ii) Assam Rifles Technical & Tradesmen for both (Male & Female) is also under progress to fill
1024 vacancies in various trades.
Further Recommendation
2.11.3 The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs on enhancing
strength of Women in this Force will be completed in time bound manner and the Committee may
finally be informed about it.
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
2.12 Recruitment and Vacancies
Recommendation
2.12.1 The Committee takes note of the reasons stated by the Ministry of Home Affairs for existence of
several vacancies in various posts and cadres in SSB. The Committee understands that recruitment of the
personnel is a time consuming process. However, the Committee feels that there is a lack of foresight, proper
planning and proactive estimation of future vacancies while reporting the vacancies to the recruitment
agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of proactively
identifying the vacancies and reporting the same to the recruitment agencies, instead of reporting the vacancies
that exist on the date of notification of the recruitment examination. The Committee also recommends that
the respective CAPFs may alternatively notify the updated status of vacancies before the start of the
recruitment process by the recruitment agency concerned so as to eliminate any delay in filling up the
vacancies. (Para 3.4.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.12.2  Recruitment in SSB is being done through SSC for the post of Constable (GD) and Sub-Inspector
(GD). Recruitment for the post of Assistant Commandant (GD) is being conducted through UPSC and for
the post of AC (MO) and Specialists through Medical Officer Selection Board (MOSB). The vacancies are
notified to the recruiting agencies well in time.
2.12.3 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for strict compliance.
Further Recommendation
2.12.4 The Committee notes the reply.

29
Recommendation
2.12.5 The Committee also observes that the recruitment agencies take around two years for co mpleting
the recruitment process. The Committee is of the view that this time period can be reduced to around one year
by streamlining the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs may request the recruitment agencies to undertake necessary measures to reduce the timeframe within
which various recruitment exams are to be completed for the CAPFs. (Para 3.4.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.12.6 From this Year, SSC is conducting Computer Based Written Examination for recruitment of Constable
(GD) in CAPFs, NIA & SSF and Rifleman (GD) in Assam Rifles, Examination – 2018, which is expected to
reduce timeframe for the recruitment.
Further Recommendation
2.12.7 The Committee notes the reply.
2.13 Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
2.13.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that SSB is presently in expansion mode and sufficient numbers
of vacancies are available in almost all the ranks. The Committee, however, observes that there is still some
stagnation at the ranks of Constable and Head Constable. A Constable gets promoted to the post of Head-
Constable in 11-12 years as against the required residency period of 8 years. It takes another 8-10 years for
a Head-Constable to become an Assistant Sub-Inspector as against the required residency period of 5 years.
The Committee has not received a satisfactory explanation why this stagnation exists despite the force being
in expansion mode. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of stagnation be addressed so that
promotions take place as soon as residency periods are completed. (Para 3.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.13.2 Promotion of Constable (GD) has been made as per prescribed residency period in the respective
RRs and availability of vacancies. Statement showing  details of the promotion of Constable (GD) to Head
Constable (GD) and Head Constable (GD) to ASI (GD) during last three years are as under :-
(i) Constable (GD) to Head Constable (GD) :
Year Vacancy Promoted Remarks
2017-18 4902 1169 -
Supplementary DPC 3527 3531 -
2017-18
2018-19 1581 1515 66 posts not filled up due to
non availability of SC personnel.
2019-20 629 579 45 posts not filled up due to non
availability of SC personnel.

30
(i) Head Constable (GD) to ASI (GD) :
2017-18 969 639 Vacancies remained unfilled due to
non availability of eligible SC
personnel.
2018-19 1123 789
2019-20 494 352
2.13.3 Promotions of Constable (GD) to the rank of HC (GD) and HC (GD) to ASI (GD) have been made
as per the availability of vacancies every year. It is evident from above statistics that posts were not kept
vacant at any time. As and when vacancies are occurred, eligible personnel are promoted.
Further Recommendation
2.13.4 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
2.13.5 The Committee also observes certain anomalies in the organizational chart that may lead to stagnation
at levels such as Assistant Sub-Inspector and Deputy Commandant as the ratio of the posts of SI and ASI at
1:6 and Dy. Commandant to Commandant at 1:5 are on the lower side compared to the ratio of other
successive posts. The Committee also feels that the situation worsened further due to 25 per cent of the
vacant posts getting filled up through direct recruitment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry may undertake measures to improve the ratio of the posts of SI and ASI and Dy. Commandant to
Commandant to at least 1:4 to reduce the stagnation at these levels. (Para 3.5.11 ibid)
Action Taken
2.13.6  A comprehensive review of cadre structure of entire Communication cadre is in progress and the
report is likely to be completed in June-July, 2019. Based on the report, the Cadre Review will be undertaken,
which may include creation as well as abolition of certain posts. While undertaking the Cadre Review, the
concerns of the Committee will be taken into consideration to reduce the stagnation at the levels of Assistant
Sub-Inspector, Sub-Inspector and Deputy Commandant to Commandant.
Further Recommendation
2.13.7 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
2.13.8 The Committee finds it quite anomalous that there are only two posts in the rank of Commandant as
compared to three posts in the rank of DIG . The Committee feels that there is a scope of increasing the
number of posts in this rank as it does not make any sense to have only two Commandants under the control
of three DIGs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider increasing the number
of posts at the Commandant level from two to at least four. (Para 3.5.14 ibid)
Action Taken
2.13.9  A Departmental Cadre Review Committee has been entrusted to make a comprehensive review of

31
cadre structure of entire Engineering cadre and accordingly the Cadre Review is under process/preparation
in SSB. The concerns of the Committee will be taken into account in the Cadre Review.
Further Recommendation
2.13.10  The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
2.13.11 The Committee, while observing the career growth chart of the Ministerial cadre in SSB, finds that
the promotional avenues at the top of the cadre are relatively sparse as only 4 posts of Deputy Commandant
are available as against the 32 posts of Assistant Commandant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry may consider enhancing the number of the posts at the Deputy Commandant level, to avoid
stagnation at the rank of Assistant Commandant. (Para 3.5.17 ibid)
Action Taken
2.13.12 The Cadre Review of Ministerial Cadre is under consideration in SSB and will be completed shortly.
The concerns of the Committee will be incorporated in the Cadre Review.
Further Recommendation
2.13.13 The Committee notes the reply.
2.14 Promotional Avenues and Stagnation in Stenographer Cadre
Recommendation
2.14.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that there is no post at the rank of Deputy Commandant.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider creating a few posts at the
Deputy Commandant level, to obviate stagnation at the rank of Assistant Commandant in stenog rapher
cadre. (Para 3.5.20 ibid)
Action Taken
2.14.2 The Cadre Review of Stenographer Cadre is under consideration in SSB. The concerns of the
Committee will be incorporated in the Cadre Review.
Further Recommendation
2.14.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.15 Promotional Avenues and Stagnation in Para-medical Cadre
Recommendation
2.15.1 The Committee takes note of the car eer growth of personnel in different posts in the para-medical
cadre of SSB and finds that promotional avenues in these posts are almost non- existent. The ratio for
successive levels in various posts viz. Staff Nurse, Pharmacist and Radiographer are 2:15, 1:9 and 1:21
respectively. There is evidently a lack of any promotional avenue for the staff in this cadre. The Committee
wonders why the Ministry is apathetic to the staff in this cadre. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry must urgently conduct a review of all the posts in the para-medical cadre

32
of SSB and take appropriate and adequate measures at the earliest to resolve the sta gnation in this
cadre. (Para 3.5.36 ibid)
Action Taken
2.15.2 The draft proposal for Cadre Review of para-medical staff has been prepared and is under examination
in SSB, which will be submitted to MHA shortly.
Further Recommendation
2.15.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.16 Attrition
Recommendation
2.16.1 The Committee finds some merit in the explanation furnished by the Ministry that there was a surge
in the number of voluntary retirements in 2017 immediately after the Pay Commission was awarded. However,
the Committee feels that voluntary retirements are also indicative of disenchantment with the working
conditions as it is unusual for government employees to seek retirements when they have more than ten years
of service left. Moreover, the Committee observes that even during 2012 and 2013, the years that did not
follow any pay commission, there were unusually high number of voluntary retirements at 447 and 341. The
Committee, therefore, feels that there are reasons other than Pay Commission award which are leading to
such high number of early retirements. The Committee is of the view that though the Ministry of Home
Affairs cited fulfilling domestic obligation as major reason for large numbers of personnel preferring to
take VRS in SSB, other reasons like career stagnation, tough working conditions and lack of pay parity with
the armed forces may also be equally important for this undesirable trend. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should conduct a survey among the personnel to assess the factors leading to
such large number of personnel taking VRS and undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns of
the personnel so that this trend can be curbed (Para 3.7.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.16.2 The reasons for V oluntary retirement are mainly due to various personal and domestic reasons,
including children/family issues, health/illness of self or family, social/family obligations and commitments
etc. Some personnel also sought voluntary retirement to enjoy a static life as well as pensionary benefits
after completing 20 years of service.
2.16.3 The following organizational efforts have been taken to check attrition of SSB personnel:-
(i) Counseling of personnel by the Head of Office before acceptance of voluntary retirement.
(ii) Grant of leave to the force personnel to attend to their urgent domestic problems/ issues/needs
by implementing a transparent and fair leave policy.
(iii) Regular interaction among officers and Jawans to find out and address their problems, especially
while proceeding and returning from leave.
(iv) Improving living conditions through provisions of basic amenities/facilities for troops and their
families.
(v) Providing better medical facilities for troops and their families.

33
(vi) Providing Recreational and sports facilities and provision of team games and sports.
(vii) Providing welfare measure like Central Police Canteens facility to the troops and their families,
scholarship to their wards.
(viii) Institution of grievances redressal mechanism right from the BOP level so that every Force
personnel can project their grievances for redressal.
(ix) Implementation of Buddy system.
(x) Briefing & debriefing of Jawans while going on leave and coming back from leave.
(xi) Supervisory officers to involve themselves with Jawans in knowing their personal/official
problems through informal interactions, especially with those returning from leave.
(xii) Not to frequently change personnel working in small cohesive group (section level).
(xiii) MySSB Mobile App which provides one stop solution for Deputation, Transfer, Training,
Salary Slip, Annual GPF Statement, Service particulars, Feedback etc and separate Module
exists for Grievance redressal of Force personnel.
(xiv) Provision of Separated Family Accommodations.
(xv) “Know Your Personnel” (KYP) is an initiative recently undertaken by DG, SSB to know the
men and their family in a better way.
(xvi) Personal hearing/interview by Senior Officers at Force Headquarters through video conference
on every 1 st & 3 rd thursday from 1400-1800 hrs.
2.16.4  Each force has its own mechanism to deal with such cases. Besides, the “ANUBHA V” portal launched
by DoP&T enables retired employees to pen their experiences. Forces may use the data for improvement at
their end.
Further Recommendation
2.16.5 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.
2.17 Training issues
Recommendation
2.17.1 The Committee notes the duration of the specialized training being provided by SSB training institutions
and feels that duration of some of the training programs such as Counter Insurgency & Jungle W arfare does
not seem enough to develop adequate capabilities for the required purpose. The Committee also wonders
how SSB training institutions provide training for countering the LWE and North-East insurgency, for
which some of its battalions have been posted. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs needs to strengthen and rationalise the training regimes for CAPFs to handle new internal
security challenges. (Para 3.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.17.2  The following specialized courses have been approved and are being conducted at CI&JW School,
Gwaldam and ATC, Sarahan for the personnel being deployed in J&K and LWE areas:-

34
1. Pre-Induction Training for Counter Insurgency & Jungle Warfare (CI&JW) for ANO (Anti-
Naxal Operation) duties for a duration of 36 days and Area Familiarization Training of 02
weeks.
2. Pre-Induction Training for the Battalion being deployed for IS/CI(Ops) duty in J&K for a
duration of 36 days. Refresher Training for Mobile Training Team for LWE deployed Battalions.
3. One week Refresher Training for personnel deployed in LWE areas.
2.17.3  The syllabi of the following specialized courses have also been framed to enhance the capabilities of
the Force personnel as per operational requirements of the Force so that they can be prepared for operational
threats of higher intensity in case if need arises:-
Sl. No. Name of Course Remarks
1 Bn Support Weapon Course for a duration of 09 Specially for Support Coy
weeks for Officers/SOs. personnel.
2 81 mm Mortar Course for a duration of 08 weeks
for Other Ranks
3 7.62 mm MMG Course for a duration of 08 weeks
for Other Ranks
4 Platoon Weapon Course for a duration of 08 weeks For Bn personnel.
for Other Ranks.
5 Weapon Instructor Course for a duration of 04 weeks
for Other Ranks
6 Commando Course for a duration of 08 weeks for For newly appointed
AC (DE)/LDCE. officers.
7 Commando Course for a duration of 10 weeks for
SOs and Other Ranks. -
2.17.4 Besides, the syllabi of the following courses are being reviewed keeping in view of the operational
requirements of the Force:-
1. AC(DE) Course.
2. SI(DE)   Course.
3. BRTC for CT(GD).
4.   Annual Intensive Refresher Training (AIRT).
Further Recommendation
2.17.5 The Committee notes the reply.

35
2.18 Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
2.18.1 The Committee understands that SSB is a young Force and is in an expansion mode. The Committee,
however, feels that it is the responsibility of the Ministry to ensure that the relevant infrastructure projects are
implemented at a pace comparable to that of the expansion of the Force to ensure satisfactory working
conditions in SSB. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should regularly assess the
housing requirement of SSB, proactively plan housing projects, and closely monitor the implementation of
construction projects to achieve a good housing satisfaction level. (Para 3.9.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.18.2  MHA reviews all projects periodically to monitor physical and financial progress.
Further Recommendation
2.18.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.19 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Electricity supply
Recommendation
2.19.1 The Committee is worried to note that 328 BoPs do not have electricity available and feels that this
lack of infrastructure can adversely affect the operational ability of SSB, especially during times of crisis.
The Committee understands that the geographical constraints and variation in the state of infrastructure in
the States are the reasons for this lack of energy at BoPs. However, the Ministry needs to adopt a progressive
and futuristic outlook to ensure energy security at the border outposts. The Committee is of the view that
after ensuring 100 per cent electrification of all the villages, the Government should focus on electrifying
remote and off-the-grid locations particularly the border outposts and military installations. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should form a working group to study the issue of
energy security for the border outposts in India by focusing on innovative solutions such as micro-grids.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should consider initiating a pilot project by installing
micro- grids in certain remote border locations particularly at Indo-Bhutan border and subsequently undertake
a viability assessment of micro-grids for powering the border outposts. (Para 3.12.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.19.2  The Ministry of Home Affairs is giving top priority to provide electricity connections to all the
BOPs of Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) particularly in remote areas. Out of 626 BOPs of SSB, elec tricity
connection is available at 278 BOPs. The Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed
by Cabinet Secretary decided to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance BOPs of the
BGFs (including SSB). However, some BOPs are presently having power supply through generator/solar
energy. The BGFs have been asked to laise with the respective DISCOMs to prepare estimates for electric
connection. The Ministry of Power has been requested to issue instructions to all the State Governments in
this regard. On receipt of estimates the proposal will be placed before ECBI for approval and allocation of
funds. Special measures like providing power through solar etc. are being under taken for electrifying
remote and off-the-grid locations.

36
Further Recommendation
2.19.3 The Committee notes that Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed
by Cabinet Secretary has decided to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance
BOPs of the BGFs (including SSB) and the measures like providing power through solar energy, etc.
are being under taken for electrifying remote and off-the-grid locations. The Committee hopes that
the Ministry would expedite the matter.
2.20 Grievance Redressal Mechanisms
Recommendation
2.20.1 The Committee also observes that during the last three years the percentage of applications that were
rejected has remarkably increased from 29.58 in 2016 to 61.74 in 2018. The Committee recommends that
the cause of this increment needs to be looked into and remedial measures be taken. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should monitor the number of transfer requests received, accepted and denied
and should strive to devise a mechanism wherein as far as possible personnel are granted transfer as per
their choice and transfer policy. (Para 3.14.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.20.2  All the transfer request of the force personnel has been examined by the Transfer Committee as per
extant instructions/guidelines of transfer policy. A huge number  of the force personnel who are not eligible
for applying for transfer, are also applying for transfer. The transfer application of personnel those who
have not completed prescribed tenure were not considered due to non completion of tenure. However, in
case of medical and other  exigencies, transfer request of such personnel are being considered  on priority
basis. Besides, genuine cases are being considered in personal interview of the competent authority in
person or through video conferencing.
Further Observation
2.20.3 The Committee notes the response of the Ministry.
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
2.21 Deployment
Recommendation
2.21.1 The Committee observes that the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force was raised for the purpose of
border guarding, especially, the India-China Border, however , some battalions of ITBP are deployed for
ANO(Anti-Naxal operations) and internal security as a result of which the jawans suffer in terms of training,
rest and recuperation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ITBP should be relieved from the task of
internal security duties and personal protection and CISF’ s proposal to augment the strength of SSG of
CISF should be expedited. (Para 4.4.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.21.2 ITBP is basically a border guarding force entrusted to guard 3488 Km long India-China border.
Following tasks are also entrusted to ITBP:-

37
(i)  Provide security to sensitive installations, banks, persons of security risk;
(ii)  Restore and preserve order in any area in the event of disturbance therein.
2.21.3 Presently 08 Bns of ITBP are deployed for ANO duties in Chhattisgarh.
2.21.4 In addition, ITBP is also deployed for Anti-Naxal operations, various Internal Security duties, VIP
security duties, etc throughout the countries from time to time.
2.21.5 Opportunities to deploy ITBP troops on IS duty/similar duties seen with great extent to rotate the
troops from continuous posting in high altitude/difficult areas. When deployed in IS duties and other similar
duties, it creates an opportunity for addressing various health issues which the troops suffer due to prolonged
deployment in high altitude areas.
Further Recommendation
2.21.6 The Committee notes the explanation given by the Ministry.
2.22 Recruitment
Recommendation
2.22.1 The Committee takes note of the pending recruitment examinations for the posts of Head Constable
(telecom) and Inspector (Hindi translation),which were cancelled by ITBP after completion of the process
of recruitment and declaration of the final list of the selected candidates on the basis of suspicion on a few
candidates. The Committee observes that the hasty manner in which these recruitments have been processed
has led to an unnecessary loss of time, effort and monetary losses on the part of the Force. The Committee
fails to understand why the entire recruitment was cancelled when the appropriate course of action would
have been to investigate the authenticity of the results of those candidates, whose selection was under
suspicion, instead of cancelling the recruitment of all the candidates. The Committee is of the view that this
was against the established principles of law as even candidates who were not under suspicion were punished
as a consequence of cancellation of the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that the Ministry should direct the ITBP to settle the disputes by following the established principles of law.
The Committee also recommends that ITBP should complete the recruitment process by declaring the results
of the candidates whose candidature was found to be fair and genuine. (Para 4.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.22.2 With reference to the recruitment of Head Constable (Telecom), it is submitted that Hon’ble High
Court of Delhi vide its Judgment/Order dated 12
th November, 2018 passed on W.P. (C) No.11233/2016 &
CM No.43966/2016 titled Karmveer Singh & Ors Vs Union of India & Ors and 09 other separate Writ
Petitions, has dismissed all these writ petitions and pending applications. Investigations in this matter are in
progress by Delhi Police on the directions of MHA.
2.22.3 As regards cancellation of recruitment of Inspector (Hindi Translator), Hon’ble Delhi High Court
vide its Judgment/Order dated 10 th October, 2018 passed on W.P. (C) No.12047/2016 titled Poonam & Ors
Vs. Union of India & Ors and 01 similar Writ Petition, has given directions to conduct a fresh recruitment
for the post of Inspector (Hindi Translator) in the ITBP in a time bound manner.  Ms. Poonam V/s Ors  filed
petition in Hon’ble Supreme Court on 20 th Nov, 2018, with prayer to set aside the verdict of Hoble High

38
Court and go by the existing recruitment process. The matter is sub-judice. Next date of hearing is 04th July,
2019.
Further Recommendation
2.22.4 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
2.23 Training
Recommendation
2.23.1 The Committee is extremely anguished to note that the ITBP who have been deployed in the treacherous
hills of the north against extreme weather on the India-China border since the year 2004, have not been
equipped with basic training gadgets and facilities, viz., modern equipment like 8 lane firing simulator and
interactive touch display. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all these equipment, facilities and
modern techniques should be procured expeditiously and training be imparted to the personnel of the Force.
The Committee feels that the modernization of the Force must be given utmost priority as this Force not only
has to face any enemy from across the border but also the vagaries of Nature. (Para 4.9.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.23.2  As far as equipping the force with modern gadgets are concerned, the formations are well equipped
with GPS, latest weapons, communication equipments and latest high powered vehicles. Regarding up-
gradation of training, the Training Centres are being equipped with the latest Mountaineering, Ski & Rescue
Equipments., to erect Artificial Climbing Wall, purchase simulators & interactive touch display etc. this will
enable us to make training more effective.
2.23.3  5 Basic training centers have Artificial Wall, firing simulators and interactive touch display, for the
usage of trainees.
Further Recommendation
2.23.4 The Committee notes the reply.
2.24 Housing and accommodation
Recommendation
2.24.1 The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level in ITBP at 13.41 per cent is one of the
lowest among the CAPFs. The Committee notes with concern that there is shortfall of 16,537 quarters. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the 3,187 houses that are under construction
must be expedited and completed as per schedule without time and cost overrun. The Committee further
recommends that the Government should chalk out ‘Action Plan’ to achieve the objective of constructing
the remaining 16,537 quarters within the stipulated timeframe. (Para 4.10.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.24.2 At present housing satisfaction level in ITBP is 42.24 percent against authorization of dwelling units
including houses under construction i.e. 2546 houses. Efforts are being made to complete these 2546 houses
within stipulated time frame.

39
2.24.3 Two proposals for construction of 2266 and 2557 houses are included in Umbrella scheme by MHA
and presently these proposal are under consideration with MHA.
2.24.4 After construction of these 4823 (2266+2557) houses, housing satisfaction level will be 59.12 percent
against authorization of houses.
Further Recommendation
2.24.5 The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry.
2.25 Basic Amenities-Electricity supply
Recommendation
2.25.1 The Committee observes that the electricity supply at the BOPs of ITBP is neither regular nor
sufficient. The downtime of generators must be reduced to a bare minimum. The Committee recommends
that the proposal to ensure regular electricity supply at BOPs of CAPFs must be prioritized and implemented
expeditiously. (Para 4.13.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.25.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is giving top priority to provide electricity connection to all the BOPs
of BGFs particularly in remote areas. Out of 178 BOPs of ITBP, electricity connection is available at 43
BOPs. The Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary decided
to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance BOPs of the BGFs (including ITBP).
However, such BOPs are presently having power supply through generator/solar energy. The BGFs have
been asked to laise with the respective DISCOMs to prepare estimates for electric connection. The Ministry
of Power has been requested to issue instructions to all the State Governments in this regard. On receipt of
estimates the proposal will be placed before ECBI for approval and allocation of funds. Special measures like
providing power through solar etc. is being under taken for electrifying remote and off-the-grid locations.
Further Recommendation
2.25.3 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.
2.26 Medical facilities
Recommendation
2.26.1 The Committee is of the considered view that ITBP personnel must get adequate medical facilities at
ground level and if required medical attention at the referral hospital. Moreover, evacuation facilities must
be ready round the clock for sick personnel for better medical attention. The Committee, therefore, recommends
the strengthening of overall health care facilities for the ITBP personnel. (Para 4.14.12 ibid)
Action Taken
2.26.2 The following medical facilities has been provided to the personnel of ITBP:-
(i) ITBP has 10 bedded hospital at battalion level to provide primary health care or first level
health care.
(ii) At BOP level, there is MI Room with well-trained Medic for primary first aid at BOP.

40
(iii) There is provision of Air evacuation of sick personnel from BOPs by helicopter of Indian Air
Force and this facility is being used as per requirement.
(iv) Two 50 bedded Composite hospitals, one 30 bedded hospital and one 200 bedded Referral
hospital are also available for providing secondary level and tertiary level treatment of Force
personnel.
(v) Education about preventing health problem and methods of preventing and controlling them
were provided to personnel of unit by medical officers by lectures and interaction.
(vi) Essential medical service are provided for personnel by early diagnosis, investigations and
treatment of diseases.
(vii) Annual Medical examination of all personnel conducted every year for screening of any illness.
(viii) Sanitary rounds conducted at Battalion level on every month.
(ix) Regular lectures conducted on health awareness and prevention of diseases.
(x) Lectures and techniques to reduce stress conducted.
(xi) Lecture on healthy diet and dietary restriction for prevention of  Hypertension and Heat disease
conducted.
(xii) Lectures given to personnel on behaviours so as to keep personnel information  about ill-
effects  of smoking.
(xiii) Besides, treatment facility in all boarder units personnel is also provided in Army Hospitals.
For strengthening of overall health care facilities for ITBP personnel at far flung AOR, Tele
Medicines facilities being provided to 20 areas (16 BOPs & 04 ANO ) as pilot project in addition to
facilities mentioned above.
Further Recommendation
2.26.3 The Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry.
2.27 Permanent Integrated Composite Building (PICB)
Recommendation
2.27.1 The Committee understands that since ITBP personnel are working in high altitude mountainous
region, therefore, adequate and commensurate infrastructure is required to enhance the professional efficiency
of the ITBP. In this regard, the proposal of Permanent Integrated Composite Building (PICB) is a welcome
concept and the Committee hopes that the said project at Leh would be completed within stipulated timeframe
and at the estimated cost. The Committee further recommends that similar PICB at various BoPs of ITBP
may be constructed. (Para 4.16.4  ibid )
Action Taken
2.27.2  DPRs on ITBP’s 96 BOPs: DPRs of 96 permanent integrated building is being prepared by CPWD.
CPWD will submit 72 DPRs by 15-06-2019 and remaining by 31-07-2019.

41
Further Recommendation
2.27.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.28 Surveillance Equipments
Recommendation
2.28.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the latest and modern equipment must be provided to
the ITBP personnel at the place of their deployment for effective and efficient working. The Committee,
therefore, hopes that the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS) must include
updated surveillance equ ipment that will work under the extreme climatic conditions. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must consider all the proposals pertaining to
critical infrastructure, night halt camps, Cutting Edge Technologies and communication & surveillance
equipment and take necessary action for procuring/installing appropriate equipments for the ITBP
personnel. (Para 4.17.2  ibid)
Action Taken
2.28.2
CIBMS:- A proposal for establishing a Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System
(CIBMS) for ITBP submitted to MHA vide U.O Note No. IV-16014/Border MGMT/24/Tele/2017-61 dated
19
th February, 2018 for implementing in 04 phases with approval to implement 1st phase in Ladakh Region in
year 2018-19 with financial implications of ` 99.04 Crore.
Phases Implementation Plan Cost I mplication
(in crores)
Phase-1 26 BOPs of Ladakh Region (NW Ftr) 99.04
Phase-2 57 BOPs of Northern Frontier (HP &Garhwal region) 98.71
Phase-3 59 BOPs of North East region (Arunchal Pradesh) 87.00
Phase-4 38 BOPs of Sikkim Sector plus remaining in depth 52.62
BOPs of NWeFtr and BOPs of Bareilly Sector
Total Cost 337.38
Following equipments were proposed in the proposal.
(i) Surveillance Eqpts- LORROS, HHTI, and Spotter scopes, Ground Portable Radar &   UAV .
(ii) Communication Eqpts- VSAT Static Version, VSAT (QDA) Mobile Version & High Speed MW
Radio link.
(iii) V ehicle– ATV 4 Seater, Snow Scooter, SUV Petrol version 4x4 & Dual Cabin Medium Truck .
(iv) Power Back up- Generator 10 KV A (Diesel) & Solar Power 10 KV A
(v) Command & Control system and Data Feed-Command and Control & Data Feed
(vi) Engineering Infrastructure - Watch Towers.
Status :- The case is under consideration at IFD (MHA) and P-II Div MHA.

42
2.28.3 Cutting Edge Technology :-  A proposal for authorization of Cutting Edge Technology has been
submitted to MHA vide U.O. Note No. 518  on 21 st August, 2018. The Details of equipment propose is as
under:-
Sl. No. Particulars Qty
1. Mini UA V 03
2. Micro UA V 16
3. PTZ camera for CCTV surveillance 60
4. UV marker for hepter landing during night 16
5. Remotely Operated Vehicle 02
6. Self power Adhoc Sensor Network 05
2.28.4  In the Meeting convened on 14th August, 2018 under this Ministry, it was decided that priority should
be given to approved infrastructure project viz roads, Helipads, BoPs & Critical infra etc. Requirement of
Night Halt camps will be assessed later on.
Further Recommendation
2.28.5 The Committee notes the reply.
2.29 Communication facilities
Recommendation
2.29.1 The Committee observes that there is no provision of mobile connectivity in many BOPs of ITBP .
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must explore the feasibility of having mobile
connectivity at the BOPs and if possible even by encouraging private operators. The proposal for providing
Optical Fiber Cable (OFC) connectivity to all BoPs by connecting all villages through National Optical Fiber
Network must be considered on priority. (Para 4.20.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.29.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is giving top priority to provide telecom connectivity (voice & data)
to all the BOPs of BGFs (including ITBP). A Committee under Additional Director General, BSF, comprising
of Inspector General, Communications of all BGFs and representatives of BSNL and TCIL has been
constituted to prepare and submit a comprehensive report identifying BOP wise requirement of connectivity.
Thereafter, the matter will be placed before Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI)
headed by Cabinet Secretary for seeking budgetary support either through Universal Service Obligation
Fund (USOF) under Department of Telecommunications or through normal budget allocation under Ministry
of Home Affairs.
Further Recommendation
2.29.3  The Committee notes the reply.

43
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
2.30 Attrition
Recommendation
2.30.1 The Committee also observes that the Ministry has not taken suitable measures to recruit or appoint
counselors, psychologists and psychiatrists to address the stress and mental health related issues in a
professional manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should consider creating posts
in the medical cadre of BSF and recruit and appoint suitable professionals. The Committee also recommends
that recruitment to these posts may be done so as to provide at least one professional counselor for every
battalion and one clinical psychologist/psychiatrist at the Frontier HQ level. (Para 5.5.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.30.2  At present, 02 posts of Psychiatrist are authorized in 100 bedded Composite Hospital at Tekanpur
and Kadamtala. Further, the case for authorization of 04 posts of clinical Psychologists in all CHs and stress
counselors in each unit will be taken up for approval.
2.30.3 Presently, 01 regular Specialist (Psychiatry) held in BSF and posted in Composite Hospital Tekanpur.
However, 02 regular GDMOs having PG qualification in Psychiatry are available in BSF and are posted in
Composite Hospital Kadamtala and Jodhpur.
Further Recommendation
2.30.4 The Committee takes note of the response of the Ministry.
2.31 Promotional Avenues
Recommendation
2.31.1 The Committee finds some merit in the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations under the
Modified Assured Career Progression(MACP) scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32 years of service
instead of the existing scheme that provides only three financial up- gradations at intervals of 10, 20 and 30
years of service at par with other civilian employees. The Committee is of the considered view that the BSF
personnel, who are facing excessive stagnation in their career growth, must be provided certain special
incentives so as to keep their morale high. Moreover, the Committee feels that it is unnecessary to equate
them with civilian employees as the nature of their duty is quite different and they require constant motivation
and a high morale to flawlessly perform the critical tasks assigned to them. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry may favorably reconsider the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations under the MACP
scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32 years of service to the BSF personnel. The Committee is of the
considered view that this proposal would stem the number of voluntary retirements taking place immediately
after completion of 20 years of service. (Para 5.6.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.31.2  MACP guidelines issued by DOP&T are uniformly applicable to all Central Government Civil
employees including CAPFs personnel. As per DoP&T guidelines applicable uniformly to all Govt.
departments, MACP are to be given on completion of 10, 20 & 30 years of service which is in vogue in BSF
as well.

44
Further Observation
2.31.3 The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
2.32 Promotional Avenues
Recommendation
2.32.1 The Committee is anguished to note that stagnation of personnel in some posts is so high that it takes
up to 23 years to get promotion. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not taken suitable steps to
remove such severe stagnation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently
take cognizance of this issue and take appropriate measures to shorten the long waiting period in career
progression. (Para 5.6.10 ibid)
Action Taken
2.32.2 To mitigate the stagnation for promotion of jawans and officers, following steps have been taken:-
(i) Cadre review of Group-‘A’ officers has been approved by the Govt. in the year 2016.
(ii) Cadre review of Ministerial Staff has been approved by the Govt. in the year 2017.
(iii) Cadre review of Communication cadre and Stenographic cadre has been approved by the
Govt. in the year 2018.
(iv) Cadre review of Group-‘B’ & ‘C’ and other supporting cadres are in active progress.
(v) Proposal to grant “Special Grade Designation” to senior and eligible Constables and Head
Constables i.e. 11248 Constables as Head Constables and 9895 Head Constables as ASI (GD)
in BSF purely on cost neutrality basis are under process at MHA.
(vi) Augmentation of training capacity of Training Centre by creating 461 posts.
(vii) Raising of 06 new Battalions.
(viii) Sanction of one National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) Battalion.
(ix) Creation of 479 posts of Para-Medical staff in the year 2019.
(x) After cadre review, there was improvement in the promotional prospects of officers, Ministerial
staff, Communication staff and Stenographic staff. Moreover, efforts are being made to sponsor
maximum nomination of official for deputation and increase the deputation commitment quota
to NSG and SPG so as to mitigate the problem to a large extent.
Further Recommendation
2.32.3 The Committee takes note of the steps taken in this direction to obviate the problem of
stagnation in BSF.
2.33 Cadre Review/Restructuring
Recommendation
2.33.1 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Ministry that the review of Air Wing and

45
Veterinary cadres was not undertaken as they were strengthened or restructured much earlier. The Committee,
however, observes that the review of Law Cadre is still under preparation by the Branch concerned. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should instruct the officers concerned to expedite the
review of the Law Cadre and ensure its implementation at the earliest. (Para 5.7.9 ibid)
Action Taken
Veterinary Cadre
2.33.2 Restructuring of Veterinary cadre has been approved by Govt. of India vide MHA Letter No. 16/01/
2005-Pers/BSF/PF-V dated 02.11.2015 in which 149 posts have been additionally sanctioned. Thus, the
restructuring/ cadre review of Veterinary setup will be due in 2020 on functional need as per monograph of
DoP&T 2010.
Air Wing Cadre
2.33.3 Str engthening of Air Wing has also been approved by Govt. of India vide MHA Letter No. 16/4/2013-
Pers/BSF/PF-V dated 27.02.2014 in which 199 posts have been additionally sanctioned. However, a proposal
for strengthening of Air Wing is under preparation by BSF. After due examination of the proposal, same will
be submitted to MHA.
Law Cadre
2.33.4 A Board of Officers have been detailed vide order dated 07.02.2019 to prepare the cadre review
proposal of Law Cadre. The same is under progress in BSF.
Further Recommendation
2.33.5 The Committee notes that the Cadre Review Proposal for Law cadre is under preparation.
2.34 Medical Response Staff
Recommendation
2.34.1 The Committee also takes note of the sub mission of the Ministry that adverse and difficult service
conditions due to posting in far flung areas/remote areas, overall deficiency of doctors in the country,
and better pay, allowances and perks in private hospitals, are the possible reasons for vacancies of
Specialist Medical Officers and GDMOs, not being filled up. The Committee appreciates that not much
can be done to remove the bottlenecks of hard service conditions or deficiency of doctors in the country.
However, improvement in pay, allowances and perks are possible through appropriate modifications in
the recruitment rules and terms and conditions of the contractual appointments. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry must undertake measures to make the terms and conditions of the recruitment/
contractual appointment more attractive and offer them remuneration and perks comparable to the private
sector. (Para 5.8.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.34.2  The Medical officers of BSF are being granted the Pay and Allowances and the financial upgradations
under DACP scheme at par with the other medical officers of Central Health Services.
2.34.3 The superannuation age of the Medical officers of BSF have also been raised to 65 years in order to
make the appointment more attractive and in view of the functional requirement of the force.

46
2.34.4  Further, the Pay, perks and other benefits attached to the posts are also being granted to the Medical
officers of the BSF.
Further Recommendation
2.34.5 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry.
2.35 Basic Amenities- Food
Recommendation
2.35.1 The Committee takes note of the explanation provided by the BSF on the controversy of providing
poor quality food to its personnel by commissioning a study conducted by Defence Institute of Physiology
and Allied Science (DIPAS). The Committee also notes that DIP AS has found that 97 per cent personnel are
satisfied with the quality and quantity of food being provided. The Committee, however, observes that the
sample size of the study was less than 3 per cent of the total strength of the Force and may be subject to
error and, therefore, may not accurately reflect the situation on the ground. (Para 5.11.8  ibid)
Recommendation
2.35.2 The Committee also takes note of the sampling technique used in the study and feels that Stratified
Random Sampling Technique may not be the best technique to identify potential issues. The Committee is
aware that food quality and quantity may not be an issue in the geographically accessible areas but the
problems exist in remote, inaccessible areas of deployment and where there are harsh climatic conditions.
The Committee feels that the study conducted by DIPAS, instead of adopting a sampling technique based on
random method should have adopted a more focused technique such as selective sampling or modal instance
sampling focused on the areas that are more likely to have a compromised quality and quantity of food. In
the Committee’ s view, conducting such a focused study would have brought out the real concerns, which
were probably lost among the favorable outcomes obtained from a wider sample. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should commission another study based on selective or modal instance sampling
technique that focuses on particular locations that are remote, inaccessible and suffer from the constraints
of harsh climatic conditions. (Para 5.11.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.35.3  As approved by Competent Authority, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS)
was asked to carry out the study on following points vide order No. 1046-65 dated 16
th Mar, 2017:-
2.35.4  Monitoring ration depending upon dietary aspects and satisfaction level of troops of BSF. In the
test, the team of scientists will collect data at around 20 locations (approx. 4 locations each in western and
eastern command). Methodology will be as under:-
(a) Giving questionnaire for assessing food quality and satisfaction level
(b) Random sampling to cover approx. 10% of total strength
(c) Interview schedule for cook houses/ kitchen
2.35.5 The technical report of study “Survey of Food and Nutritional requirement of BSF pers” received
vide DIPAS L/No. TC/DIP-265/DIPAS/2018 dated 22
nd Jan, 2018. As per the study report-

47
(i) 08 Frontiers were identified by BSF for study of both WC & EC with 04 locations in each as
following:-
Western Command - Kashmir Ftr
Gujarat Ftr
Rajasthan Ftr
Punjab Ftr
Eastern Command - SB Ftr
M&C Ftr
Meghalaya Ftr
Tripura Ftr
(ii) The filled forms were digitized and complete data was obtained from 6526 participants and
focused group discussion (FGD) was made at 37 different unit mess/ cook houses visited by
study team.
(iii) The study was carried out at following 02 locations:-
(a) Kalyani (SB Ftr) – Study was carried out during 10
th April to 21st July, 2017. A total of 105
participants were selected randomly and represented all types of work profiles.
(b) Ferozepur (Punjab Ftr) – Study was carried out during 31 st August to 10 th September,
2017. A total 120 participants were selected.
2.35.6 DIP AS vide their L/No. TC/DIP-265/DIPAS/2018 dated 22nd January, 2018 informed that they have
successfully completed the study and submitted the report.
2.35.7 Since each Force may have different sets of grounds circumstances, they may study at their end
adopting the methodology suggested by the Committee and report to MHA for submission of an Action
Taken Note to the Committee in due course.
Further Recommendation
2.35.8 The Committee notes the reply.
2.36 Leave and Transfer Issues
Recommendation
2.36.1 The Committee appreciates the difficulty in acceding to transfer requests of all the personnel. However,
there is a need to identify the factors that lead to such a huge number of transfer requests every year. The
Committee feels that if the pattern of recruitment, especially for the Subordinate Officers and Other ranks,
can be aligned to the geographical constraints faced by the Force then it would be easier to provide posting
in his State of residence or even near his home town. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should review the recruitment policies pertaining to BSF to align them with the geographical
deployment of the Force by recruiting more candidates from the States/Region where the Force is deployed.
The Committee is of the view that this could help in reducing not only the tendency to seek transfers to
preferred locations but also help in addressing the attrition to certain extent. (Para 5.14.8 ibid)

48
Action Taken
2.36.2  Keeping in view of security reasons as well as nature of duties and deployment of BSF, it is
impracticable to provide posting of BSF personnel in his State of residence or even near to his home town.
Candidates from all over the country are being recruited in various ranks.
2.36.3  Due to deployment on International Border, issues of security and vigilance are of primary concern.
Continuation of BSF personnel in particular geographical area can be counterproductive in long run.
Further Recommendation
2.36.4 The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
2.37 Grievance Redressal
Recommendation
2.37.1 The Committee appreciates various components of Grievance Redressal System of BSF . The
Committee desires that the Grievance Redresssal mechanism must be easily accessible, user-friendly,
transparent and fair in dealing with the grievances of BSF personnel. (Para 5.15.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.37.2  A healthy Grievance Redress system is being followed in the Border Security Force since 1992 to
redress the grievances of serving as well as retired personnel in time bound manner.
2.37.3  Modern mechanism by way of integration of technology is being used by BSF for registering the
grievances. The various formal and informal channels of registering grievances available to a BSF personnel
is attached as Appendix-‘B’.
2.37.4  A system has been developed with unique central ID to integrate the grievances, maintain digital
record and form consolidate data of all type of grievance for retrieval at later date.
Further Recommendation
2.37.5 The Committee notes the reply.
2.38 Infrastructural Issues-Security of Personnel
Recommendation
2.38.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that Bundhs are being
constructed along the International Border on the India-Pakistan Border to provide adequate protection
from cross border firing and shelling to the personnel. The Committee recommends that the Bundhs may
be constructed at all the Border Outposts that are affected by cross-border firing and shelling. The Committee
also recommends that the construction of Bundhs may be expedited and completed in a time-bound
manner. (Para 5.17.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.38.2  Ring Bundh in BOP provides protection from flat trajectory fire. However, a Composite Bundh of
135 feet width, all along IB in Jammu has been sanctioned and will protect Force personnel as well as

49
villagers. Out of 179 Kms of IB in Jammu, 33.1 Kms pilot project of Composite Bundh has been revised by
42 HLEC held on 24 th January, 2018. To begin the project, work has been started by the CPWD in two
patches i.e. in AOR of BOP Fakir and BOP Kothe in 2.6 Kms. Work is in progress by CPWD. Land acquisition
for composite bundh is also under progress.
Further Recommendation
2.38.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.39    Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach (GJSPKK) Scheme
Recommendation
2.39.1 The Committee is dismayed to observe that an insurance scheme with a huge financial corpus was
devised and implemented without consulting professionals having relevant experience in the insurance sector.
The Committee is also disappointed with the Ministry as it allowed implementation of the Scheme in such a
nonchalant manner without proper assessment of the financial implications of the Scheme. The Committee
takes strong exception to the discretionary manner and financial imprudence with which this Scheme was
drafted and allowed to be implemented. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should engage
professionals having experience in insurance sector and background in actuarial sciences to comprehensively
review this Scheme and arrive at an optimum premium to be paid by the personnel and the maximum benefits
that can be granted to the personnel under this Scheme. The question of shortfall in the promised refund of
the premium must also be addressed and a solution found so that the personnel who contributed to the
scheme are not deprived of their legitimate dues. (Para 5.18.6 ibid)
Recommendation
2.39.2 The Committee also takes note of the revisions made in the ‘Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan
Kawach’ Scheme to make it financially viable. The Committee observes that the problems occurred due to an
improper financial analysis before the implementation of the Scheme and in view of the reduced fund
position it was arbitrarily decided to provide refund of subscription fee to the retiree personnel at the rate of
41 per cent instead of 100 per cent with interest. Moreover, when the Scheme was revised the refund of 100
per cent of the subscription amount paid was stipulated for the retiree personnel with effect from 1
st September
2017. The Committee feels that this may have created an anomalous situation where a personnel retiring
during the period from 1st September, 2014 to 31st August, 2015 would get refund of only 41 per cent of his
subscription amount while a personnel retiring after this date would get refund of 100 per cent of the
subscription amount paid by him. The Committee, therefore, deplores the arbitrary and discretionary measure
in which this issue has been handled by BSF . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may institute an
enquiry into the matter and fix the accountability of the officer(s) concerned. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry may resolve such anomalies that may have occurred due to the review of the
scheme and undertake measures to refund the promised amount to all the retiree personnel so that they are
not deprived of their legitimate dues. (Para 5.18.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.39.3  Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach (GJSPKK) Scheme is not an insurance scheme.
2.39.4  The sole motive of the scheme was to provide substantial and immediate financial assistance to force

50
personnel in the event of death, disability, missing, retirement etc. and accordingly with the approval of
Board of Governors during Governing Body Meeting, the scheme started w.e.f. Sept, 2014.
2.39.5  Prior to commencement of GJSPKK scheme, Seema Prahari Beema Yojana under LIC scheme was
running on annual increment basis with LIC under which only insurance cover in the event of death,
disability and missing was given. However, there was no provision for providing financial assistance/benefits
to Force pers in comparison to GJSPKK.
2.39.6  GJSPKK scheme was approved by DG BSF during 47th Governing Body Meeting of Central Benevolent
Fund and 39th Governing Body Meeting of Special Relief Fund.
2.39.7  The case for approval of MHA for starting BSF Insurance Scheme with complete details of scheme
was sent to MHA (R&W Dte) vide UO No. 13631 dated 18 th June, 2014. Later MHA(R&W Dte) vide UO
No. 27011/49/2014/R&W/ dated 19th August, 2014 conveyed that “As per the proposed scheme, DG BSF is
the Chairman of Governing Body and is competent to decide all matters related to the welfare of BSF jawans
in consultation with other members of Governing Body. Thus, approval of this Ministry is not deemed
necessary”.
2.39.8  GJSPKK scheme was registered under Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860 vide Registration No.
S-E/380/Distt. South-EAST/2014 dated 27 th August, 2014 and regular audit of the fund is being carried out
by appointed Chartered Accountant annually.
2.39.9  Enhancement of subscription towards GJSPKK scheme and increase in the benefits of the fund to
Force pers was agreed during 50 th GBM of Contributory Benevolent Fund held on 15 th June 2017 and
accordingly, changes were incorporated in terms of benefit as well subscription by Force pers.
2.39.10  Action is in hand to refund the 100% amount of subscription to the personnel who quit service
w.e.f. 1st September, 2014 to 31 st August, 2017.
2.39.11 However, the suggestion to increase the corpus of the fund may be reviewed in the next meeting of
Governing Body of the fund and may be adopted, if required to the best advantage of the fund.
2.39.12  It is stated here that this Ministry has issued an advisory to all Forces inter-alia advising them that
SOPs/Rules/Regulations/By-laws of welfare schemes and financial help packages are duly notified on their
website in order to ensure transparency. Also, to have such funds audited at regular intervals through
authorized audit agencies to ensure adequate financial propriety and accountability in their usages.
Further Recommendation
2.39.13 The Committee notes the reply.
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
2.40 Food
Recommendation
2.40.1 The Committee finds it hard to believe that everything is fine and there are no issues with the quality
of food and an effective system of checks and balances exists in all the forces. The Committee feels that
there should be location and geography specific systems of purchase, procurement and provision of food

51
items to be followed by all the Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs, after interacting with all the Forces, should devise a comprehensive system of purchase, preparation
and provision of food items. (Para 6.1.6  ibid)
Recommendation
2.40.2 The Committee also takes note of the regular quality checks being done by the various Forces and
feels that the internal checks mechanism is more or less routine in nature. The Committee feels that elements
of externality and surprise are missing from the system of food quality checks prevalent in various Forces.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should evolve an inspection
mechanism comprising of dieticians, experienced food inspectors and officials not belonging to the Force
for surprise checks of the quality and quantity served in various Forces, especially at the remote and
inaccessible locations. (Para 6.1.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.40.3  Mechanism to check quality of food being served to jawans is in place. CAPFs, while deployed
under Ops Control of Army, procure ration as per Defence food specification/Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India (FSSAI). Also some Forces like Assam Rifles is reported to have engaged nutritionist to
prepare a standard menu based on caloric requirement of troops. In Forces, Unit Medical Officer/Duty
Officer/Senior Officers check food for its nutritious value and quality during their visits. Monthly mess
meeting is being carried out to look into grievances and further improvements in the quality of food. In
addition, this Ministry has also advised the Forces that the senior officer’s may also partake the food
prepared for jawans and endorse a note on the quality/quantity of food in Inspection Register.
2.40.4  The forces have also been advised to review their internal grievances redressal system and take
proactive measures to redress the grievances. MHA have launched a Mobile Application for redressal of the
grievances of CAPFs personnel.
Further Recommendation
2.40.5 The Committee notes the reply.
2.41 Cadre Review
Recommendation
2.41.1 The Committee feels that regular cadre review of the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) is essential to
maintain their organizational structure as per their requirements. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should undertake measures to expedite the pending cadre reviews of Assam Rifles and
ITBP . (Para 6.4.2 ibid)
Recommendation
2.41.2 The Committee is disappointed to observe that restructuring of Group ‘A’ cadre is prioritized in the
Forces at the cost of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ cadres. The Committee feels that stagnation is more in the
lowermost ranks and cadre reviews of lower ranks should be taken up before the higher ranks. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently expedite the cadre reviews of Group
‘B’ and ‘C’  cadres. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry, in future, should adopt a system to

52
take up the cadre review of Group ‘C’ and ‘B’  first, in that order , and then conduct the cadre review of
Group ‘A’. (Para 6.4.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.41.3  Assam Rifle will be advised to expedite. About ITBP, the position is as under:-
(i) The Cadre Review proposal of Group ‘A ’ Executive GD and Non (GD) Cadre of ITBP has
been approved by DoP&T and DoE. And Cabinet approval is being sought. However, sanction
order for creation of 68 posts of Group ‘A’ Non GD Cadre upto the level of DIG has been
issued on 09
th May, 2019
(ii) Group ‘A’ Executive GD and Non (GD) in ITBP – Draft Cabinet Note circulated for inter-
ministerial on 07th May, 2019.
(iii) The Cadre Review of Group B & C (GD) and Non-GD cadre is under process in the
Ministry.
(iv) Group  ‘C’ Tradesmen  - Under examination
The advice of the Committee noted for guidance.
Further Recommendation
2.41.4 The Committee notes the reply of MHA that its recommendation has been noted for guidance.
2.42 Nomenclature of CAPFs
Recommendation
2.42.1 The Committee notes the contention of the NCC and the comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs
on the issue of change of nomenclature of the CPMFs to CAPFs. (Para 6.5.8 ibid)
Action Taken
2.42.2  No specific comments.
Further Recommendation
2.42.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.43 Status and Benefits to Ex-CAPF Personnel
Recommendation
2.43.1 The Committee is of the view that the issue of granting of Ex-Servicemen status and Martyr/War
Widow status for the CAPFs for their supreme sacrifices made for the nation needs to be properly recognized
by the Government and hence needs detailed examination to motivate and encourage them. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that there should be no difference in the benefits being granted to CAPFs personnel
and Defence personnel. The advisory issued to State/UT Governments for extending suitable benefits to Ex.
CAPFs personnel on the lines of Defence personnel may be monitored and any difference therein may be
brought to the notice of State/UT Governments. (Para 6.6.5 ibid)

53
Recommendation
2.43.2 The Committee feels that leaving the decision to the State Governments to extend suitable benefits to
Ex-CAPF personnel on the line of Ex-Servicemen may not have the desired efforts. It is therefore necessary
that the benefits that are extended to Ex-Servicemen of the Ex-CAPF personnel are monitored and if there
is any variation that may be attended to. (Para 6.6.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.43.3  It is submitted that Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) has approved the proposal of this Ministry
to declare the retired CAPF personnel as “Ex-CAPF personnel”.  On this basis, an administrative order was
issued vide this Ministry OM No. 27011/100/2012-R&W dated 23
rd November, 2012. In the aforesaid order,
retired personnel of Central Armed Police Force personnel from CRPF, BSF, CISF, ITBP and SSB have been
designated as “Ex-Central Armed Police Force personnel” (Ex-CAPF personnel) and based on such designation,
State/UT Government may extend suitable benefits to them on the line of ex-servicemen of Defence Force.
On the basis of above, the Union HS vide their DO dated 19
th February, 2013 had requested all States/UTs
Governments to extend the suitable benefits to CAPFs personnel on the lines of benefits extended by the
States/UTs Governments to the Ex-servicemen of Defence Forces and the same was followed by the Union
HS DO dated 24
th March, 2014 and OM dated 21 st June, 2015. Extending the benefits is purely prerogative
of the State/UTs Governments.
2.43.4 As on date, the Governments of Goa, Dadara and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu have issued
notification for extending benefits to Ex-CAPFs personnel at par with Ex-Servicemen.
Further Recommendation
2.43.5 The Committee notes the reply.
2.44 Central Police Canteen (CPC) and the Welfare and Rehabilitation Board (W ARB)
Recommendation
2.44.1 The Committee feels that both the organizations, i.e., CPC and WARB, though meant for welfare of
CAPF personnel, both serving and retired, need to be backed up by institutional mechanisms like expediting
the registration of WARB as a society so that it is able to serve its intended purpose. The Committee
recommends that working of both organizations may be thoroughly reviewed and robust measures may be
undertaken for carrying out the entrusted functions effectively and efficiently. The Committee also
recommends that to strengthen the Central Police Canteens system, the Ministry of Home Affairs may
explore the possibility of exempting the goods provided to the personnel through Central Police Canteens
from the State component of GST by all the State Governments. (Para 6.7.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.44.2 As regard exemption from Goods and Services Tax (GST) on purchase/sale of goods through
Central Police Canteen (CPC) for CAPFs personnel is concerned, it is stated that the Hon’ble Home Minister
has already sent a DO letter dated 29
th June, 2017 to the Hon’ble Finance Minister for grant of exemption
from Goods and Services Tax (GST) on purchase/sale of goods through Central Police Canteen (CPC) for
CAPFs personnel. The same has been followed by this Ministry vide letter dated 14 th August, 2017 and
31st August, 2017. The reply on the proposal is awaited from Ministry of Finance.

54
2.44.3 CPC is currently chaired by an ADG rank officer. It has 119 Master Canteens and 1811 Subsidiary
Canteens functioning all over India.
2.44.4 W ARB is Chaired by a DG of CAPF by rotation and has local chapters viz State Welfare Officers and
District Welfare Officers to assist.
Further Recommendation
2.44.5 The Committee notes the reply.
2.45 Old Pension System
Recommendation
2.45.1 The Committee notes that the Cabinet and the Group of Ministers (GoM) have examined the issue of
regular (old) pension to CAPFs personnel employed from the year 2004 onwards and could not find merit to
revert to the old pension scheme. (Para 6.8.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.45.2 The matter was examined. It was found that it is not feasible to exempt CPMFs personnel from the
purview of New Pension Scheme. The Scheme has already run for 14 years and the roll back exclusively
for CAPFs at this stage may not be feasible.
Further Observation
2.45.3 The Committee notes the response of the Ministry.
2.46 Para-military Service Pay (PMSP)
Recommendation
2.46.1 The Committee has noted Rule 6(1) of the IPS Cadre Rules 1954 that stipulates deputation of
IPS officers to the Central Government and deputation of State Cadre of IPS for central deputation
quota. (Para 6.10.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.46.2  The Committee’s views are noted.
Further Recommendation
2.46.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.47 Removal of Deputation Quota at Senior Officers level in CAPFs
Recommendation
2.47.1 The Committee feels that the nature of duty of CAPFs are more similar to the Armed Forces rather
than Police Forces and it would make more sense to bring more officers from the Armed Forces on
deputation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation
with the Ministry of Defence, should explore the mechanism of lateral induction of the Officers from the
Armed Forces in the CAPFs on short-term deputation, especially in the Battalions posted in the disturbed

55
areas such as Kashmir and North-eastern States, where the Armed Forces and the CAPFs work in tandem
with each other. (Para 6.10.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.47.2  Proposal already examined by MHA by constituting a Committee under the Chairmanship of DG,
CRPF with DsG of other CAPFs as members. The lateral induction of a defence personnel in CAPFs was
not found feasible by the Committee. Decision conveyed to MoD.
Further Recommendation
2.47.3 The Committee notes the reply.
2.48 Electricity Supply
Recommendation
2.48.1 The Committee takes note of the lack of electricity supply at several installations of CAPFs particularly
Border Out Posts (BOPs) of the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) and Indo- Tibetan Border Police (ITBP). These
BOPs do not have a regular supply of electricity and are primarily dependent on generator sets. The Committee
feels that this is not a healthy state of affairs and this seriously affects the working conditions of the
personnel as well as operations of the Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs should take decision expeditiously on the pending proposal to ensure regular  electricity
supply at BOPs of CAPFs. The Committee also recommends that special measures should be undertaken for
electrifying remote and off-the-grid locations. (Para 6.13.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.48.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is giving top priority to provide electricity connection to all the BOPs
of BGFs particularly in remote areas. The electricity connection available and required by BOPs of BGFs is
as follows:-
S.No BGFs T otal No. Electricity Electricity % BOPs yet to
of BOPs/COBs connection connection be connected
available at required at
BOPs BOPs
1. BSF 1901 1537 364 19%
2. ITBP 178 43 135 76%
3. SSB 626 278 345 56%
4. Assam Rifles 277 228 49 18%
2.48.3  The Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary decided
to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance BOPs of the BGFs. However, such BOPs
are presently having power supply through generator/solar energy.  The BGFs have been asked to liaise with
the respective DISCOMs to prepare estimates for electric connection. The Ministry of Power has been
required to issue instructions to all the State Governments in this regard. On receipt of estimates the proposal

56
will be placed before ECBI for approval and allocation of funds. Special measures like providing power
through solar energy etc is being under taken for electrifying remote and off-the-grid locations.
Further Recommendation
2.48.4 The Committee notes that Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed
by Cabinet Secretary has decided to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance
BOPs of the BGFs.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
ASSAM RIFLES
3.1 Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee is of the view that the reply furnished by the Ministry is not  sufficient justification
for not reducing the levels of direct recruitment. The Committee feels that conducting direct recruitment at
four levels viz. Naib Subedar, Warrant Officer, Havildar, and Rifleman can justifiably be reduced to two
levels to increase the promotional avenues. The Committee is aware that direct recruitment for General Duty
posts in most of the other CAPFs takes place at three ranks viz. Constable, Sub-Inspector and Assistant
Commandant. The Committee is also aware that there is at least one intermediate rank in between two levels
of direct recruitment. The Committee thus feels that the scheme of direct recruitment at all four of the
lowermost ranks in the AR is not justified. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable structural
changes must be brought about in the recruitment mechanism of the AR to conduct direct recruitment only at
three stages viz. Rifleman, Warrant Officer, and Subedar . The Committee strongly recommends that conducting
direct recruitment at any two ranks that are consecutive in the hierarchy may be avoided as this gives rise to
stagnation and depressed promotional avenues for its personnel. (Para 2.4.10 of 214
th Report)
Action Taken
3.1.2 It is submitted that Assam Rifles is a Paramilitary Force distinct from CAPFs and has Paramilitary
function of supplementing Military Operations in both Peace and War. Hence, its rank structure is akin more
to the Military rather than the Central Armed Police Forces which have more of a policing function. Further,
the rank structure is more defined and hierarchical for purposes of conducting Military Operations in
detachments, sections, platoons and companies as compared to a relatively flatter rank structure of CAPFs
required for policing functions. For these reasons, it is imperative that the rank structure of Assam Rifles be
kept intact even at the cost of variance from the CAPFs. The associated nomenclature of ranks too must
also be retained for the same functional reason and command and control and joint operations with the
Army.
3.1.3 Direct recruitment at intermediate levels generally reduces promotion scope for those inducted at
lower ranks. Hence, in Assam Rifles direct recruitment in the General Category is only carried out at one
level i.e, Constable (Rifleman in Assam Rifles) and LDCE for Assistant Commandant. In an effort to
improve promotion opportunities, the Ministry approved upgradation of one post of Constable (Rifleman)
as Head Constable (Havildar) in each Section of the Battalions, thereby reducing stagnation from 22 to 23
years to about 18 years. Keeping in view all the aspects, direct induction at intermediate ranks is not
recommended.
Further Recommendation
3.1.4 The Committee notes the contention of the Ministry that the rank structure of Assam Rifles
57

58
is more defined and hierarchical for purposes of conducting Military Operations in detachments,
sections, platoons and companies as compared to a relatively flatter rank structure of CAPFs required
for policing functions, therefore the rank structure and associated nomenclature of Assam Rifles is
not recommended to be altered. However, the Committee feels that it being one of the Border
Guarding Force and it functions like other Border Guarding Forces, therefore, it should be like
other Border Guarding Forces even in hierarchical structure. The Committee therefore reiterates
its recommendation.
Recommendation
3.1.5 The Committee feels that at 80:20, the ratio of officers belonging to the Indian Army and the
officers belonging to the Assam Rifles cadre is heavily skewed against AR Cadre officers. The Committee
takes note of the proposal to rationalise this ratio by bringing it down to 65.74: 33.76. The Committee is of
the view that the proposed measure of rationalizing the ratio is necessary to maintain a balance in the
composition of the Force at the officer ranks. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that this
proposal to enhance the strength AR Cadre officers should be considered at the earliest to strike a balance
between the officers of the Indian Army and the Assam Rifles Cadre. (Para 2.4.14 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.6 In the present situation, it is imperative that Army officers continue to serve in Assam Rifles on
deputation as per the existing norms so that functional requirement of Paramilitary Force and close integration
with the Army in War and No War No Peace (NWNP) is maintained for optimal functional efficiency. Other
pressing operational reasons to continue with the higher ratio of Indian Army Officers vis-a -vis Assam
Rifles Cadre Officers are as follows:-
(i)    The unresolved boundary/ LAC issue with China will continue to demand that the Assam Rifles
battalions are employed in a Conventional infantry role–a situation that can only be met by
having regular Army officers posted in the current proportion. Assam Rifles thus form a very
vital component of the Indian Army’s plans in countering any likely Chinese designs in the
North Eastern Region.
(ii) Assam Rifles battalions also have a Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorist role to play in the
North East which again demands the heavy profile of Army officers who with younger age
profile and higher skill set to provide dynamism and vigour to the Force as well as adaptability
suited to dynamic warfare.
(iii) The current composition and resultant close association between the Army and the Assam Rifles
is a time tested relationship of over 180 years and thus creates a force multiplier effect, which
is vital in winning wars. Altering the character of the Assam Rifles will have negative repercussions
on its joint Operations with the Military.
(iv) The Assam Rifles also forms part of all the operational plans in respect to China. Presently,
Assam Rifles battalions can switch to roles in supports of the Army like occupation of defences,
acting as Covering troops, operating behind enemy lines or carrying out Rear Area Security in

59
a challenging time frame and without any major effort as Army officers are trained in the
nuances of these operations and have experience from their units.
3.1.7 However, the proposed Cadre review envisages a change in the existing ratio of 80:20 to
65.74:33.76 based upon the functional and operational requirement of the Force as recommended by
the Comm ittee.
Further Recommendation
3.1.8 The Committee reiterates its recommendation and urges upon the Government to expedite
the process of proposed cadre review that envisage a change in the existing ratio of 80:20 to 65.74:33.76
to meet the operational requirement.
3.2 Welfare Schemes and Issues-Ex-CAPF/Ex-servicemen status
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee notes the reluctance to designate the retired personnel of Assam Rifles as either ex-
CAPF or ex-Servicemen and also takes note of the observation of the Ministry of Law & Justice on this
issue. The Committee believes that this issue can be resolved through imaginative measures. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may designate the retired personnel of the Assam Rifles as
“Ex-Central Armed Police Force’ and consider granting them post-retirement benefits available to the ex-
CAPF personnel. (Para 2.18.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 Assam Rifles is a CPMF, not CAPF, due to military components in its organizational structure and
operations.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3 The Committee takes a serious note that the Government is reluctant to designate the
retired personnel of Assam Rifles as either ex-CAPF or ex-servicemen and questions so, they belong
to which service? The Committee is not at all convinced with the explanation furnished by the
Ministry that Assam Rifles is a CPMF, not CAPF, due to military components in its organizational
structure and operations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the issue can be resolved only
when the Ministry of Home Affairs designates the retired personnel of the Assam Rifles as “Ex-
Central Armed Police Force” and consider granting them post-retirement benefits available to the
ex-CAPF personnel or military personnel.
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
3.3 Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee takes note of the career growth chart of the General Duty cadre and finds that the
present ratio of posts at the levels of Assistant Commandant and Deputy Commandant which is at 2:9, does
not seem optimal for providing desirable promotional avenues. The Committee feels that, at present, stagnation
does not seem to be there apparently due to the ongoing expansion of the Force. However, in future, this
sub-optimal ratio can prove to be a bottleneck for career growth of the officers serving at the level of

60
Assistant Commandant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review the number
of posts at the level of Deputy Commandant in the General Duty cadre of SSB and consider improving the
ratio of the posts at the levels of Assistant Commandant and Deputy Commandant to at least 1:4 and
gradually to 1:3 so as to ensure availability of sufficient promotional avenues. The Committee also recommends
that this should be brought to the notice of Cadre Review authorities if that process has not been completed
yet. (Para 3.5.7 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 Consequent upon the approval of Cadre Review in respect of Group-A General Duty (Combatised)
posts of SSB vide MHA letter No. A-120117/2018-Pers-II dated 02.01.2018 and sanction  of posts for SSB
Intelligence Set-up vide MHA letter dated 10.07.2017, the total   sanctioned posts of Assistant Commandant
(GD) and Deputy Commandant (GD) comes to  608 and 384 respectively. Therefore, the present promotion
ratio of AC (GD) to DC (GD) is 1.6:1 (after rounding off).
Further Recommendation
3.3.3 The Committee finds that the present ratio of 1.6:1 of AC(GD) and DC(GD) is still far away
from 1:4 and ultimately 1:3. Therefore, the Committee feels that continuous efforts need to be
made to bring the ratio to desired level.
3.4 Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee is concerned that the delay in land acquisition, paucity of funds for construction,
and delay by the construction agencies have affected the completion of housing projects and feels that the
housing project monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened. The housing satisfaction level in the SSB
at around 17 per cent is among the lowest in all the CAPFs and even after the completion of various
projects, some of which are likely to spillover to the next year, the satisfaction level will still remain low at
around 33 per cent of the authorized housing level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should take necessary measures to streamline the factors that have delayed the construction of projects and
provide adequate funds to the Force under appropriate budgetary head to achieve the completion of all the
projects as per the stated timeline. The Committee observes that such poor housing satisfaction level could
be one major reason behind high attrition/VRS, etc. (Para 3.9.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.2 Housing satisfaction level in SSB is 20.36%. Out of 29331(authorized houses), total houses sanctioned
are 9871, in which 5971 nos. houses are available and 3900 houses are under construction. With the construction
of above 3900 houses, the housing satisfaction level will be enhanced to 33.65%. All efforts are made to
ensure timely completion of the housing projects.
Further Recommendation
3.4.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that the projected satisfaction level
will still remain inadequate because against the authorized houses of 29331 and total sanctioned
houses of 9871, only 5971 houses are available and even after additional ongoing construction of

61
3900 houses there still remains immense shortage of accommodation for SSB personnel. Therefore,
the Committee strongly recommends for effective concrete steps to be taken for enhancing the
housing satisfaction level in SSB.
3.5 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Food
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the present rate
of the Ration Money Allowance was fixed at 
` 97.85 with effect from 1 st April, 2015 upto 31 st March, 2016
and the revision of Ration Money Allowance is due with effect from1st April, 2016. The Committee is unable
to understand the reasons for the delay in the revision of the Ration Money Allowance. The Committee is not
satisfied with the submission of the representatives of SSB that the present rate of Ration Money Allowance
is sufficient to provide three nutritious meals for a jawan simply because no feedback regarding ration
money being inadequate has been received. The Committee feels that this allowance should be revised
periodically after taking into account the prevailing inflation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the amount of Ration Money Allowance should be linked to the food inflation component of the Consumer
Price Index and must be revised accordingly. (Para 3.10.6  ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.2 The rate of Ration Money Allowance for CAPFs is revised from time to time as per the rate of Ration
Money Allowance given to Defence Personnel as notified by M/o Defence.
Further Recommendation
3.5.3 The Committee feels that reply of the MHA is not satisfactory as instead of revising the
Ration Money Allowance the Ministry has stated that it is revised from time to time without spelling
out the exact time when it has been revised, what action has been taken to revise the allowance
with effect from 01.04.2016 since when it is due. The Committee therefore reiterates its
recommendation.
3.6 Medical facilities
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee is anguished to note that out of 217 posts in the Medical cadre, almost 45 per cent
i.e. 99 posts are vacant. Moreover, the situation is extremely worrisome in the case of Specialist Medical
Officers as 19 out of 21 posts are vacant. The Committee recommends that the Ministry must urgently take
remedial measures to improve the situation and fill the vacancies in a time bound manner and submit special
report on the progress achieved within three months. (Para 3.13.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.2 In many cases, the candidates allotted by MOSB do not  join service after issue of offer of appointment.
Some candidates who join service also tender resignation from service. As on date, 104 posts of MOs are
lying vacant in SSB against the authorized 217 posts.
3.6.3 The details of vacancies of  Specialists and AC(MO) notified and  allotted/ filled by MOSB for the last
05 years (i.e. 2013-2019) are furnished as under:-

62
Year Vacancies Allotment made V acancies filled up.
notified to by MOSB.
MOSB.
DC (Specialist) :
2013 21 01 01
2014 20 00 00
2015 20 01 01
2016 19 00 00
2018 19 Allotment awaited.
AC (MO) :
2013 49 26 12
2014 49 19 12
2015 60 18 12
2016 61 21 Offer of appointment issued
on 22.04.19.
2018 19 Allotment awaited.
3.6.4 MHA have permitted CAPFs to fill up vacancies on contractual appointment basis as well. Accordingly,
in SSB, 20 GDMO and 09 Specialists appointed on contractual basis.
3.6.5 Cases of engagement of MOs on contractual appointment is being considered on priority.
3.6.6 MOSB – 2018 is underway (Nodal Force – ITBP). Advertisement has been published on 30.03.2019
and further process is on.
Further Recommendation
3.6.7 The Committee notes that SSB has been permitted to hire on contract basis and some GDMO
and specialists have been appointed.  But a permanent and long term solution needs to be found out.
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
3.7 Medical facilities
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee feels that vacancies of so many doctors and para medical staff in the ITBP is having
an adverse impact on the well being of its staff, particularly the jawans, affecting their efficiency. At a time
when the ITBP personnel suffer from various diseases, the vacancies of 8 Specialist Medical officers and 93
Medical Officers is quite alarming. There is no reason why there should be such a large number of vacancies
at any given point of time, especially for ITBP as it has no other medical access at all because of the area

63
of its deployment and inaccessible terrain. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that urgent measures
must be taken to fill all the medical vacancies in the Force in a time bound manner and efforts must be
taken to ensure that no medical posts remain vacant for more than 2 months at any point of time. The
Committee further recommends that the Force may explore the feasibility of recruiting on ad-hoc basis till
the regular appointments are made. (Para 4.14.10 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 As on date total 65 posts in various cadres of para medical staff are vacant which are to be filled
through direct recruitment as well as by promotion.
3.7.3 The recruitment in medical cadre is done through a recruiting agency i.e. MOSB.  Due to shortage
of eligible candidates, vacancies remain unfilled, however efforts are being made to overcome the
shortage.
3.7.4 ITBP is giving top priority to ensure filling up of the vacancies of Medical Officers in the Border
areas where there is no other medical facilities available.
3.7.5 ITBP also recruiting doctors on contractual basis after conducting walk in interview on all India
basis.
Further Recommendation
3.7.6 The Committee notes that there exists vacancies of 65 posts in various cadre of Para-medical
staff and recommends that concrete steps to the appointment on contract basis should be taken as
short term measures and regular appointments as a permanent measure needs to be taken.
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
3.8 Attrition
Recommendation
3.8.1 The Committee observes that certain measures have been taken to address the stress levels of the
personnel in the Force. However, there is a need to have an institutional set-up both at the MHA level and
at the level of the Headquarters of every Force, including BSF, for proper identification of factors that
cause stress, development of strategies to help the personnel in addressing these factors and monitoring the
implementation of these strategies in every battalion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
must have an institutional set-up comprising officers from the MHA, Bureau of Police Research and
Development (BPRD), heads of various forces and experts from the areas of public health, mental health,
psychology, psychiatry etc. to deal with the issue of stress in the BSF as well as in other CAPFs in a
professional manner. (Para 5.5.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.2 BSF has adopted following remedial measures to reduce the stress and strain of the troops deployed
in field formations:-
(a) Regular Yoga has been introduced in the BSF by qualified instructors for better health and
reducing stress.

64
(b) Financial Literacy programme introduced in the entire force to guide all personnel for future
financial security.
(c) Free help lines installed at Force HQ level, accessible to all men to report problems/grievances
if not addressed for any reason.
(d) Free guidance to wards of BSF personnel through “Prepmantra” app for all competitive
exams for Engineering, Medical, professional, Law entrance, Management entrance & UPSC
exams.
(e) Regular interaction between Comdrs and Jawans is being ensured to reduce the stress level by
counseling and addressing grievances/personal problem.
(f) Grievances redressal Cells have been set up at all level to sort out the problems of serving
personnel.
(g) Development of infrastructure on BOPs for providing basic amenities to the troops and improve
their living conditions.
(h) Installation of force multipliers and electronic gadgets and construction of roads, fence and
flood lights to reduce physical and mental fatigue and enhance operational efficiency.
(i) Stress Management Capsule courses are being conducted regularly for the troops to make
them understand, how to handle the stress.
(j) Rest and Relief system introduced in order to ensure adequate rest & relief to the BSF personnel.
(k) Implementation of rational and fair leave policy.
(l) Regimental and Community activities including Sports/Games at all levels and participation of
all including officers is ensured.
(m) Provision of better communication facilities at places of deployment, particularly, in remote
areas, so that man can speak to their families.
(n) Transparency in distribution of duties is ensured to prevent resentment and discontent amongst
personnel.
3.8.3 An SOP was prepared on the “Holistic Health and Wellness” of the force personnel and same has
been issued to all HQrs/Bns/Establishments for its implementation upto BOP level.
3.8.4 Each Forces advised to put in place an institutional mechanism to continuously monitor this area and
undertake fresh measures based on findings of their monitoring.
Further Recommendation
3.8.5 The Committee hopes that plethora of remedial measures to reduce the stress and strain of
the troops of CAPFs deployed at various strategic posts would result in better working conditions
and therefore automatically reduce the prevailing high rate of attrition in CAPFs. The Committee,
however, expresses its anguish over the fact that the Ministry has not provided its comment on the
Committee’s recommendation for setting up of an institutional mechanism comprising of officers

65
from the MHA, Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD), heads of various forces and
experts from the areas of public health, mental health, psychology, psychiatry etc. to deal with the
issue of stress in the BSF as well as in other CAPFs in a professional manner. The Committee,
therefore, desires the response of the Ministry thereon.
3.9 Medical Response Staff
Recommendation
3.9.1 The Committee notes that around 40 per cent posts in the Medical Officers cadre are vacant and most
of the vacancies are at the mid-level posts of Specialist Medical Officers and General Duty Medical Officers
that are critical for providing medical care to various battalions. (Para 5.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.9.2 At present, BSF is having an overall deficiency of 151 regular GDMOs against the authorization of
441 GDMOs and deficiency of 61 regular specialists against the authorization of 74 Specialists.
3.9.3 The existing vacancies of GDMOs as well as specialists are being filled up by regularly conducting
selection/recruitment through annual MOSB (Medical Officers Selection Board). However, in the meantime
the vacant posts of said Medical Officers are filled by appointing contractual doctors  (GDMOs & Specialists).
Further Recommendation
3.9.4 The Committee expresses its concern to observe deficiency of 151 regular GDMOs against
the authorization of 441 GDMOs and deficiency of 61 regular Specialists against the authorization
of 74 Specialists. The vacancy position at such large level is highly undesirable as the Medical
Officers are critical for providing medical care to various battalions. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that immediate measures should be undertaken for regular appointment of GDMOs
and Specialists and BSF and till then appointments on contract be made as a temporary measure.
3.10 Shortage of Budget Provisions for Housing
Recommendation
3.10.1 The Committee takes note of the shortage of budgetary allocation vis-à-vis projected demand of
funds for construction of housing projects and is disappointed to note that the lack of funds has delayed the
construction of housing projects that were supposed to be implemented as and when more battalions were
raised. The Committee feels that this expansion of Force without creation of commensurate number of
houses has led to a situation where providing housing accommodation has become extremely challenging for
the Force. The Committee, therefore, takes a strong exception to this trend of allocating lower budgetary
grants and recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make all efforts to convince the Ministry
of Finance to provide higher amount of funds to make up for the past shortfalls for constructing the housing
projects. (Para 5.10.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.2  The Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) approved by the Govt. for 2017-18 to 2019-20
provides allocation for the infrastructure schemes of CAPFs, CPO & DP. In 2018-19, the allocation for
CAPFs infrastructure was increased to ` 4127.09 Crore in RE stage as against ` 3785.67 Crore in BE.

66
Further Recommendation
3.10.3 The Committee wants the Ministry of Home Affairs to inform the Committee as how much
funds will be available to BSF out of the increased allocation at RE stage.
3.11 Reserve Battalions
Recommendation
3.11.1 The Committee is astonished to observe that no reserve battalion of BSF is in a state of rest out of the
total of 186 battalions of BSF whereas, as per the policy, around 46 battalions should be in a state of rest. The
Committee is further dismayed to observe that all the 27 reserve battalions designated for the purpose of rest
and recuperation have been deployed for internal security duties. The Committee feels that this situation
needs to be remedied forthwith. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Report of the Emergency Committee
of Secretaries in 1965 and accepted to by Group of Ministers in the year 2001, may be implemented and
mandatory guidelines laid down for keeping an appropriate number of battalions in a state of rest and
recuperation. (Para  5.13.3  ibid)
Action Taken
3.11.2 After approval of CCS, the sanction for raising of 06 additional Battalions in BSF (04 for providing
dedicated security to 08 Integrated Check Posts and 02 Reserve Battalions for operational turn over) has
been issued on 19
th January 2018.
Further Recommendation
3.11.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and reiterates
its recommendation at para 5.13.3 of 214
th Report.
3.12 Infrastructural Issues- Road Connectivity
Recommendation
3.12.1 The Committee is concerned to observe that there is a requirement of construction of around 2032
kms link roads on the India-Pakistan and India-Bangladesh borders to provide connectivity to every Border
Outpost. The Committee also notes that apart from the project to construct the link roads, there is
another project under consideration of MHA to construct more than 1426 kms of lateral roads and almost
752 kms of axial roads. The Committee feels that there is a need to construct a huge length of more than
4210 kms of roads in the border areas where BSF is deployed. The Committee is, therefore, of the
considered view that border roads is one of the most essential infrastructure requirements and the absence of
connectivity affects not only the operational efficiency but also the working conditions of the personnel.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all these projects must be considered in a time-bound
manner and an early decision be taken to approve them so that construction work on ground level is started
without delay. (Para 5.16.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.12.2  Details of lateral and axial roads approved to be constructed in Punjab and Rajasthan States are as
under:-

67
Punjab
Lateral Road Axial Road
481.584 Kms 219.450 Kms
3.12.3  33 HLEC vide agenda item No. 16 held on 15th November, 2016 approved ` 8.20 Crore to CPWD for
survey and preparation of DPR. DPR is yet to be submitted to CPWD.
Rajasthan
Lateral Road Axial Road
945.193 Kms 533.035 Kms
3.12.4  43 HLEC vide agenda item No. 9 held on 18 th April, 2018 approved ` 17.29 Crore to CPWD for
survey and preparation of DPR. DPR is yet to be submitted by CPWD.
Further Recommendation
3.12.5 The Committee wonders that CPWD is yet to submit DPR for which an amount of ````` 8.20
Crore was approved in 33 rd HLEC in 2016. Also, for preparing DPR for Lateral (945.193 Kms) and
Axial Roads (533.035 Kms) in Rajasthan, an amount of Rs 17.29 Crore has been approved in April
2018 whereas CPWD is yet to submit DPR. Needless to say that Border roads are the most essential
infrastructure requirement for BSFs for surveillance and safeguard the Border areas. Therefore,
the Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 5.16.3 of 214
th Report.

68
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
3.13 Para-military Service Pay (PMSP)
Recommendation
3.13.1 The Committee notes the fact that Military Service Pay (MSP) is paid to the defence forces
personnel, in view of their service conditions viz. risk to life and social and family isolation. The Committee
feels that the CAPFs personnel also have the risk to life and undergo the similar social and family
isolation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Para Military Service Pay (PMSP) may be granted
to CAPF personnel and if it is difficult to grant PMSP to CAPFs then some other incentive for their
risk to life and social and family isolation, particularly for CAPFs personnel deployed in hard areas,
may be considered. (Para  6.9.3  ibid)
Action Taken
3.13.2  MHA had recommended to 7
th CPC for grant of Para Military Service Pay (PMSP) to the CAPFs. 7th
CPC did not accept the proposal. Subsequently, Committee on Allowance was also requested to consider
grant of PMSP at par with Military Service Pay to CAPF personnel, as they face similar risk and challenges
in discharging their responsibilities compared to Army personnel. The Committee on Allowance also did not
accept the recommendations of MHA.
Further Recommendation
3.13.3 The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of MHA for grant of Para Military
Service Pay (PMSP) to the CAPFs if not at par with Military Service Pay (MSP) to defence forces but
then some other incentive for  their risk  needs to be considered.  The Committee therefore reiterates
its recommendation.
3.14 Removal of Deputation Quota at Senior Officers level in CAPFs
Recommendation
3.14.1 The Committee also recommends that the Government may re-examine the Rule 6(1) of the IPS
Cadre Rules, 1954 for fixing a limited percentage of deputation of IPS officers in the CAPFs keeping in
view the interest of CAPFs personnel. The Committee also recommends that not more than 25 per cent posts
should be reserved for Officers coming on deputation, either from IPS or from the Armed Forces, in any
rank, and there should be no reservation for the posts of Director General in any CAPF and the officers of
the CAPF cadres should be given equal opportunity to reach the topmost ranks. The Committee is of the
view that this measure will not only go a long way to boost the morale of the CAPFs but will also provide
a bigger pool of qualified Officers for selecting the heads of CAPFs. (Para 6.10.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.14.2  As provided under Article 312 of the Constitution, the Indian Police Service is an All India Service
both for the Union and the States. A certain number of posts in different police and other Organizations/
Departments of the Central Government are filled up by IPS officers allotted to various State cadres.  The
cardinal principle is that an IPS officer so appointed will be available to serve on Central deputation for a
stipulated tenure and thereafter return to his / her parent cadre. The movement of officers from the State to
the Centre and back is of mutual benefit to the States and the Government of India on the one hand and to

69
the officers concerned on the other. Those IPS officers are appointed in Central Armed Police Forces/
Railways Protection Force on deputation basis for a limited period as per percentage/quota fixed in Recruitment
Rules/criterion of the posts.
3.14.3  That in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the All India Services
Act, 1951, the Central Government implemented the IPS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 which under Rule 3 provides
for the constitution of different state cadres and under rule 4(1) prescribes the strength and composition of
such cadres constituted under rule 3 in consultation with the State Governments. It is pertinent to mention
that as per Rule 6(1) of the IPS (cadre) rules, IPS cadre officer can be deputed for service under the Central
Government with the concurrence of the State Government concerned.
3.14.4  That IPS (Pay) Rules list the posts which are to be manned by the IPS officers and fix the pay for
the same. Therefore, utilization of services of the IPS officers in the central government is mandatory as per
the constitutional scheme. “Police” and “Public Order” are the State subjects under the State list in the 7
th
Schedule of the Constitution of India. The Government of India has been very careful in structuring these
Forces in such a manner so as to strengthen the federal structure.  In view of the intrinsic requirement of
national security as well as internal security and also to serve and strengthen the federal structure of the
nation, the Indian Police Service (IPS) officers play an important role in the overall security architecture of
the country.  They are the main coordinating Service between the Central Government and the State
Governments while carrying out day to day policing functions, law and order duties as well as for strategizing
the fight against insurgency, militancy and terrorism in various parts of the country, both as the leaders of
the State Police Forces as well as Armed Police Forces. Therefore, the services of the officers of an
integrative service like IPS are a must for the smooth functioning of Armed Forces to enable them to work
with the State Governments and State Police Forces which are officered by the IPS and the State Police
Services.
Further Recommendation
3.14.5 The Committee is not convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and reiterates
its recommendation that not more than 25 percent posts should be reserved for officers coming on
deputation and that there should be no reservation for the posts of Director General.
3.15 Reserve Battalions
Recommendation
3.15.1 The Committee is pained to note that the reserve battalions, which are to be used judiciously and
provided rest for being in a state of preparedness, are engaged in duties such as internal security and
counter-insurgency, which are quite rigorous. The Committee takes a strong exception to this overuse of the
Force personnel. The Committee feels that the Ministry has to draw a line firmly to allow much required rest
and recuperation to the personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should implement, without exception, the well-defined policy regarding the number of battalions that are, at
any given time in a state of rest and recuperation. The Committee also recommends that the policy on
battalion that should be designated for training purposes at any point of time, should be rigor ously
followed. (Para 6.11.2 ibid)

70
Action Taken
3.15.2  Central Police Forces are made available in aid of the State Governments for public order duties.
The deployment of the Forces depends upon the overall security scenario. In order to meet the requirement
of these Forces in various State, CAPFs are fully committed and other Border Guarding Forces have also
been diverted from their primary role. This has resulted in over-stretching of the CAPFs to the extent that all
reserves including the training reserves have been committed for L&O, election related duties.
3.15.3  The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for deployment of CAPFs provides that one coy in each
battalion shall be kept for rotational training and shall not be committed for operational deployment. But
these training coys are also deployed in order to meet the emergent requirements and other exigencies.
3.15.4  The CAPFs may therefore, plan the training of their earmarked training coys, keeping in view the
predictable requirements as mentioned above. The training module should be such that every company of
the battalion undergoes training during the year despite regular deployment. For this purpose, each force
may conduct a detailed exercise every year and prepare the training calendar accordingly.
Further Recommendation
3.15.5 The Committee is not in favour of over-stretching the duties and responsibilities of the
CAPFs to such an extent that even the reserve, who is supposed to be under the state of preparedness
are engaged in duties pertaining to internal security on election duties. The Committee is also in
agreement with Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for deployment of CAPFs regarding rotational
training of CAPFs. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation as made in Para
6.11.2 of 214
th Report of the Committee.
3.16 Housing Shortage
Recommendation
3.16.1 The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level vis-à-vis authorized number of houses
is quite low in all border guarding forces. The Committee also notes that the housing problem is more
acute when the satisfaction level is compared to sanctioned strength. The Committee further notes that the
construction of several housing projects is pending while proposals of some housing projects are yet to be
approved by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should expedite the completion of the on going housing projects. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry should take an early decision on all housing projects under consideration and expedite their
completion in a time bound manner to improve the satisfaction levels vis-à-vis authorized number of
houses. (Para 6.14.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.16.2  At present there are 1,06,683 dwelling units available against authorisation of 2,73,282 houses. The
present housing satisfaction level is 39.04% against authorisation. There are 25,302 houses under construction.
Further, Government have recently sanctioned purchase of 1031 DDA flats (CRPF-578 & BSF-453). With
the inclusion of above houses/flats under construction/purchase, the housing satisfaction will be enhanced
to 48.67%.

71
Further Recommendation
3.16.3 The Committee expresses concern over the acute shortage of dwelling units for CAPFs i.e.
1,06,683 available units against authorization of 2,73,282 houses that amounts to 39.04 % satisfaction
level against authorization. The Committee feels that the efforts of the Ministry to improve the
housing satisfaction level are not sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should urgently draw ‘action plan’ to reduce the housing shortage and to achieve a satisfaction
level of at least 50 per cent. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should expedite the completion of the ongoing housing projects in a time bound manner.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
ASSAM RIFLES
4.1 Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee takes note of the stagnation at the ranks of Rifleman, Havildar and Warrant Officer
and feels that requisite measures need be taken to increase the number of posts in the ranks of Warrant
Officers, Subedar and Subedar Major to enhance the promotional avenues and reduce the time period for
getting first promotion to the rank of Havildar. (Para 2.4.9 of 214
th Report)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The Cadre Review proposal of Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ posts was considered in the MHA and returned to
Assam Rifles with some observations. Assam Rifles has informed that they will be sending revised proposal.
Further Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee notes that the Cadre Review proposal of Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ posts after
consideration by the MHA was returned to Assam Rifles with some observations with a direction to
submit revised proposal to MHA. The Committee hopes that Assam Rifles would submit the Cadre
Review Proposal again to the MHA and the MHA would process the revised Cadre Review proposal
of Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ posts in Assam Rifles expeditiously and the Committee would be informed of the
same.
4.2 Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee also takes note of the proposal of construction of 384 additional houses by 2020 that
is still under the consideration of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee feels that the project needs
to be expedited if it has to be completed by its stipulated deadline. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that an early decision may be taken to grant approval to this proposal within the next three months and the
construction may be started at the earliest during this calendar year itself. (Para 2.9.8 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.2 360 Type-II, 29 Type-III, 04 Type-IV , 16-Type-V and 02-Type-VI (total 411) under RB Head have
been projected by AR to this Ministry. Approval to the proposal is under process.
Further Recommendation
4.2.3 The Committee had recommended that approval may be granted within next three months
but that has not been done. The Committee, therefore, recommends for early approval of the
proposal so that the Construction work of Houses are completed by set timeframe i.e.  year,
2020.
72

73
4.3 Road connectivity and Mobility
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee is aware that several Company Operating Bases (COBs) are located in remote areas
due to which the Assam Rifles personnel have to suffer various hardships. Thus, it is essential to connect
every single COB with all-weather roads to improve the working conditions of the personnel. The Committee
takes note of the plan to provide connectivity by constructing 4310.44 kms of roads at an estimated cost of
` 9490.20 Crore. The Committee recommends that this plan should be examined expeditiously and a decision
on its implementation may be taken at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the roads that are
planned to be constructed must be all-weather roads that are able to withstand the harsh geographical and
climatic conditions of the North Eastern region. (Para 2.14.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 A proposal from Assam Rifles for construction of 4310.44 km of road along IMB to enhance road
connectivity is under consideration in this Ministry.
Further Recommendation
4.3.3 The Committee notes the pending proposal of the Assam Rifles for construction of 4310.44
km of road along India Myanmar Border(IMB)  to enhance road connectivity. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Government to expedite the process of consideration.
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
4.4 Cadre Restructuring
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee is of the view that cadre restructuring, in accordance with the timeline and procedure
prescribed by the DoPT, is essential to obviate stagnation and to provide reasonable career growth to all the
personnel serving in various cadres. The Committee, therefore, recommends that not only the pending cadre
review of all the remaining cadres be completed at the earliest, but also the cadre review of all the posts in
the force should be undertaken every five years. (Para 3.6.2 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 The status of cadre review in SSB is as under:-
(i) In the year 2018, Cadre Review in respect of Group-A General Duty (Combatised) posts of
SSB has been approved on 02.01.2018.
(ii) The Cadre Review proposal of Group- B & C General Duty Cadre posts was submitted to DoE
(MoF) was approved by the Hon’ble Union Home Minister. DoE (MoF) have raised  certain
observations. Accordingly, rectifications/observations are being addressed, which will be
completed shortly.
(iii) The Cadre Review proposal of  Group-C Tradesmen cadre posts is under examination in
SSB.

74
(iv) The Cadre Review proposal of Group-B&C MT & Mech cadre is under consideration in
SSB.
(v) Cadre Review proposals  of remaining 13 cadres have been initiated in SSB and most of them
are under active stage of deliberation and drafting, which will be  submitted expeditiously to
MHA.
Further Recommendation
4.4.3 The Committee observes that the proposals for cadre review are at various stages. The
Committee would like to impress upon the MHA to expedite the matter and furnish the final outcome
of cadre restructuring of all posts in SSB.  The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that
the cadre review of all the posts in the force should be undertaken every five years.
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
4.5 Basic Amenities-Drinking Water
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee is surprised to observe that in 82 per cent of the BoPs, drinking water is obtained
from rivulets and springs which are polluted and at some places the level of contamination is alarming. Clean
drinking water is a fundamental right of every person. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
proper provisions must be made to make clean and safe drinking water available to the ITBP personnel in all the
BOPs and wherever feasible, the possibility of supplying piped regular drinking water to BOPs must be explored.
This must be done immediately and a special report submitted within 6 months. (Para 4.12.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.5.2 The Ministry of Home Af fairs is giving top priority to provide clean drinking water to all the
personnel who are posted particularly in remote areas. Out of 178 BOPs of ITBP, clean potable drinking
water facilities are available at 32 BOPs.
4.5.3 The Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary, in its
13
th meeting held on 19 th March, 2018 decided to provide basic facilities like safe drinking water to all the
balance BOPs of BGFs (including BOPs of ITBP) yet to be provided drinking water facilities. ITBP has
provided RO facilities for water purification at BOPs to ensure that troops consume clean drinking water. In
addition to this, the issue has been taken up with MoDW&S to prepare estimates for providing drinking
water supply to the BOPs, as the BOPs are not covered under the existing schemes/projects viz., “National
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP)”. The estimates will be placed before the next meeting of
ECBI for approval and allocation of budget.
Further Recommendation
4.5.4 The Committee expresses its concern that out of 178 BOPs of ITBP, the clean potable drinking
water is available at only 32 BOPs. However, the Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure
(ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary has decided to provide all basic facilities like safe drinking
water to balance BOPs of the BGFs. The question arises as to what interim measures are being
taken to supply safe drinking water to ITBP jawans at the remaining BOPs. The Committee earnestly

75
feels that procedural delay must be avoided in the matter as jawans may suffer from water borne
diseases due to unsafe drinking water. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the MHA to
expedite the process of consideration and approval of budget for supplying pure and safe water to
ITBP and the Committee expects that a comprehensive and early action taken report be provided to
the Committee for its perusal.
4.6 Infrastructural Issues - Road connectivity
Recommendation
4.6.1 The Committee takes note of the on-going project of road connectivity consisting of 41 roads under
phase-I, DPR of 46 roads under phase-II already approved, and construction of 50 roads at proposal stage
under phase-III. The Committee recommends that all on-going road construction works must be completed
and proposal under phase-III must be approved within the timeframe. The approved road construction
projects must be taken up for completion within set time frame. (Para 4.15.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.6.2 ICBR-I roads: Construction of 14 roads completed, connectivity established on 7 roads and 4 roads
are under various stages of construction.
4.6.3 ICBR-II roads: HLEC has approved for construction of 45 ICBR-II along India-China Border. EFC
Note has been submitted to D/o Expenditure for convening EFC meeting.
4.6.4 ICBR-III roads: MoD has accorded operational clearance for construction of 19 roads out of
23 roads proposed to connect existing BOPs.
Further Recommendation
4.6.5 The Committee notes the response of various projects / proposals pertaining to infrastructural
road connectivity of ITBP and desires that the timeframe for consideration/approval and completion
of on-going roads connectivity projects especially of ICBR-II roads and ICBR-III roads are adhered
to and progress made in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
4.7 Cadre Review/Restructuring
Recommendation
4.7.1 The Committee expresses its concern that there is excessive stagnation in the non- gazetted ranks of
BSF especially at the level of Constable. The Committee is disappointed to observe that a Constable is able
to get his first promotion after a long duration of around 20 years. The Committee wonders how the Force
expects the personnel at the lowest rank to maintain their morale in view of such stagnation which would
provide them with only one promotion throughout their career. The Committee also feels that it is quite
understandable that thousands of Constables opt for voluntary retirement after 20 years of service as they
are left with no hope of career progression. The Committee fails to understand that cadre review started in
November, 2015 is pending at the Force level and has not reached the MHA, even after more than three
years. The Committee feels that this issue has been languishing for a long time and the Ministry needs to
urgently find a way out for expediting the process. A time limit needs to be fixed for each process. The

76
Committee recommends that the Ministry should prioritize the cadre review/restructuring for Group - B & C
of General Duty cadre. (Para 5.7.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.7.2 Cadre review proceedings is under active examination in BSF and same will be completed by BSF
and submitted to MHA shortly. BSF is advised to expedite its proposal.
Further Recommendation
4.7.3 The Committee hopes that BSF would expedite its consideration of the proposal for cadre
review and would forward the same to MHA for its approval.  The Committee may be apprised of the
same once the process is complete.
Recommendation
4.7.4 The Com mittee observes that the cadre review for Stenographic, Medical Group-A, General
Duty Group-B&C and Supporting Cadres are under consideration at different stages. The Committee
recommends that review of all these cadres may be expedited and completed by the end of the current
year. (Para 5.7.7 ibid)
Action Taken
4.7.5
Stenographic Cadre:- Cadre review of Stenographic cadre has already been approved and conveyed
to BSF on 26 th September, 2018.
4.7.6 Medical of ficers Group ‘A ’:- Proposal for cadre review of Group ‘A’ Medical officers is under
consideration. Efforts will be made to expedite it.
4.7.7 Group -‘B’ & ‘C’ of GD cadre:- Cadre review proceedings is under examination and being submitted
to MHA shortly. Efforts are being made to expedite the submission.
4.7.8 Pharmacist & Nursing Assistant Cadre:- Cadre review proceedings is under examination and being
submitted to MHA shortly. Efforts are being made to expedite the submission.
4.7.9 Tradesmen Cadre :- Cadre review proceedings under examination and being submitted to MHA
shortly. Efforts are being made to expedite the submission.
4.7.10 Official Language Cadre:- Cadre review proceedings is under examination and being submitted to
MHA shortly. Efforts are being made to expedite the submission.
4.7.11 MT Workshop & Water Wing Cadre:- Cadre review proceedings is under examination and being
submitted to MHA shortly. Efforts are being made to expedite the submission.
4.7.12 Draftsmen and Printing Press Cadre:- Cadre review proceedings is under examination and being
submitted to MHA shortly. Efforts are being made to expedite the submission.
Further Recommendation
4.7.13 The Committee feels that the process for all cadres needs to be expedited and it may be
apprised after all the processes are over.

77
4.8 Infrastructural Issues - Road Connectivity
Recommendation
4.8.1 The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to overcome the
infrastructural challenges caused due to the geographical constraints of the area of deployment. The Committee
feels that certain measures such as Construction of Pucca Naka Machan/Ambush cum Patrol (ACP) Shelters,
providing solar power to Border Outposts (BOPs) and Key Location Positions, upgrading the existing
conventional BOPs to Composite BOPs, construction of advanced fibre reinforced plastic BOPs at forward
defense locations etc., are critical for improving the working conditions of the personnel. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must accord due priority for implementation of all these measures to
upgrade the infrastructure available for the BSF personnel at the earliest. (Para 5.16.6 ibid)
Action Taken
Ambush cum patrol (ACP) Shelter
4.8.2 ` 97.03 Crore was appraised for construction of OP Point/ ACP Shelter, which is likely to be completed
in the coming months. However, 2
nd phase of the scheme, ACP shelter is under preparation and remaining
BOPs will be considered in the scheme.
Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP)
4.8.3 ` 75.95 Crore for 398 nos. element (i.e. 18 nos. for Jammu and 380 nos. for Kashmir) was
appraised for advance FRP project. Out of which, 18 nos. works has been completed in Jammu Ftr and
78 nos. works has been completed in Kashmir Ftr. Remaining structures are under construction under
Kashmir Ftr.
Further Recommendation
4.8.4 The Committee hopes that the remaining construction works of Ambush cum Patrol (ACP)
Shelter and Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP) will be completed soon and the Committee will be apprised
of the progress made in this regard.
4.9 Infrastructural Issues-Security of Personnel
Recommendation
4.9.1 The Committee notes the measures being taken to provide security against Improvised Explosive
Devices and land mines. The Committee feels that reducing casualties of personnel of BSF should be a top
priority for the Ministry. The Committee is aware that land mines have consumed lives of several personnel
and there is a need to employ technologically advanced equipment that allow remote detection and detonation
of land mines. The Committee, in this regard, would like to point out that that some Unmanned Aerial
Systems/Drones have been developed that can autonomously map, detect and detonate land mines. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the availability of such technological equipment
and procure them for protecting the personnel against the threat of land mines. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry must give direction to BSF to employ state of the art equipments to
ensure remote detection and detonation of underground IEDs or landmines. (Para 5.17.3 ibid)

78
Action Taken
4.9.2 02 Nos. Micro UA Vs have been procured by BSF on trial basis and deployed under Ftr HQ Jammu
and ANO Theatre.
4.9.3 In addition to above, 11 Nos.  Micro UAVs received at SIW BSF New Delhi on 19th Nov’2018 from
M/s Asteria Aerospace Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru. UA Vs are under JRI and same will be distributed to all concerned.
4.9.4 Besides, a case for authorization of Micro & Mini UA Vs (Battalion wise /Coy wise) is under
consideration in BSF for its further submission to MHA.
Further Recommendation
4.9.5 The Com mittee observes the delay in trial/experiment and authorisation to employ state
of the art equipment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that micro UA Vs procured by
BSF to be deployed be approved by MHA on priority basis and the Committee be informed of the
same.
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
4.10 Ration Money Allowance
Recommendation
4.10.1 The Committee notes the uniform rate of Ration Money Allowance prescribed by the Ministry of
Defence and adopted by all the forces. The Committee feels that the Forces are deployed in different
circumstances and varied geographical terrains. The geographical and climatic conditions and the supply
chain system vary from State to State and sometimes even within a State. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the system of Ration Money Allowance to all CAPFs irrespective of their topography of place of
deployment needs to be revisited. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should adopt a bottom-
up approach to calculate varying rates of Ration Money Allowance for every battalion, by acquiring inputs
from every single unit/company of all the Forces, taking into consideration the supply chain constraints,
geographical limitations, vagaries of climate specific to every battalion. (Para 6.2.4 ibid)
Recommendation
4.10.2 The Committee does not find any merit in the existing system of adopting the rate prescribed by the
Ministry of Defence as they may not be aware about the requirements of the CAPFs as much as the Ministry
of Home Affairs or the CAPFs themselves. The Committee further recommends that every Battalion/Sector
HQ should be instructed to come out with an assessment of monthly food requirement, along with the market
price of various food items prevailing in the area from where they purchase the ration, and this information
should be compiled at the Frontier Headquarters level and sent to the Ministry for approval to arrive at
appropriate rates of Ration Money Allowance for different battalions. The Committee also recommends that
the rates prescribed by the Frontier Headquarters for various battalions should be approved by the Force
Headquarters and any variance between the rates for different Battalions should be examined and approved
by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee further recommends that once this exercise is done
comprehensively, the rates arrived at may be revised annually by linking them with the food inflation
component of the Consumer Price Index and may be reviewed after every 5 years. (Para 6.2.5  ibid)

79
Action Taken
4.10.3 The rate of Ra tion Money Allowance for CAPFs is revised from time to time as per the rate of
Ration Money Allowance given to Defence force personnel as notified by Ministry of Defence from time
to time.
4.10.4 Proposal on the line of recommendations of the Committee will be considered by the Ministry when
Forces make such assessment and send to this Ministry. The outcome will be shared in due course.
Further Recommendation
4.10.5 The Committee notes that the MHA is awaiting for the assessment to be made by the CAPFs
as per Committee’s recommendation and the outcome will be shared in due course with the
Committee.
4.11 Deployment of BGFs for activities other than Border Guarding
Recommendation
4.11.1 The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s plan to progressively assign security of all VIP protectees,
apart from high risk protectees, to the Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF . The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should implement this plan at the earliest and put an end to the issue of multiple forces
being assigned the task of VIP security. The Committee also recommends that appropriate measures may
be taken in a timely manner to augment the strength of SSG to enable it to cope with the enhanced
responsibility. (Para 6.3.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.11.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for necessary action. The matter of relieving
Border Guarding Force from personal protection duty is under review and examination. The outcome of the
exercise will be shared in due course.
Further Recommendation
4.11.3 The Committee notes the response of MHA of assigning security of all VIP protectees to the
Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF and thus relieving BSF from the task of VIP security. The
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
4.12 Clean Drinking Water
Recommendation
4.12.1 The Committee feels that providing clean drinking water to all the personnel who are posted, particularly
in remote areas, should be given priority. Contaminated water not only causes water borne diseases but also
leads to deterioration of overall health of the personnel if consumed over a long period of time. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should give this issue utmost importance
and take measures to ensure that personnel of all the CAPFs are provided clean and purified drinking water.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should evolve an inspection mechanism for conducting
surprise checks of availability of clean drinking water at the BOPs. (Para 6.12.5 ibid)

80
Action Taken
4.12.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is giving top priority to provide clean drinking water to all the
personnel who are posted particularly in remote areas. The clean drinking water facilities available and
required by BOPs of BGFs is as following:-
S.No BGFs T otal No. Potable water Potable water % of BOPs yet to be
of BOPs/ available at required at provided
COBs BOPs BOPs
1. BSF 1901 1588 313 16%
2. ITBP 178 32 146 82%
3. SSB 626 138 488 78%
4. Assam Rifles 277 155 118 43%
4.12.3  The Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary, in its
13th meeting held on 19 th March, 2018 decided to provide basic facilities like safe drinking water to all the
balance BOPs of BGFs yet to be provided drinking water facilities. However, such BOPs are presently
having this facility through natural rivulets/springs source of water. BGFs have also provided RO facilities
for water purification at BOPs to ensure that troops consume clean drinking water. In addition to this, the
issue has been taken up with MoDW&S to prepare estimates for providing drinking water supply to the
BOPs, as the BOPs are not covered under the existing schemes/projects viz., National Rural Drinking Water
Programme (NRDWO). The estimates will be placed before the next meeting of ECBI for approval and
allocation of budget. The recommendation of the Committee regarding inspection mechanism for conducting
surprise checks of availability of clean drinking water at the BOPs has been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
4.12.4 The Committee is anguished to find that 16% of BSF, 82% of ITBP, 78% of SSB and 43%
Assam Rifles BOPs/ COB are yet to be provided clean and safe drinking water. The Committee
notes that Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary in
its meeting held on 19
th March 2018 has decided to provide all basic facilities like safe drinking
water to balance BOPs of the BGFs.  The issue has now been taken with Ministry of Drinking Water
and Sanitation (MoDW&S) to prepare estimate for providing safe drinking water to BOPs. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the MHA to expedite the matter of estimates and apprise the
Committee of action taken regarding inspection mechanism for conducting surprise check of
providing clean and safe drinking water at all BOPs.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
ASSAM RIFLES
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.1.3)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.2.3)
Grievance Redressal
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.3.3)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.3.6)
Training Issues
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.4.4)
Casualties
The Committee notes the measures undertaken for keeping health issues in check.
(Para 1.5.5)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.5.9)
Women Representation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.6.4)
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.7.3)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.7.6)
Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Food
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.8.4)
Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Drinking water
The Committee notes the effort of the Ministry in ensuring safe drinking water to SSB
personnel. (Para 1.9.3)
Grievance Redressal Mechanisms
The Committee notes the response of the Ministry. The Ministry is taking cognizance
of the concerns of SSB personnel in posting and transfer through E-Transfer Application
system and hopes that the dissatisfaction level in the force would diminish due to measures
underta ken. (Para 1.10.4)
81

82
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
Recruitment
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.11.3)
Attrition
The Committee takes note of the various measures taken for improving the working conditions
of ITBP personnel. (Para 1.12.4)
Promotional avenues and Stagnation
The Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry. (Para 1.13.6)
Basic Amenities-Food
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.14.3)
Mobility of troops
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.15.4)
Modernization and Technological advancements
The Committee notes the initiatives taken in the field of IT infrastructure and software
applications in ITBP . (Para 1.16.3)
Grievance Redressal
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.17.3)
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
Attrition
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.18.4)
Attrition
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.19.5)
Attrition
The Committee takes note of the measures taken. (Para 1.20.4)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee takes note of the ongoing housing project to improve the housing satisfaction
levels in BSF. (Para 1.21.3)
Shortage of Budget Provisions for Housing
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.22.4)
Training Issues
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.23.5)

83
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.23.8)
Leave and Transfer Issues
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.24.4)
COMMON TO ALL CAPFS
Electricity Supply
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.25.3)
ASSAM RIFLES
Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.1.5)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.1.8)
Working Hours
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.2.3)
Basic amenities - Food
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.3.3)
Medical facilities
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.4.3)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.5.3)
Attrition
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.6.3)
Deputation Opportunities
The Committee is convinced with the reply. (Para 2.7.3)
Welfare Schemes and Issues
The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Ministry. (Para 2.8.10)
Welfare Schemes and Issues
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.9.3)
Welfare Schemes and Issues-Benevolent Fund
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.10.5)
Women Representation in Assam Rifles
The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs on enhancing

84
strength of Women in this Force will be completed in time bound manner and the Committee may
finally be informed about it. (Para 2.11.3)
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
Recruitment and Vacancies
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.12.4)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.12.7)
Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.13.4)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.13.7)
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.13.10)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.13.13)
Promotional Avenues and Stagnation in Stenographer Cadre
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.14.3)
Promotional Avenues and Stagnation in Para-medical Cadre
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.15.3)
Attrition
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. (Para 2.16.5)
Training issues
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.17.5)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.18.3)
Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Electricity supply
The Committee notes that Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed
by Cabinet Secretary has decided to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance
BOPs of the BGFs (including SSB) and the measures like providing power through solar energy, etc.
are being under taken for electrifying remote and off-the-grid locations. The Committee hopes that
the Ministry would expedite the matter. (Para 2.19.3)
Grievance Redressal Mechanisms
The Committee notes the response of the Ministry. (Para 2.20.3)

85
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
Deployment
The Committee notes the explanation given by the Ministry. (Para 2.21.6)
Recruitment
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 2.22.4)
Training
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.23.4)
Housing and accommodation
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 2.24.5)
Basic Amenities-Electricity supply
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. (Para 2.25.3)
Medical facilities
The Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry. (Para 2.26.3)
Permanent Integrated Composite Building (PICB)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.27.3)
Surveillance Equipments
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.28.5)
Communication facilities
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.29.3)
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
Attrition
The Committee takes note of the response of the Ministry. (Para 2.30.4)
Promotional Avenues
The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Ministry. (Para 2.31.3)
Promotional Avenues
The Committee takes note of the steps taken in this direction to obviate the problem of
stagnation in BSF. (Para 2.32.3)
Cadre Review/Restructuring
The Co mmittee notes that the Cadre Review Proposal for Law cadre is under
preparation. (Para 2.33.5)

86
Medical Response Staff
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry. (Para 2.34.5)
Basic Amenities- Food
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.35.8)
Leave and Transfer Issues
The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Ministry. (Para 2.36.4)
Grievance Redressal
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.37.5)
Infrastructural Issues-Security of Personnel
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.38.3)
Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach (GJSPKK) Scheme
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.39.13)
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
Food
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.40.5)
Cadre Review
The C ommittee notes the reply of MHA that its recommendation has been noted for
guidance. (Para 2.41.4)
Nomenclature of CAPFs
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.42.3)
Status and Benefits to Ex-CAPF Personnel
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.43.5)
Central Police Canteen (CPC) and the Welfare and Rehabilitation Board (W ARB)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.44.5)
Old Pension System
The Committee notes the response of the Ministry. (Para 2.45.3)
Para-military Service Pay (PMSP)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.46.3)
Removal of Deputation Quota at Senior Officers level in CAPFs
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 2.47.3)

87
Electricity Supply
The Committee notes that Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed
by Cabinet Secretary has decided to provide all basic facilities including electricity supply to balance
BOPs of the BGFs. (Para 2.48.4)
ASSAM RIFLES
Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
The Committee notes the contention of the Ministry that the rank structure of Assam Rifles
is more defined and hierarchical for purposes of conducting Military Operations in detachments,
sections, platoons and companies as compared to a relatively flatter rank structure of CAPFs required
for policing functions, therefore the rank structure and associated nomenclature of Assam Rifles is
not recommended to be altered. However, the Committee feels that it being one of the Border
Guarding Force and it functions like other Border Guarding Forces, therefore, it should be like
other Border Guarding Forces even in hierarchical structure. The Committee therefore reiterates
its recommendation. (Para 3.1.4)
The Committee reiterates its recommendation and urges upon the Government to expedite
the process of proposed cadre review that envisage a change in the existing ratio of 80:20 to 65.74:33.76
to meet the operational requirement. (Para 3.1.8)
Welfare Schemes and Issues-Ex-CAPF/Ex-servicemen status
The Committee takes a serious note that the Government is reluctant to designate the retired
personnel of Assam Rifles as either ex-CAPF or ex-servicemen and questions so, they belong to
which service? The Committee is not at all convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry
that Assam Rifles is a CPMF, not CAPF, due to military components in its organizational structure
and operations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the issue can be resolved only when the
Ministry of Home Affairs designates the retired personnel of the Assam Rifles as “Ex-Central
Armed Police Force” and consider granting them post-retirement benefits available to the ex-CAPF
personnel or military personnel. (Para 3.2.3)
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
The Committee finds that the present ratio of 1.6:1 of AC(GD) and DC(GD) is still far away
from 1:4 and ultimately 1:3. Therefore, the Committee feels that continuous efforts need to be
made to bring the ratio to desired level. (Para 3.3.3)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that the projected satisfaction level
will still remain inadequate because against the authorized houses of 29331 and total sanctioned
houses of 9871, only 5971 houses are available and even after additional ongoing construction of
3900 houses there still remains immense shortage of accommodation for SSB personnel. Therefore,
the Committee strongly recommends for effective concrete steps to be taken for enhancing the
housing satisfaction level in SSB. (Para 3.4.3)

88
Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Food
The Committee feels that reply of the MHA is not satisfactory as instead of revising the
Ration Money Allowance the Ministry has stated that it is revised from time to time without spelling
out the exact time when it has been revised, what action has been taken to revise the allowance
with effect from 01.04.2016 since when it is due. The Committee therefore reiterates its
recommendation. (Para 3.5.3)
Medical facilities
The Committee notes that SSB has been permitted to hire on contract basis and some GDMO
and specialists have been appointed.  But a permanent and long term solution needs to be found
out. (Para 3.6.7)
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
Medical facilities
The Committee notes that there exists vacancies of 65 posts in various cadre of Para-
medical staff and recommends that concrete steps to the appointment on contract basis should
be taken as short term measures and regular appointments as a permanent measure needs to
be taken. (Para 3.7.6)
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
Attrition
The Committee hopes that plethora of remedial measures to reduce the stress and strain of
the troops of CAPFs deployed at various strategic posts would result in better working conditions
and therefore automatically reduce the prevailing high rate of attrition in CAPFs. The Committee,
however, expresses its anguish over the fact that the Ministry has not provided its comment on the
Committee’s recommendation for setting up of an institutional mechanism comprising of officers
from the MHA, Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD), heads of various forces and
experts from the areas of public health, mental health, psychology, psychiatry etc. to deal with the
issue of stress in the BSF as well as in other CAPFs in a professional manner. The Committee,
therefore, desires the response of the Ministry thereon. (Para 3.8.5)
Medical Response Staff
The Committee expresses its concern to observe deficiency of 151 regular GDMOs against the
authorization of 441 GDMOs and deficiency of 61 regular Specialists against the authorization of 74
Specialists. The vacancy position at such large level is highly undesirable as the Medical Officers
are critical for providing medical care to various battalions. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that immediate measures should be undertaken for regular appointment of GDMOs and Specialists
and BSF and till then appointments on contract be made as a temporary measure. (Para 3.9.4)
Shortage of Budget Provisions for Housing
The Committee wants the Ministry of Home Affairs to inform the Committee as how much
funds will be available to BSF out of the increased allocation at RE stage. (Para 3.10.3)

89
Reserve Battalions
The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and reiterates
its recommendation at para 5.13.3 of 214 th Report. (Para 3.11.3)
Infrastructural Issues- Road Connectivity
The Committee wonders that CPWD is yet to submit DPR for which an amount of ````` 8.20
Crore was approved in 33 rd HLEC in 2016. Also, for preparing DPR for Lateral (945.193 Kms.) and
Axial Roads (533.035 Kms.) in Rajasthan, an amount of ````` 17.29 Crore has been approved in April
2018 whereas CPWD is yet to submit DPR. Needless to say that Border roads are the most essential
infrastructure requirement for BSFs for surveillance and safeguard the Border areas. Therefore,
the Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 5.16.3 of 214
th Report. (Para 3.12.5)
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
Para-military Service Pay (PMSP)
The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of MHA for grant of Para Military Service
Pay (PMSP) to the CAPFs if not at par with Military Service Pay (MSP) to defence forces but then
some other incentive for  their risk  needs to be considered.  The Committee therefore reiterates
its recommendation. (Para 3.13.3)
Removal of Deputation Quota at Senior Officers level in CAPFs
The Committee is not convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and reiterates
its recommendation that not more than 25 percent posts should be reserved for officers coming on
deputation and that there should be no reservation for the posts of Director General. (Para 3.14.5)
Reserve Battalions
The Committee is not in favour of over-stretching the duties and responsibilities of the CAPFs
to such an extent that even the reserve, who is supposed to be under the state of preparedness are
engaged in duties pertaining to internal security on election duties. The Committee is also in
agreement with Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for deployment of CAPFs regarding rotational
training of CAPFs. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation as made in Para
6.11.2 of 214
th Report of the Committee. (Para 3.15.5)
Housing Shortage
The Committee expresses concern over the acute shortage of dwelling units for CAPFs i.e.
1,06,683 available units against authorization of 2,73,282 houses that amounts to 39.04 %
satisfaction level against authorization. The Committee feels that the efforts of the Ministry to
improve the housing satisfaction level are not sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should urgently draw ‘action plan’ to reduce the housing shortage and to achieve
a satisfaction level of at least 50 per cent. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should expedite the completion of the ongoing housing projects in a time bound
manner. (Para 3.16.3)

90
ASSAM RIFLES
Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
The Committee notes that the Cadre Review proposal of Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ posts after consideration
by the MHA was returned to Assam Rifles with some observations with a direction to submit
revised proposal to MHA. The Committee hopes that Assam Rifles would submit the Cadre Review
Proposal again to the MHA and the MHA would process the revised Cadre Review proposal of
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ posts in Assam Rifles expeditiously and the Committee would be informed of the
same. (Para 4.1.3)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee had rec ommended that approval may be granted within next three months
but that has not been done. The Committee, therefore, recommends for early approval of the
proposal so that the Construction work of Houses are completed by set timeframe i.e. year,
2020. (Para 4.2.3)
Road connectivity and Mobility
The Committee notes the pending proposal of the Assam Rifles for construction of 4310.44
km of road along India Myanmar Border (IMB) to enhance road connectivity. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Government to expedite the process of consideration. (Para 4.3.3)
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL
Cadre Restructuring
The Committee observes that the proposals for cadre review are at various stages. The
Committee would like to impress upon the MHA to expedite the matter and furnish the final outcome
of cadre restructuring of all posts in SSB. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that
the cadre review of all the posts in the force should be undertaken every five years. (Para 4.4.3)
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE
Basic Amenities-Drinking Water
The Committee expresses its concern that out of 178 BOPs of ITBP, the clean potable drinking
water is available at only 32 BOPs. However, the Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure
(ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary has decided to provide all basic facilities like safe drinking
water to balance BOPs of the BGFs. The question arises as to what interim measures are being
taken to supply safe drinking water to ITBP jawans at the remaining BOPs. The Committee earnestly
feels that procedural delay must be avoided in the matter as jawans may suffer from water borne
diseases due to unsafe drinking water.  The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the MHA to
expedite the process of consideration and approval of budget for supplying pure and safe water to
ITBP and the Committee expects that a comprehensive and early action taken report be provided to
the Committee for its perusal. (Para 4.5.4)

91
Infrastructural Issues- Road connectivity
The Committee notes the response of various projects / proposals pertaining to infrastructural
road connectivity of ITBP and desires that the timeframe for consideration/approval and completion
of on-going roads connectivity projects especially of ICBR-II roads and ICBR-III roads are adhered
to and progress made in this regard may be furnished to the Committee. (Para 4.6.5)
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
Cadre Review/Restructuring
The Committee hopes that BSF would expedite its consideration of the proposal for cadre
review and would forward the same to MHA for its approval.  The Committee may be apprised of the
same once the process is complete. (Para 4.7.3)
The Committee feels that the process for all cadres needs to be expedited and it may be
apprised after all the processes are over. (Para 4.7.13)
Infrastructural Issues- Road Connectivity
The Committee hopes that the remaining construction works of Ambush cum Patrol (ACP)
Shelter and Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP) will be completed soon and the Committee will be apprised
of the progress made in this regard. (Para 4.8.4)
Infrastructural Issues-Security of Personnel
The Committee observes the delay in trial/experiment and authorisation to employ state
of the art equipment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that micro UA Vs procured by
BSF to be deployed be approved by MHA on priority basis and the Committee be informed of the
same. (Para 4.9.5)
COMMON TO ALL CAPFs
Ration Money Allowance
The Committee notes that the MHA is awaiting for the assessment to be made by the CAPFs
as per Committee’s recommendation and the outcome will be shared in due course with the
Committee. (Para 4.10.5)
Deployment of BGFs for activities other than Border Guarding
The Committee notes the response of MHA of assigning security of all VIP protectees to the
Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF and thus relieving BSF from the task of VIP security. The
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 4.11.3)
Clean Drinking Water
The Committee is anguished to find that 16% of BSF, 82% of ITBP, 78% of SSB and 43%
Assam Rifles BOPs/ COB are yet to be provided clean and safe drinking water. The Committee
notes that Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary in
its meeting held on 19
th March 2018 has decided to provide all basic facilities like safe drinking

92
water to balance BOPs of the BGFs.  The issue has now been taken with Ministry of Drinking Water
and Sanitation (MoDW&S) to prepare estimate for providing safe drinking water to BOPs. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the MHA to expedite the matter of estimates and apprise the
Committee of action taken regarding inspection mechanism for conducting surprise check of
providing clean and safe drinking water at all BOPs. (Para 4.12.4)

MINUTES

95
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 04.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9th December, 2019 in G-074, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Manish Gupta
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
9. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhary
10. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shrimati Kirron Kher
13. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
14. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
19. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
20. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
21. Dr. Satyapal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Additional secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary

96
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following three draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) Draft 220 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Two Hundred Fifteenth Report on ‘Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding
Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force and National Security
Guard)’.
(ii) Draft 221 st Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on the ‘Working Conditions in Border Guarding
Forces (Assam Rifles, Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border Police and Border Security
Force)’.
(iii) Draft 222nd Report on ‘Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’.
3. * * *
4. The Committee, then, took up the draft 221 st Report for consideration and adopted the same without
any change.
5. * * *
6. The Committee authorised the chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation/laying of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 11th  December,
2019.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

APPENDIX

APPENDIX-A
OPERATIONAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF ASSAM RIFLES
Description 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 T otal
Insurgents/Militants 31 43 18 11 11 114
Neutralized
Insurgents/Militants 922 866 577 551 537 3453
Apprehended
Insurgents/Militants 155 02 06 01 01 165
Surrendered
Nos. of Arms seized 939 504 490 506 341 2780
CONTRABAND ITEMS SEIZED BY ASSAM RIFLES
Contraband 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Seized
Banned Drugs 81.7 Lakh 2.01 Cr. 1.64 Cr. 6.31 Cr. 77.23 Cr.
Ganja 68.76 Lakh 1.99 Cr. 29.93 Lakh 41.182 Lakh 23.60 Lakh
Brown Sugar 1.35 Lakh 83.7 Lakh 1.60 Cr. 1.81 Cr. 11.648 Cr.
Illicit Liquor 5.66 Cr. 1.08 Cr. 66.56 Lakh 9.50 Cr. 1.89 Cr.
(IMFL)
Opium 1.10 Cr. 2.02 Cr. 34.15 Lakh 3.77 Lakh 8.82 Lakh
Marijuana - 54 Thousand 71.18 Cr. 28.19 Cr. 48.73 Cr.
Gold - 18 Lakh 2.11 Cr. 15.04 Cr. 28.28 Cr.
Pangolin Shells 6.22 Lakh 45.28 Lakh 28.80 Lakh 1.662 Lakh 25.50 Lakh
Tokay Geckos 1.08 Cr. 60 Lakh 72 Lakh - 24 Lakh
Herion - - - 6 Lakh 7.19 Cr.
Total 9.42 Cr. 9.17 Cr. 78.84 Cr. 33.46 Cr. 165.78 Cr.
99

APPENDIX-‘B’
1. Channels with Integration of Technology
(i) Govt. level:-  Central public grievance redress and monitoring system (CPGRAMS) which is
available through Internet Serving and majority of ex-personnel are utilizing this channel.
(i) Mobile App:- MHA Grievance App was launched on 11 May 2017 by Home Minister of India.
The compliance of this App is being monitored at MHA and the HM level.
(iii) Twitter Seva:- Twitter Seva is launched by Ministry of Home Affairs on 8th March’ 2017 for the
purpose of public grievance redressal in MHA.
2. FHQ Level
(i) E—Grievance (GRC Helpline):- E-grievance channel on Intranet Prahari Project (IPP) is
being used by serving pers of BSF and elaborate SOP in this regard was also framed. This
System has proved its utility so far.
(ii) IVRS (Interactive Voice Response System):-
Through this system troops are recording their grievance which is being redressed at Force HQ
level. Complaint/Grievance can be registered by calling on Tele No.011-46133100.
(iii) Through ‘e’ mail: - Grievances are also being lodged by the petitioner on ‘e’ mail ID of the DG
BSF as well as DIG (RR).
3. By Normal Channel
(i) Govt. Level
(a) R&W Dte MHA:-  Resettlement & Welfare Directorate, (Pers-ll), MHA forwarding
grievances of ex-personnel to redress in time bound manner.
(b) President Secretariat/PMOVIP/MHA references:-  Grievances of serving and retired
personnel being received from Politician through MHA (Pers-III) and being redressed.
(ii) FHQ Level
(a) DG Secretariat reference:- Grievances being received in the DG Secretariat directly and
being redressed.
(b) Grievances received through normal dak:-  All the grievances of serving/retired and
other personnel being received in dak and redressed.
(c) Application through proper Channel:-  Grievances received through proper channel
are being examined in detail at FHQ and redressed appropriately.
(iii) Unit/Field Formation Level
Field formations are being redressed the grievances through following channels
(a) Roll Call
100

101
(b) Mess meetings
(c) Sainik Sammelans
(d) Personal interview by H.O.O. while proceeding and returning from leave
(e) Monthly Coy Comdr conference
(f) Welfare meetings
(g) Interaction with troops by Comdts/Nodal Officer periodically as well as while visit to
BOP.