PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 156
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON IMPLEMENT OF CENTRAL SCHEME OF
MODERNISATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)
ND  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22  DECEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  DECEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22  DECEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  DECEMBER, 2011)

107
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY SECOND REPORT
ON IMPLEMENTATION OF CENTRAL SCHEME OF
MODERNISATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22 ND DECEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 ND DECEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-304

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i )-(iv)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (v)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—5
CHAPTER  I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ..................................................................................... 6—13
CHAPTER  II : The recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......... 14—19
CHAPTER  III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry .............. 20—63
CHAPTER IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government have not been received .................................... 64—68
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS//CONCLUSIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 69—75
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 77—89
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................ 91— 104
(I) Scheme of Modernisation of Prison (Physical Progress) ................................ 93
(II) Scheme of Modernisation of Prison (Unspent balance with State
Government as on 16.09.201 1) ............................................................................. 94

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on  31st August, 2009)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Brijesh Pathak
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri Tariq Anwar
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
16. Shri Naveen Jindal
17. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat)
18. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
19. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
20. Shri L. Rajagopal
21. Shri Nilesh Narayan Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Shri A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
26. Shri Ravneet Singh
27. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
28. Shri Harsh Vardhan
29. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
30. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
1
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
1 Shri Neeraj Shekhar nominated w.e.f. 14 October, 2009 vice Shri Akhilesh Yadav who was nominated to the Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forest.
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Javed Akhtar
2
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri L. Raja Gopal
16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
17. Shri Naveen Jindal
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
(ii)
2 Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 September, 2011 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who resigned from the Membership of the
DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.r. the 13 September, 2010.

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Rajagopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
(iii)

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s 142
nd Report on Implementation of
Central Scheme of Modernization of Prison Administration.
2. The One Hundred and Forty Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 26
th February, 2009. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to
the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the
recommendations of the Committee contained in the report.
3. The Minister for Home Affairs made a Statement on the status of implementation of
recommendations contained in the said report of the Committee on 4
th and 5 th December, 2009 in
the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, respectively pursuant to the Direction of the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha dated 24
th September, 2004.
4. The Ministry also furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee.
The Committee in its sitting held on 7 th January, 2010 discussed the said ATNs received from the
Ministry and found that action taken replies sent by the Ministry of Home Affairs on most of the
recommendations were of interim and routine nature. The Committee noted that the Ministry had
stated that recommendations of the Committee had been sent to the State Governments for
necessary action and that the Action Taken replies did not contain any response from the State
Governments and action taken by them.
5. In view of the above, the Committee had felt that Union Government should come with
concrete action taken on the recommendations of the Committee and suggested that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should pursue the matter vigorously with the State Governments rather than just
forwarding the recommendations to State Governments for necessary action.
6. Pursuant to the direction of the Committee, Rajya Sabha Secretariat requested the Ministry
to furnish revised Action Taken Notes received from various States of the country. In response,
the Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the revised Action Taken Notes in parts. The Secretariat
requested the Ministry to furnish final updated comprehensive Action Taken Notes for consideration
of the Committee. The Ministry furnished the updated revised Action Taken Replies on
5
th November, 2011.
7. The Committee in its sitting held on 8 th November, 2011 heard the presentation of the Home
Secretary on the updated revised ATNs received from the Ministry on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 142
nd report.
8. The Committee considered the draft 156 th Action Taken Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 20 th December, 2011.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
20th December , 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Forty Second Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on Implementation of
Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration. The Committee in its 142
nd Report made
twenty six recommendations/observations giving major thrust to the proper implementation of the
scheme and continuation of the second phase of the scheme.
2. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished background note along with updated Action Taken
Notes on the subject. The Ministry mentioned in background note that the first phase of Scheme
of Modernisation of Prisons was launched by Ministry of Home Affairs in 2002-03 in 27 States
except Arunachal Pradesh over a period of five years (2002-2007) with an outlay of Rs. 1800 crore
on cost sharing ration of 75:25 between the Central and State Governments respectively for
(i) construction of new jails; (ii) repair and renovation and construction of additional barracks in
the existing jails; (iii) improvement in sanitation and water supply; and (iv) construction of living
accommodation for prison personnel. The scheme was extended for a further period of 2 years
without additional funds to enable the State Governments to complete their activities. The scheme
ended on 31.3.2009.
3. The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs reviewed the status of second phase of scheme. The Committee learnt that the Government
had decided to defer the second phase of the scheme. Taking serious note of this fact, the
Committee in its 144
th Report recommended for reconsideration of the decision by the Government
to defer the second phase of the scheme. The Ministry in its Action Taken Notes on the 144 th
Report stated as under:
“On the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on modernization of
prisons and also in view of the demands of State Governments, a proposal for second phase
of the scheme of modernization of prisons was prepared by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
The proposal was placed before the Committee of Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) in Ministry
of Finance. It was, however, decided that the phase-II of the scheme be deferred for the
time being owing to heavy commitment of Government of India on other important sectors.
The matter was reconsidered in this Ministry and it has been decided to close the scheme.”
4. The Committee, in its 150
th Report on the Action Taken Notes on 144 th Report made the
following recommendations:-
“The Committee is constrained to note that the important scheme for modernizing prisons
in the country is not being given the importance it deserves. It is unfortunate that
Government has decided to close the scheme. From the point of view of improving the
facilities in the prisons, it is necessary to have such a scheme as States will not be
implementing such a scheme on their own. The Committee desires that Government may
reconsider its decision and inform it of its decision.”
5. The Ministry, in the background note sent alongwith further revised Action Taken Note on
l42
nd report, stated that as on 16.09.2011, 119 new jails, 1572 additional barracks and 8568 staff
quarters have been constructed by the State Governments. The Central share amounting to
Rs. 21.76 crore was lying unspent with the State Governments as on 16.09.2011. The Ministry
further stated that a review meeting was held on 16.09.2011 with the concerned States for

2
expediting utilisation of unspent balance and it was expected that the unspent balance would be reduced
substantially within 2-3 months. The next review meeting was to be held in November 201 1. Details
of physical and financial progress as on 16.09.2011 are enclosed (Annexure-I and Annexure-II)
6. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in the background note also stated that keeping in view the
demands of various State Governments, the recommendations made by the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs and recommendations of Draft National Policy on Prison Reforms and
Correctional Administration, it placed a proposal for the Second phase of the Scheme (costing
Rs. 4270 crore) before the Committee of Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) for consideration. The CNE
in its meeting held on 27
th August, 2009 chaired by Secretary (Expenditure) took the following
decisions in the matter:
(i) No new scheme be taken up during the year 2009-10 or 2010-2011 due to financial
constraints and heavy commitments of Government of India on other important
sector;
(ii) Since Prison is a State subject, the States must provide resources for upgradation and
modernisation of prisons;
(iii) The States who have no resources have to project their requirements before the 13
th
Finance Commission;
(iv) State must use innovative methods like public private partnership or to shift old jails
outside the city to reclaim and exploit old jails sites which can fund their
modernization plans; and
(v) The scheme to be shifted from non-plan to plan side.
7. As per decision of the CNE, the proposal for second phase could not be taken up before
2011-12. The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that they informed, accordingly, the State
Governments/UT Administrations about the deferment of the scheme with a suggestion that the
Government of India would support the proposals of the State Governments seeking more funds
for modernisation of prisons as and when it is submitted to the Planning Commission by the State
Governments.
8. The Ministry in its background note also informed the Committee that the Thirteenth
Finance Commission has recommended Rs. 609 crore for the up-gradation of prisons for the eight
States i.e. Andhra Pradesh – Rs. 90 crore, Arunachal Pradesh – Rs. 10 crore, Chhattisgarh –
Rs. 150 crore, Kera1a – Rs. 154 crore, Maharashtra – Rs. 60 crore, Mizoram – Rs. 30 crore,
Orissa Rs. 100 crore, and Tripura – Rs. 15 crore.
9. The Committee in its sitting held on 8
th November, 2011 heard the Home Secretary on the
updated Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry on the observations/recommendations
contained in the 142
nd Report. The main highlights of the presentation made before the Committee
were as under:-
(i) Occupancy rate stands at 122.8 per cent in Central Prisons, 143.7 per cent in District
Prisons, 88.1 per cent in Sub-prisons, and 73.2 per cent in open prisons;
(ii) Prison demographics indicate one-third of convicted population, two-third under-trial
and one per cent detenues;
(iii) Period of detention (unsentenced) stands 3.9 per cent upto 3 months, 22 per cent
upto 3 to 6 months, 18.5 per cent upto 6 to 12 months, 12.1 per cent upto 1 to 2
years, 5.8 per cent from 2 to 3 years, 2.7 per cent from 3 to 5 years and 1 per cent
above 5 years;

3
(iv) W omen prisoners constitute 4.1%. Of the 15406 women prisoners, 4588 were
convicts and 10687 under-trials;
(v) Declining trend of prison occupancy (percentage of overcrowding) i.e. 45.4 per cent
in 2005 to 22.8 per cent in 2009;
(vi) Increasing trend of foreign prisoners i.e.  284 in 2002 to 5262 in 2009. The
Repatriation of sentenced Prisoners Act, 2003, facilitate transfer of sentenced foreign
prisoners from India to their home countries and vice versa would help in their social
rehabilitation;
(vii) A sum of Rs. 1796.5 crore under non-plan scheme of modernization of prisons was
earmarked which constituted Rs. 1034.6 crore for Construction of new jails;
Rs. 248.6 crore for Expansion of Renovation of jails, Rs. 465.1 crore for Staff
quarters, Rs. 48.2 crore for sanitation and water supply;
(viii) Prison Modernization Project (with investment of about Rs. 1800 crore) included
Mega project; construction of 119 new jails, 1572 additional barracks, and 8568 prison
staff quarters completed, 43 Jails, 159 barracks and 235 prison staff quarters was
under completion;
(ix) Many States have also made their own investments which inter alia , resulted in
decongestion in jails and improved civic amenities;
(x) Several rounds of review meetings were held for physical/financial progress of the
scheme by the officers of Ministry of Home Affairs;
(xi) The State Governments being regularly impressed upon to invoke Sections 436A,
436(i) and 265 to 265 L of the CrPC 1973 with the objective to reduce the
overcrowding and languishing of under-trials in jails;
(xii) The old system of shaving dispensed with and by and large prisoners being provided
a separate disposable razor to check the spread of HIV/AIDS among the prisoners;
(xiii) Since the proposal of second phase was deferred by the CNE for the period of 2009-
10 and 2010-11 and also keeping the recommendation of Parliamentary Standing
Committee and demands of State Governments, a proposal for second phase of the
scheme for Rs 5693.33 crore has now been initiated in this Ministry and the proposal
is under active consideration.
10. During the course of the presentation, the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
apprised the Committee that when the proposal for the second phase of the scheme costing
Rs. 4270 crore was placed before the Committee of Non Plan Expenditure (CNE) of Ministry of
Finance for consideration, the CNE in its sitting held on 27
th August, 2009, Chaired by the
Secretary, Expenditure decided that the modernization of prison administration scheme be shifted
from non-plan to the plan side.
Explaining the background on this issue, the Home Secretary stated as under:-
“...the previous scheme of modernization of prison was under Non-Plan. Last time, when
we had gone to them, they had said that we should shift it to Plan, to shift.....We would
be going back to the Ministry of Finance to say that this should continue under Non-
Plan. If they agree, it would be okay; otherwise, we would go to the Planning
Commission.”

4
11. The Committee further wanted to know raison-d’etre for shifting of expenditure involved
in modernization of police force and the additional benefits that would accrue due to changing the
nature of expenditure. The Home Secretary just responded as under:-
“Sir, it was not our proposal to shift the scheme for modernization of prisons from non-
Plan to Plan. It was the decision conveyed to us by the Ministry of Finance when we first
went before the Finance Ministry’s Committee on non-Plan expenditure.”
12. Further explaining about the background on the issue, the Home Secretary responded as
under:
“This distinction between the Plan and the non-Plan somehow was not meant to what it
has come to mean. It has somehow acquired overtones of Plan being more preferable to
non-Plan and that an attempt should be to increase Plan expenditure and reduce non-Plan
expenditure whereas most of the essential and basic functions of the State are on the non-
Plan side. The fundamental sovereign functions of the States are on the non-Plan side. This
is some orientation or accent, which we will have to change. This mindset has to be
changed. The prisons have suffered because of this, and, unfortunately, you will find a
large number of prisons in the state in which they are today. That is why, the second phase
of prison modernization scheme is necessary so that we are able to assist the States.”
13. The Committee takes note of the fact that the second phase of the scheme has not
yet been finalized nor approved. The matter is still under active consideration as to whether
it should be made under non-plan or plan expenditure. The Committee is of the view that
the Government should take a positive view in regard to taking up the second phase of the
scheme from 2012-13. Whether the scheme continues under non-plan expenditure or shifted
to plan-expenditure head, it is left to the government to decide but the Committee desires
that scheme should be continued from next financial year.
14. The updated Action Taken Note received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of
the recommendations/observations contained in the 142
nd Report have been categorized as under:
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Paras: 4.1.6, 4.17, 4.10.2, 4.18.2 and 4.19.1 (5 Recommendations)
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in Chapter - I of the Report.
Chapter II: Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para: 4.8.4 and 4.21.1 (2
Recommendations)
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 4.1.4, 4.1.5, 4.2.2, 4.3.1, 4.4.2,
4.5.4, 4.6.2, 4.7.3, 4.9.2, 4.11, 4.13.1, 4.14.1, 4.14.2, 4.15.1, 4.16.1, 4.17.2 and 4.20.1
(17 Recommendations)
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect
of these recommendations.
Chapter-IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government have not been received: Para: 4.12.1 and 4.21.2 (2
Recommendations)

5
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized in
Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the
Committee.
15. The details of the ATR have been discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

6
6
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.1 The Committee supports the idea of increase in allocation to the better performing States
like Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Gujarat, J & K, Manipur, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh etc. which
would not only lead to improving the conditions of the prisons, prisoners and prison staff but
would also encourage other States not performing well, to catch up with the better performing
States in the country.
(Para 4.1.6 of 142
nd Report)
Action Taken
1.1.1 The observations of the Committee shall be kept in mind at the time of second phase of
the scheme as and when finalised.
Recommendation
1.2 The Committee has noted that the States of Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, and Uttaranchal,
have utilized hundred per cent funds released to them under this Scheme and the States of Haryana,
Karnataka, Manipur, UP and West Bengal are nearing the target in terms of utilization of funds
allocated to them. However, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Kerala have performed
badly. The Committee desires that special attention may be given to those States lagging behind
in the second phase of the Scheme.
(Para 4.17 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.1 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The observations of the Committee shall be
kept in mind at the time of second phase of the scheme as and when finalised.
Further Comments of the Government
1.2.2 T aking note of the financial constraints of North-eastern States and that they are reeling
under a financial crunch and finding it extremely difficult to provide resources for modernization
of prison administration, the Committee sought to know whether the contribution of North-eastern
state share could be reduced to 10 per cent from 25 per cent.
1.2.3 Responding to the query of the Committee the Home Secretary assured the Committee to
examine the matter and consider it.
Further Observation
1.2.4 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs should consider the
financial constraint of the North-eastern States and also examine the possibility of reducing
the States’ contribution of fund under the scheme from existing pattern of 25 per cent to

7
10 per cent. The Committee also desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs should persuade
the State Governments of North-East to allocate funds for modernization of prison
administration from NLCPR.
Recommendation
1.3 It is the considered opinion of the Committee that the conditions in an average Indian
Prison are awful, which present a very depressing picture. Being overcrowded, unhygienic and
gloomy, these incarceration centers are presumed to be places far from being any kind of
correctional centre. They often breed hardened criminals who practically become a menace to the
society. A mindless adherence to centuries old jail manuals leaves very little scope for any
innovative approach in the matter of dealing with people who end up in prisons for various reasons
and under various circumstances. With revolutionary changes taking place in every field around us,
it is high time that our mindset towards prisoners also undergoes a change, that a prison should
truly reflect the spirit of correction and reformation by treating the inmates as human beings.
(Para 4.10.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.1 The Government of India has issued a comprehensive advisory on Prison Administration to
all the state Governments on 17.7.2009 which addresses this issue and emphasises on the State
Governments to take adequate steps in this direction.
1.3.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : Proper hygiene is maintained in the jails. All officers are trained in
Correctional Administration. This Jail is having one Work Shop for vocational training like weaving,
cane and bamboo, carpentry, wood carving, tailoring etc.
Andhra Pradesh : Conditions in Prisons are very comfortable. Correctional methods are strictly
followed and inmates are treated in a most humane manner.
Assam : The attention of all Superintendents of Jails have been drawn to the contents of this
paragraph and instructed to construct an innovative mindset towards prisoners keeping in view the
revolutionary changes that are taking place around us. It is also impressed upon all Superintendents
of Jails that prisoners are getting treatment in Jail as human beings.
Bihar : As Bihar Prisons have overcome the overcrowding problem, conditions of prisons has
improved. 1200 hand-pumps, 43 modem kitchen, 2309 toilets, 4361 electric fans, 456 TV and LPG
cooking facilities have been provided for improving the condition of jails.
Chandigarh UT : Prisoners are imparted training in various skills like carpentry, welding, polishing,
tailoring, canning of chairs repair of refrigerators, scooters and computer education etc..
Recreational facilities are also provided to prisoners.
Chhattisgarh : Many programmes are being initiated for the prisoners in the jail. They are also given
technical training through various programmes to enable them to live life with their own work after
release from the prison.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Condition of Sub-Jail Silvassa are quite good and hygienic. The cells
are provided with fans, adequate number of toilets and bathroom and cable TV etc. Necessary
steps will be taken for future improvement of the jail.

8
Daman & Diu UT : Situation is Sub jail, Daman and Diu is entirely different. Due attention is paid
to the health and hygiene of the inmates. Inmates are provided with tea/snacks, lunch and dinner
are provided at fixed times.
Delhi : Delhi prisons are considered pioneer in the field of prison reforms not only in India but
all over the world. A number of correctional programmes like yoga, meditation, education and
vocational activities, Human Right Protection Courses are organised inside the jail in collaboration
with the NGO which is quite a trend setter for other jails.
Goa : The inmates are provided with all adequate facilities as per Jail rules as well as Jail Manual
which have recently been revised/formulated.
Gujarat : Living conditions of the prisoners are fully compatible with human dignity and effective
steps are being taken to enhance prison capacity. Medical facilities and hygienic conditions have
been upgraded.
Haryana : Draft of Haryana Jail Manual to replace the existing Punjab Jail Manual as applicable to
Haryana has been sent to the Govt. Young offenders/undertrials are being kept separately.
Himachal Pradesh : The prisons of HP state are not overcrowded to a large extent. After completion
of the works of two jails at Hamirpur and Solan and on completion of additional barracks at Nahan,
Mandi, Bilaspur, Dharamshala, the capacity has been increased from 979 to 1302. In addition to
the above increase, there is an additional increase in capacity of 29 prisoners in new subjail Nurpur
and the capacity has been increased to 1331. On Completion of all the work i.e the works of
Chamba and Una jails the capacity will increase to 1763.
Jammu & Kashmir : Prisons of J&K are maintained in good condition. Prisoners are being provided
educational/technical education besides the adult education in view of that after release no prisoner
shall recycle in the world of crime and live with dignity in society.
Jharkhand : Correctional activities are being practiced in the prisons of the State. More human
oriented programmes are being included.
Karnataka : Proper segregation of inmates are being made as per the prevailing Rules in force. Like
V ocational training in various crafts, modern methods of Agriculture and horticulture. Wages
earning, reading room and library, pursuing of education through open universities at Deptt. Cost,
canteens, prison panchayats, parole, emergency and premature release are also there.
Kerala : Both Central and State Governments are allowing funds for the modernisation of prisons
An amount of Rs.1656 lakhs has been expended for the purpose.
Madhya Pradesh : Efforts are being made to provide adequate residence along with hygienic and
fresh environment to the prisoners in the state.
Maharashtra : The prison administration is taking care of almost all possible grievances of the
inmates. They are provided with possible facilities in every aspects.
Manipur : It is expected to bring change in the mindset towards prisoners and to reflect the spirit
of correction and reformation by treating the inmates as human beings.
Meghalaya : There should be a uniform design for Jail in the country with an observation room
for newly admitted prisoners. Scope for segregation as per age, crimes should be incorporated in
a separate ward exclusively for first time offenders.
Mizoram : Instructions are given to the Prisons staff to adopt modern concept strictly while
treating the inmates for their correction and reformation in prisons.

9
Nagaland : There is no question of Jail overcrowded in the State of Nagaland. All prisoners are
keeping in the same enclosures and segregation cannot be done for correctional measures due to
lack of proper infrastructures and this are one of the most important problems in State Nagaland
Jails.
Orissa : To improve the living conditions of prisoners new sub-jails and additional wards have been
constructed for accommodating more prisoners. Number of NGOs have endeavoured in organizing
spiritual activities to divert mental tensions of inmates. This also includes teaching Yoga, meditation,
religious discourses in different jails, to develop the spirit of correction and reformation.
Puducherry UT : Necessary training programme would be instituted through Regional Institute for
Correctional Administration, Vellore. They are constantly advised to treat them as dignified human
beings.
Puniab : Jails are now being called “Sudhar Ghars” to bring about psychological change in the
treatment of offenders in jails. So Jails are now not a custody but a place for correction,
reformation and rehabilitation of offenders.
Rajasthan : Many schemes such as parole, open camp etc. are being initiated in the jails in
Rajasthan for the prisoners.
Sikkim : Sikkim prisons in its dedicated endeavour to reformation and correction of prisoners in
true spirit have taken up the uphill task of reformation in the present global concept of reformation,
rehabilitation and reintegration to the society.
Tamil Nadu : The existing diet menu of prisoners was fixed by the Government as per the
recommendation of the Prison Reforms Commission after getting the opinion from the Dietician.
Tripura : The State Government is in the process of phasing out cell old prisons by relocating in
different locations for providing better infrastructural facilities. The State Government has brought
amendment of the Prisoner (Tripura Amendment) Act, 1979, framed the Prisoners (release of
Parole) Rules 1988 and Rules for Premature Release of prisoners for the welfare of the prisoners.
The State Government has prescribed the menu for healthy diet of the prisoners for the well being
of the inmates/prisoners.
Uttar Pradesh : Under section 436A and 436(1) of Cr.P.C., possible measures are being taken to
release the prisoners. As per Jail Manual, possible facilities are being provided to the prisoners at
present.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented sincerely.
West Bengal : State Government is totally committed to changing the prisons into correctional
homes in the true sense of the term. The names have been changed, reform activities have been
in full swing. The entire state machinery is oriented towards reforms in the correctional system.
Further Recommendation
1.3.3 The Committee observes that most of the State Government are conscious of the
idea of prison as a place for correctional and reformation. In this regard, the Committee
appreciates the steps taken by the Government of Punjab where jails are now being called
a “Sudhar Ghar” i.e. a place for physiological transformation of offenders. The Committee
feels that other State Government should follow the suit and impart the jail officers and
staff requisite training and skill with the intention to treat jails not just a place of custody
but also a place for reformation. The Committee also recommends that steps be taken to
ensure that the advisories issued are strictly implemented at the ground level.

10
Recommendation
1.4 The Committee recommends that the power of giving character certificate be entrusted to
the respective Jail Superintendents as they are the authorities who had been closely watching the
activities of the inmates for a long time.
(Para 4.18.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : Giving power to Jail Supdt. of Jail for issuing Character Certificates will
be remarkable achievement.
Andhra Pradesh : No comments.
Assam : There is a provision in the Assam Jail Manual empowering Superintendent of the Jail to
give character certificate to the prisoners on release, and these are followed by the jails.
Bihar : This is under examination.
Chandigarh UT : This will be complied with.
Chhattisgarh : No rule for issuance of Character Certificate for the prisoners.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : The recommendation is welcome. The Superintendent of Jail observes
the behaviour and conduct of prisoners and he is the right person to certify the character of a
prisoner.
Daman & Diu UT : UT Administration will consider this.
Delhi : Superintendent Jails in Delhi are issuing Character Certificates to the requesting prisoners.
Goa : This is being implemented whenever the inmates request for the same.
Gujarat : This recommendation is agreeable.
Haryana : Superintendent Jails are already issuing Annual Good Conduct Certificates to the convicts
for their good behaviour, which helps convicts in availing parole facilities etc.
Himachal Pradesh : The Superintendent is authorised to issue character certificate to inmates as and
when required.
Jammu & Kashmir : The authorization for providing the antecedents and character certificates to
all the persons is made by CID Department.
Jharkhand : The character certificate to the prisoners eligible for Open Jail should be given by the
committee of District & Session Judge, Deputy Commissioner and Jail Superintendent.
Karnataka : Will be considered and implemented.
Kerala : The Committee recommends that the power of giving character certificate be entrusted to
respective Jail Superintendents.
Madhya Pradesh : At the time of release from jail, the prisoners are given release certificate which
also include the character of the prisoner.

11
Maharashtra : This recommendation is being examined and a decision will be taken shortly.
Manipur : State Government is under consideration to 11 perationalised the recommendation of the
Committee regarding issuing of Character Certificate.
Meghalaya : No Comments from the State Government.
Mizoram : Entrusting the Jail Superintendents to issue Character Certificates is considered a positive
step after broader discussions on the issues.
Nagaland : Giving authorisation to Jail Superintendents for issue of Character Certificate of
Prisoners is a new and good idea which may be followed whenever required.
Orissa : The power of giving Character Certificate to the inmates of the jails has been entrusted
to the Collector and Distt. Magistrate, S.P and Superintendents of Jails for the release of prisoners
under parole etc.
Puducherry UT : Chief Superintendent of Jails/Superintendent of Jails is the authority to issue Good
Conduct Certificates.
Punjab : Superintendent Jails are competent to issue Character Certificates to jail inmates and can
also recommend premature release for good conduct.
Rajasthan : Superintendent of jail is given power to issue character certificate and other certificate
to the trained prisoners.
Sikkim : The practice of issuing Character Certificate is being done by the Jail Superintendents on
the request of the prisoners on their release for the period of their detention based on their
performance and conduct while in custody.
Tamil Nadu : No comments.
Tripura : Jail Superintendent of central jail is giving the Character Certificate to convicts in case
of necessity.
Maharashtra : This recommendation is being examined and a decision will be taken shortly.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented.
West Bengal : The Department proposes to take up the issue of certifying release-worthiness of
long term inmates by the Superintendents of Correctional Homes instead of police authorities.
Recommendation
Horticulture in Jail Premises
1.5 The sub-Committee came across the large tracts of land in the jails which remained
unutilized. The Committee feels that planting of medicinal plants, horticulture and kitchen garden
etc. should be encouraged in such land as it would not only increase the income of the prisons
but would also lead to improving the physical environment in the jail premises.
(Para 4.19.1 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:

12
Andaman & Nicobar : The system of horticulture and vegetable plantation is in force in this Prison.
Andhra Pradesh : The Superintendents of Prisoners Agricultural Colonies and Semi Open Prisoners
were requested to contact the Forest Department/Horticulture Department and explore the
possibility of growing medicinal plants.
Assam : Almost in all Jails, all available lands inside and outside the jail are brought under paddy
and other seasonal vegetable crops cultivation.
Bihar : Horticulture is already in practice through kitchen gardens in some jails where sufficient
land is available. Planting of medicinal plants is under consideration.
Chandigarh UT : Jail land is utilized for harvesting wheat and paddy crops etc. Vegetables are also
grown.
Chhattisgarh : Vegetables/Flowers are being planted in the jails by the prisoners.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Recommendation is welcome.
Daman & Diu UT : There is no open space for taking up horticulture activities.
Delhi : Horticulture activities are taken up in a big way in the jails to make the Jail environment
clean and green. Nurseries in jails are nurturing plants which are sold to public through Tihar Haat.
Goa : This is being implemented within the area of the Jail premises.
Gujarat : Organic farming is introduced in Ahmedabad Central Prison. Project of planting the
medicinal plants has been undertaken at Vadodara Central Prison.
Haryana : Crops like wheat, paddy, mustard, pulses and vegetables are being grown in the jail
premises.
Himachal Pradesh : For planting flowers and kitchen garden in the jail premises the jail authorities
have already been directed by the Dte of Prisons to take up the matter with the Horticulture Dept
of the state and it has already come up in some jails.
Jammu & Kashmir : In view of the insufficient land available in the jails of J&K such programmes
are not feasible.
Jharkhand : Horticultural activities like medicinal and aromatic plants should also be encouraged and
Department of Agriculture/Horticulture should be actively involved.
Kamataka : Vacant land in jail premises is being utilized for agriculture and horticulture. Paddy,
raggi, maize, vegetables etc. are grown here. Plantation of medicinal plants is also being taken into
consideration.
Kerala : Wherever land is available in prisons, it is used for agricultural and Horticultural purposes,
especially in Open Prisons. Cultivation of medicinal plants is done here. Main crops are Rubber,
vegetables and trees like cashew nut also planted.
Madhya Pradesh : Trees have been planted in the spare land in the jails of state for making healthy
environment.
Maharashtra : The State Prison authorities have already taken necessary steps for horticulture
development.
Manipur : Once the perimeter walls of the jails are secured, this will be considered in consultation
with the Horticulture Department and Jail Department.

13
Meghalaya : Instructions have been issued in this regard to all jails for finding out ways and means
to start a horticulture farm where huge land is available.
Mizoram : Since the Mizoram Prisons have no large tracks vacant land, developing kitchen gardens
is the only option available.
Nagaland : In Nagaland, jail department have not acquired sufficient Land for development of
Horticulture in Jail Premises except doing Kitchen Gardens and Prisoners are doing Kitchen Garden
inside the Compound Wall with the permission of authority.
Orissa : Plantation programme had already been taken up in almost all jails. Now medicinal plants
and fruits etc. vegetable gardens are available in all jails of Orissa.
Puducherry UT : Necessary efforts are being taken to make arrangement for cultivation of
vegetables and to develop green lawns with springs and for gardening.
Punjab : Agriculture work is being undertaken in almost all Central Jails. Planting of medicinal
plants and kitchen gardens with Horticulture Department is under consideration where land is
sufficient to undertake these activities.
Rajasthan : Trees are planted in the jail premises and kitchen garden has been developed in the jail.
Due to shortage of water in the State, it is difficult to do more activity in this area.
Sikkim : All lands belonging to the prison are being utilized for all purpose like Horticulture,
agriculture, forestation, plantation of citrus trees and beautification of prison complex.
Tamil Nadu : In Central Prisons like Trichy, Coimbatore etc., vegetables, greens, coconut etc. are
being grown in the available land and used in preparing food for the prisoners.
Tripura : This is done in all prisons.
Uttar Pradesh : Vegetables are cultivated on about 682 hectares land in the prisons of the state.
Government is also considering to cultivate spices, flowers etc. in the available lands of the
prisons.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented.
West Bengal : Correctional Services authority in West Bengal promotes horticulture in the premises
to put the large track of land to productive purpose.

14
14
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
Recommendation
2.1 The Committee strongly recommends that concern of health and hygiene in the prisons
should be urgently addressed for which adequate supply of water and proper sanitation facilities
were a must. It also recommends that the existing medical facilities in the prisons should be
overhauled and one police escort party should always be provided to accompany a prisoner
requiring emergency medical attention. In the second phase of the scheme, proper emphasis may be
laid on this aspect. The Committee feels that at least in the newly constructed additional barracks
and jails, facilities for water harvesting, alternative sources of energy, converting garbage into bio-
gas etc. must be provided. The Committee is also of the firm opinion that the old system of shaving
should be dispensed with and each prisoner should be provided a separate disposable razor to
check the spread of HIV/AIDS among the prisoners.
(Para 4.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman.& Nicobar : 10 bedded hospitals have one full time Doctor, one Pharmacist, 2 Staff
Nurses and a Ward Boy. Facilities of water harvesting is also being provided in the kitchen and
barracks. Jail Barber is using one blade for one prisoner for shaving.
Andhra Pradesh : Provision of water and sanitation facilities is already made in all the jails in the
State during the last 5 years. Proper medical facilities, full time doctors, full-fledged hospitals are
available in Central/District Jails. However, it is not possible to convert the garbage into Bio-gas.
Separate disposable razors are also provided to barbers to prevent HIV/AIDS etc.
Assam : Under the Scheme of Modernisation of Prisons the independent water supply projects have
been constructed in seven jails and they are functioning properly. In other jails hand Tube Well,
Ring Well are installed and supply of water for bath and drinking purpose is found adequate. Old
and damaged drains inside have been reconstructed and repaired. Proper stocks of medicine are
being kept for medical treatment of the inmates. For escorting sick prisoners to and from hospital
outside the jails, escort parties are being provided by the police authorities. The Superintendents of
Jails have been instructed to adopt a shaving system for the inmates in view of the spread of HIV/
AIDS.
Bihar : As per the orders of IG Prisons, special medical camps are organised for the treatment of
diseases of various prisoners. Various diseases like ocular, mental problems, handicapped ones are
given medical treatment and facilities. Newly constructed Operation Theatre in Central Jail
Bhagalpur is set up for women prisoners, Hepatitis B vaccine is being given to all prisoners of

15
Shahid Khudiram Bose Central Jail, Muzaffarpur. Aids awareness programmes-cum-yoga training
are also undertaken.
Chandigarh UT : Model Jail, Chandigarh has adequate water supply through two tube wells. Water
purifiers, water coolers are also installed in the Jail. Ambulance and police escort are also there
while taking sick prisoners to hospitals. Instructions for use of disposable blades to the barbers
have been given to prevent spread of HIV/AIDS among prisoners.
Chhattisgarh : For the health and hygiene of the prison adequate supply of water and proper
facilities are provided. Medical facilities are also provided. Necessary measures are taken to prevent
HIV/AIDs among the prisoners with the help of Health Department and NGOs.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : The health and hygiene in the prison is being maintained and adequate
supply of water and proper facilities are also available in the Sub-Jail. Doctor visits every Sunday
and as and when required.
Daman & Diu UT : Due importance is given to health and hygiene in the Sub Jail premises. Police
escort is always provided to prisoners requiring medical attention. Prisoners are allowed to maintain
their own shaving kits and a designated barber visits the Sub Jails on every Sunday.
Delhi : There are one 150 bedded hospital in Central Jail No.3 and dispensaries in each jail for
round the clock health care of the prisoner. There is separate dispensary with MI Room for the
female prisoners.
Goa : As regards health and hygiene of the prisoners, adequate medical facilities have been provided
to the inmates in the jails and judicial lock ups. If required proper police escort to the Goa Medical
College and Hospital and other centres, are provided. As regards shaving blades, it is stated that
the used blades are not re-used in order to prevent spreading of HIV/AIDS.
Gujarat : 42 works of water supply and sanitation have been completed. R.O. Plants for clean
drinking water is being installed at all the jails. Services of experts’ doctors from local civil
hospitals are made available. In emergent situations, Jail personnel escort the prisoners to shift to
civil hospital.
Haryana : Conditions are healthy and hygienic. Most facilities are being provided to the inmates.
Provisions will be provided for water harvesting, alternatives sources of energy, covering, garbage
into bio-gas etc.
Himachal Pradesh : In HP there are 04 medical officers posted in the big jails i.e. Nahan, Kanda,
Dharamshala and Bilaspur. Whereas in subjail there is paramedical staff. In case of emergency, the
convict is rushed to the nearby Hospital immediately. In both Central jails, Nahan and Kanda, there
is Police escort party which accompany a prisoner during emergency. The construction of new
jails and additional barracks is being carried out as per the latest specifications including facilities
for water harvesting, alternative sources of energy etc. The proposal for providing disposable
razors to male prisoners is under consideration.
Jammu & Kashmir : In J&K it is mandatory provision to provide basic facilities to all jail inmates.
Women prisoners are being sent for court attendance/medical check-up in the Govt. Hospitals
through regular escort party comprising of lady constable. Provision of providing disposable razors
to barbers with proper instructions. However proposal of converting garbage into biogas etc. is
under active consideration.
Jharkhand : Adequate water supply is ensured in all prisons. Solar energy and Bio-gas units have/
are being installed in Central Jail, Ranchi and provision for the same has been made in the State
Plan for other jails. Providing disposable razors will be included in C.S.S/State Plan.

16
Karnataka : Works of expansion, repairs and renovation was taken up at 28 prisons and water
supply was also improved. Improvement of sanitation system is also under perspective plan. ICTC
at Central Prison, Bangalore is also under perspective for testing HIV/AIDS etc. to the prisoners.
Kerala : Top priority and care is given to health and hygiene of prisoners. Adequate water supply
and sanitation facilities have been provided to the jails. Rain water harvesting has also been
implemented. All Central Prisons have Prison Hospitals. Police escort is providing while prisoners
visit hospitals.
Madhya Pradesh : For providing adequate water supply and proper sanitation facilities in the jails,
efforts are being made. Under scheme of modernisation of prisons, 206 works have been done by
the state government. Separate shaving razor is provided to the prisoners to prevent from HIV/AIDS.
Maharashtra : There are sufficient provisions to provide adequate water supply. The sanitation
facilities being utilised in the prisons are clean and hygienic. Medical attention are also given to
prisoners properly. There is control on spreading epidemic diseases in this region. Separate blades
are used for shaving of individuals.
Manipur : There is dedicated water supply scheme for Central Jail Sajiwa only. Old system of
shaving has been dispensed with and a separate disposable razor blade is being used to check
spread of HIV/AID among the prisoners.
Meghalaya : Adequate water is being supplied and hygiene is being thoroughly maintained.
Mizoram : Adequate water supply and proper sanitation facilities are available in all the jails. The
rain water harvesting system is being followed in the State. Garbage is converted into bio-gas.
Nagaland : Since jails in Nagaland are having moderate Prison Population only there are no such
water problems except only during dry seasons. Meanwhile, Medical facilities for the Prisoners are
“poor” because of not having regular Doctor in the Department. There was no sense of producing
alternative power energy but as directed we shall try to install Biogas system wherever feasibility
is found. Shaving of new system has been followed.
Orissa : Patient prisoners are shifted to outside hospitals for better treatment guarded by police
escorts party as deployed by Distt. Police Authority. Provision for provision of police escort party
for emergency medical attention will be implemented soon.
Puducherry UT : Adequate water is being provided to all the inmates. Sewerage Treatment Plant
is under construction at a cost of Rs.24.50 lakhs by PWD Prison Hospital is also constructed. Well
equipped Prison hospital is also there.
Punjab : Utmost concern is put on the aspect of health and hygiene and adequate supply of water
to the jails inmates. Police escorts for accompanying prisoners for shifting them to outside
hospitals is requested for but response is inadequate.
Rajasthan : Adequate water supply is available in the jails of Rajasthan. Doctors and other necessary
medical facilities are available for the treatment of the prisoners. On emergency the prisoners are
sent to civil hospital for better treatment. For savings of the prisoners, new blades are available
in the jails under the Rajasthan Jail Rules 1951.
Sikkim : Adequate supply of drinking water and proper sanitation has been provided to prisoners
alongwith adequate and proper medical facilities.
Tamil Nadu : The prison hospitals are presently managed by two Civil Assistant Surgeon supported
by sufficient number of para-medical staff to provide effective health care to the prisoners.
Prisoners requiring specialised treatment are referred to Government Head quarters hospital on the

17
advice of the Prison Medical Officer. With a view to eradicate TB/HIV among prisoners, DOTS/
ICTC centre has been established in all the prisons in the state.
Tripura : All prisons in the State have adequate water and sanitation provision along with medial
units in all prisons. In case of emergency prisoners are taken to the Hospital for proper treatment
with police escort and critical patient are sent outside the state for proper medical treatment as and
when referred by the Standing Medical Board. Municipal authority is taking all necessary action
regularly and responsible for removing the garbage. In order to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS,
separate blades are provided to the prisoners. However, the recommendation of the Committee will
be considered further.
Uttarakhand : All the prisons have adequate supply of water, proper sanitation and medical facilities.
West Bengal : State Government is taking steps on hygiene in the correctional homes like adequate
water supply and proper sanitation facilities.
Recommendation
General
2.2 The sub-Committee noticed and came across several problems in the jails visited by it. All
the problems have been explained in the preceding chapters. The Committee desires that the
concerned jails and the State Governments and also the Union Ministry of Home Affairs may look
into those problems and solve them at the earliest.
(Para 4.21.1 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.1 The Government of India has issued a comprehensive advisory on Prison Administration to
all the state Governments on 17.7.2009.
2.2.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : All the basic facilities such as food, clothing, bedding and medical facilities
are provided. Reformative measures are taken before release of prisoners.
Andhra Pradesh : No comments.
Assam : No comments
Bihar : No comments.
Chandigarh UT : Immediate solutions of the general problems is made as and when these come to
the notice.
Chhattisgarh : Possible action is being initiated.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : All the recommendations have been noted and steps towards
implementation of these recommendations, whenever applicable will be initiated.
Daman & Diu UT : UT Administration is taking all necessary action to solve the problem if any
in Sub Jail.
Delhi : Delhi Jails are being regularly visited by the Additional Sessions Judge and one Additional
Judge has been made in charge of each jail for visiting purpose. Detailed report is submitted to

18
High Court, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and DG, Prisons for taking necessary curative action. Press
is invited to cover important events inside the prison. NGOs are visiting jails to make the working
more transparent.
Goa : No comments.
Guiarat : Adequate funds are released by the State Government to bring about various reformatory
initiatives.
Haryana : Special attention is paid towards welfare of prisoners as well as of the staff. Grievances
of staff are taken into consideration on priority level.
Himachal Pradesh : To solve the problems of inmates sincere efforts are made.
Jammu & Kashmir : Many proposals have been submitted to the Govt. for improving the health
facilities, diet scale, wage earning etc. and many more steps have been taken to improve the
facilities Blue blankets have been introduced for the first time.
Jharkhand : Suggestions will be complied with in due course of time.
Karnataka : The State Government certainly would address these problems with all sincerity and
seriousness.
Kerala : Follow up action will be taken to tackle the issues explained in the report of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Madhya Pradesh : Suggestions of the committee will be taken care for implementation.
Maharashtra : The prison authorities have replied all the necessary point enlisted above.
Manipur : Jail Department Manipur is making all efforts to address the problems indicated by the
Sub-Committee to solve them as far as possible.
Meghalava : No comments.
Mizoram : Prisons in Mizoram are improving and by and large there is no problem as mentioned
in the aforesaid chapter.
Nagaland : As the jails in Nagaland have been construed for mere detention purposes during
insurgency period without having sense of correctional and reformatory programmes to implement
Model Jail Manual as recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee and the directives of
the BPR&D Home Ministry Delhi, all Jails in Nagaland are required to extend and over hauled the
entire infrastructures with maximum fund provided by the Centre without which implementation of
Model Jail Manual will be a vague only.
Orissa : As per the recommendations of the sub-committee, the problems explained in the
proceeding chapters, concerned authorities are taking all possible steps to solve the problems at the
earliest.
Puducherry UT : Nil
Punjab : Efforts are made to redress the grievances of inmates by jail authorities.
Rajasthan : A high level committee has been constituted by the state to give suggestion for prison
reforms.
Sikkim : Any problem faced by the Prison Administration is discussed during the meeting of the
Board of Visitors and subsequently placed before the State Advisory Board for further action with
the State.

19
Tamil Nadu : No comments.
Tripura : Without funding by the Government of India, addressing all issues raised by the sub-
Committee may be lengthy process and in some cases impossible to implement.
Uttar Pradesh : Government is taking necessary action to reduce the problems of prisoners in the
state.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented.
West Bengal : Govt. of West Bengal has expressed its gratitude to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs for going into the maladies affecting the prison system in the country
and reiterates its commitment in bringing about reforms in correctional system in the state.

20
20
CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendations
3.1 The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the scheme got a slow start due to delay
in preparation and approval of estimates and release of matching share by the State Governments,
expresses its concern that against the total released amount of Rs.1756.56 crore (with Central share
of Rs. 1315.14 crore and the States share of Rs. 441.42 crore upto December, 2008), the funds
utilized by States remained at Rs. 1375.53 crore which is 78.3% of the total amount. The
Committee also takes note that due to a variety of reasons, the implementation of the scheme has
been behind schedule by almost two years and the scheme has therefore been extended by two years
w.e.f. 1.4.2007 without affecting the total outlay to enable all the State Governments to complete
the entire work by 2008-09. However, the Committee is unhappy to note that even with the extended
tenure of the scheme, the States have not taken advantage of the same and the works are yet to
be completed.
(Para 4.1.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.1 Due to the initial teething problems, the scheme got a slow start. Because of this reason,
the scheme was extended by a period of two years to enable the State Governments to complete
the projects. As on 31.3.2009, i.e. the end of the scheme, an amount of Rs. 1346.95 crores had
been released to the State Governments against the total allocation of Rs. 1350 crores. An amount
of Rs. 3.05 crore which includes Rs. 1.51 crore to the State of J&K and rest of Rs. 2.44 crore
as uncommitted fund was surrendered.
3.1.2 The central share of Rs. 21.76 crore is lying unspent with the State Governments at the
end of September 2011  which is about 1.61% of the total release of central share.
3.1.3 W ith a view to review the physical and financial progress of the scheme, regular meetings
have been convened with all the State Governments to impress upon to complete the remaining
work as well as to utilise unspent balance. The recent meetings in this regard were held on
5.7.2011 via video conferencing and on 16-09-11 a comprehensive review meeting was held with
all the States/UTs. The next review meeting with State Governments/UTs is scheduled to be held
in November 2011.
Further Recommendations
3.1.4 The Committee has examined the issue in detail and made its observations and
recommendations in response to Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation
of the Committee in Para 3.3.5 of this chapter.
Recommendation
3.2 The extended tenure of the Scheme will come to an end on 31.03.2009. The Committee is
of the view that given the fact that barely a month has been left before the scheme would come

21
to a close, it would be unrealistic to expect that all pending works would be completed. That being
the scenario, the Committee urges upon the Union Home Secretary to urgently convene a meeting
of Chief Secretaries and DGPs and IG (Prisons) of all States so that brainstorming sessions could
take place to introspect on the achievement and shortcomings of the Central Scheme. Such a
conference would also provide opportunities to find out the reasons for the unsatisfactory
performance of some State Governments and also to acknowledge and encourage the good work
done by other States. The Committee is firmly of the view that such an exercise would be a good
prelude before giving concrete shape to the second phase of the Scheme. In this context, the
Committee underscores the need for getting an evaluation of the Scheme done by an expert body.
The Committee does not appreciate the idea of the Ministry to engage an external body for the
purpose. The Committee does not understand why MHA should look for an external agency when
an organization under its control, viz, Bureau of Police Research and Development is very much
competent to take up such a task. The Committee strongly recommends that MHA should entrust
the study of evaluation of the implementation of the Scheme to BPR&D.
(Para 4.1.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.1 W ith a view to review the physical and financial progress of the scheme, regular meetings
have been convened with all the State Governments to impress upon to complete the remaining
work as well as to utilise unspent balance. The recent meetings in this regard were held on
5.7.2011 via video conferencing and on 16-09-11 a comprehensive review meeting was held with
all the States/UTs. The next review meeting with State Governments/ UTs is scheduled to be held
in November 2011.
3.2.2 An All India Conference of Correctional Administrators was held on 8-9th September 2010,
which was inaugurated by the Hon’ble Home Minister and attended by the Secretaries (incharge of
Prisons) and DGs/IGs (incharge of Prisons). The views of the State Governments were exchanged
and as outcome of the conference advisories on “Best Prison Practices” and “Overcrowding in
Prisons” were issued to all States/UTs. As a follow up and continuous monitoring mechanism,
another All India Conference of Correctional Administrators is planned next year. This would also
put in place an oversight mechanism for better compliance to our advisories particularly in view
of recent negative media coverage of the prison administration in the country. A Compendium of
Advisories published in June 2011 has been circulated to all States/UTs for compliance.
3.2.3 As regards, mid term evaluation of the scheme of phase-I, Bureau of Police Research &
Development (BPR&D) neither has the requisite staff nor any expertise to carry out such an
evaluation. The matter was in any case, also taken up with the BPR&D and they had shown their
inability to carry out such a review. It was therefore decided that the mid term evaluation of the
scheme be entrusted to some private, reputed and independent agency. On the basis of the tender,
M/s Ernst & Young were awarded contract for the mid-term evaluation of the scheme. The
consultant has since submitted its interim as well as the final report. The suggestions/observations
of the consultant would be taken into account at the time of second phase of the scheme as and
when finalised.
Further Comments of the Government
3.2.4 The Home Secretary, during the course of his oral evidence before the Committee, stated
that the engagement of the external consultant was only to ensure that it could come up with a
report which was unbiased and which would give true picture of the conditions in jails.
3.2.5 However, the Committee takes note of the mandate of BPRD as described in the Annual
Report 2010-11 of the Ministry of Home Affairs which states as under:

22
“The BPR&D was set up in 1970 to identify the needs and problems of police in the
country, undertake appropriate research project and studies and to suggest modalities to
overcome the same. It was also mandated to keep abreast of latest developments in the
fields of science and technology, both in India and abroad, with a view to promote the use
of appropriate technology in police work. Over the years, this organization has been
entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring the training needs and quality of training in
States and Central Government, assisting States in modernization of police forces and
correctional administration.”
3.2.6 The Committee also notes from the same Annual Report of the Ministry of Home Affairs
that BPR&D has undertaken major research studies and activities during the year 2010-11 on the
Community Crime Prevention Programmes in the City of Chennai; Influence of certain Psychosocial
variable on Occupational stress and Psychological well-being among Women Police and Problem in
the Criminal Investigation with reference to increasing acquittals.
3.2.7 When the Committee sought to know experience/expertise and the skill that Ernst & Young
had for evaluation, the Home Secretary, responding on the issue stated that he was not aware of
the process of selecting Ernst & Young for evaluation of the scheme over the BPRD, however, he
would come back to the Committee with the details.
3.2.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs in a subsequent written communication further replied as under:-
“With reference to parameters for selection of M/s Ernst and Young... it is informed that
the selection of consultant was done by an open tender in which out of three eligible
bidders viz. (i) M/s Ernst & Young Private Ltd.. (ii) M/s Grant and Thorton India and
(iii) M/s Wipro Ltd., M/s Ernst & Young Private Ltd. finally qualified and accordingly the
assignment for evaluation was given to them.”
3.2.9 The Committee is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry and feels quite
concerned to note that the BPR&D had not requisite staff and expertise to evaluate the
Central Scheme of Implementation of Modernisation of Prison Administration despite the
fact that it has undertaken several research studies of high calibre. The Committee does
not buy the argument given by the Ministry. The Committee is of the considered view that
BPR&D should be provided the requisite staff to undertake this kind of evaluation in
future. However, the Committee hopes that the Ministry of Home Affairs would examine the
observations of the Ernst & Young and would leave no stone unturned in the
implementation of the recommendations made by the expert body.
Recommendation
3.3 From the above table, it could be seen that there is substantial shortfall in achievement of
physical targets in various components of the Scheme. However, keeping this in mind, the
Committee does not think the targets could be achieved within the remaining period of the Scheme.
It appears that there is going to be a drastic shortfall in the achievement of physical targets. The
Ministry may look into this aspect seriously to avoid its repetition before starting the second phase
of the Scheme.
(Para 4.2.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.1 W ith a view to review the physical and financial progress of the scheme, regular meetings
have been convened in this Ministry with all the State Governments to impress upon to complete
the remaining work as well as to utilise unspent balance at the earliest. The recent meetings in this

23
regard were held on 5.7.2011 via video conferencing and on 16-09-11 a comprehensive review
meeting was held with all the States/UTs. The next review meeting with State Governments/ UTs
is scheduled to be held in November, 2011.
3.3.2 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The observations of the Committee shall be
kept in mind at the time of second phase of the scheme as and when finalised.
Further Comments of the Governments
3.3.3 The Committee, after having a perusal of the revised Action Taken Notes and the
background note thereon, felt that there has been marginal gap between the allocation made by the
Central Government under the scheme and the amount actually spent. However, this near
achievement of the financial targets is not reflected in the physical targets. As may be seen in the
Annexure I, there are big gaps between the targets fixed and the achievements made under various
components. It has also been mentioned that in the recent review meeting held on 16
th September,
2011, the entire position was reviewed. The Committee sought to know the reasons for the
shortfall and whether the Ministry was satisfied with the physical targets achieved and the further
strategy to proceed about in the second phase of the scheme.
3.3.4 The Home Secretary during the course of oral evidence responding to the shortfall in the
achievement of targets stated as under:-
“.....this will depend on two things. One is because of the late start by some States. Some
States started early; some States started late and some States started very late. Those States
which started very late, by the time they started, the cost had gone up, and, therefore, they
utilized the funds in lesser number of prisons or barracks. That could be one. But this is
something, ....which needs detailed review. So, I will not attempt to answer it here. I will
delve into this further.”
3.3.5 The Committee understands that the unspent amount to the tune of Rs. 21.76 crore,
which is only a marginal gap for this near achievement of the financial target, is not
reflected in the physical targets because against the total number of 162 jails to be
constructed under the scheme, only 119 were constructed and out of that, only 87 jails got
operationalized. Further, against a total target of 1731 barracks, only 1572 barracks were
constructed and out of that, 1435 got operationalized. Again, against the target of 8803 staff
quarters, only 8568 staff quarters were actually constructed and out of that only 8304 staff
quarters got occupied. This is a sorry state of affairs. Now the basic question arises as to
whether the remaining unspent amount to the tune of Rs. 21.76 crore would be sufficient
to meet the expenditure for the remaining projects. Obviously not, because the delayed
projects would by now have undergone cost over run. Under the circumstances and as also
accepted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the whole matter needs a comprehensive review.
The Committee therefore recommends that the entire issue, including requirement of fund
in the 2nd phase of the scheme as well as funds required for completion of pending
unfinished works, may be comprehensively reviewed at the earliest. The Committee also
desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs may undertake a detailed review of lapses in the
implementation of the projects under the scheme in the first phase and apprise the
Committee of the conclusions so arrived.
Recommendation
Overcrowding in Prisons
3.4 The sub-Committee during its visits to various jails has found that one of the most
important hurdles coming in the way of prison reforms is the problem of overcrowding of prisoners

24
which is the root cause of most of the ills besetting the prisons. This problem could be solved only
by construction of additional barracks and new jails on priority basis. The Ministry of Home
Affairs should seriously introspect and discuss this aspect with all the State Governments before
launching the second phase of the Scheme.
(Para 4.3.1 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.1 The major thrust of the scheme of Modernisation of prisons (Phase I) was on the
construction of new jails/additional barracks with a view to reduce overcrowding in jails. Out of
total allocation of Rs 1800 crore, more than 55% were earmarked for this purpose. In line with
the observations of the Committee, substantial amount was proposed for the construction of new
jails/barracks in the second phase of the scheme. Since no second phase of the scheme is in place,
the suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The observations of the Committee shall be kept
in mind at the time of second phase of the scheme as and when finalised.
3.4.2 The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : At present there are 1026 inmates against capacity of 269.
Andhra Pradesh : No overcrowding. Out of authorised capacity of 16073 prisoners, there was
13629 prisoners lodged as on 16.9.2011.
Assam : With a view to reduce overcrowding in some Jails, expansion of 2 jails viz, District Jail,
Morigaon and Barpeta has been made. Three new District Jails have already been made functional
and construction of new Jail, Guwahati at Sarusajai with a capacity for 1000 inmates is going to
be completed to which the existing Central Jail Guwahati will be shifted. Steps have also been taken
for construction of additional two storied RCC building for 100 prisoners’ each in five District
Jails.
Bihar : By constructing two new jails, the sanctioned strength of Bihar Jails, overcrowding problem
has eased out.
Chandigarh UT : No overcrowding.
Chhattisgarh : To reduce the overcrowding problem new jails and additional barracks are being
constructed.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : No overcrowding.
Daman & Diu UT : There is no overcrowding in Sub Jail Daman & Diu. Overall capacity of Sub
Jails Daman & Diu is 120. As on date there are 40 inmates in Sub Jails, so no question of
overcrowding.
Delhi : There is overcrowding of Undertrial prisoners. To reduce the overcrowding problem new
jails at Mandoli, Narela and Baprola (openjail) are being constructed. Inmate population stood at
12536 as on 09-09-11.
Goa : There is no problem of overcrowding in the jails and Judicial Lock-ups of Goa. Excess of
under-trials will be sorted by strengthening of Sub-Jail, Sada.
Gujarat : On completion of ongoing project, an additional accommodation for about 7000 prisoners
will be created and problem of overcrowding will be solved.
Haryana : Haryana State has 18 jails having capacity of 16034 inmates against which the State has
15750 prisoners as on 16-9-2011. There is no overcrowding in jails of Haryana.

25
Himachal Pradesh : On completion of ongoing works the jail capacity will increase from 1131
prisoners to 1763 prisoners.
Jammu & Kashmir : In J&K there are 13 functional jails and the average jail population is 2300
to 2600. There is one Distt. Jail in Anantnag and two more are under construction in Kargil
and Pulwama under the Modernization of Prisons. Due to militancy in the State a few jails
are overcrowded. Taking this thing into consideration new distt. Jails are being constructed in
Phase-II with the capacity of 50 inmates each at Bandipura, Ramban and Kulgaon.
Jharkhand : Five new sub-jails of 300 prisoners capacity are in process of construction. Further
construction of sub-jails at three places and new District jails at two districts are in the process
of land acquisition. Hence the capacity of prisons in Jharkhand will be upto 14431 whereas average
population of the prisoners in the state is 17191.
Karnataka : Overall percentage of overcrowding in prisons is 6.51%. Action is being taken to ease
out the problem of overcrowding in prisons in the State of Karnataka.
Kerala : Overcrowding in jails of Kerala is main hurdle in Jail Reforms. There are 6500 prisoners
whereas the capacity is only for 4692. To overcome this problem seven new jails have been opened
in Kerala with authorised capacity of 356 prisoners. In addition to this 20 more jails are being
constructed. Many new blocks (9) are also being constructed.
Lakshadweep UT : No overcrowding.
Madhya Pradesh : The accommodation capacity of prisoners will be increased from 23524 to
30304 after construction of barracks and accordingly the overcrowding will decrease from 43.39%
to 10%.
Maharashtra : To reduce the overcrowding in prisons the Govt. of Maharashtra has already taken
necessary steps by constructing new prisons which will help in solving the problem.
Manipur : No overcrowding in the prisons of Manipur.
Meghalaya : To reduce the overcrowding in jails, new jails are being constructed.
Mizoram : To reduce the problem of overcrowding, additional barracks were constructed and
existing 6 jails were renovated under the scheme of modernisation of prisons. Three new district
jails are also being constructed by the state government.
Nagaland : No overcrowding. The prisoners are less compared with the other big States of the
country.
Orissa : On functioning of new jails and wards constructed under the scheme of modernisation of
prisons in full fledged manner, the overcrowding of prisoners will be solved.
Puducherry UT : There is no overcrowding in the Jails of UT of Puducherry. At present Phase-I of
Central Prison, Puducherry is constructed with capacity of 300 inmates. Financial assistance from
MHA is called for construction of Central Prison.
Punjab : With addition of new jails which are being constructed in the State the problem of
overcrowding will considerably ease out.
Rajasthan : As on 16-09-2011, 6.5% overcrowding. However, to reduce the overcrowding, new jails
and barracks have been constructed under the scheme of modernisation of prisons.
Tamil Nadu : As on 16-9-11 there is no overcrowding with 14293 inmates lodged as against
capacity of 21911 in 134 jails.

26
Sikkim : With the completion of two additional barracks at Central Prison, the overcrowding
problem will come down to nil.
Tripura : To reduce the problem of overcrowding, the State Government have constructed 7
additional prisoners wards in Jail and Sub-Jail. Besides, two new sub-jail and one Central prisons
with 1000 intake capacity are under construction. But due to discontinuation of Modernisation of
Prison Scheme all these works have slowed down for paucity of fund.
Uttar Pradesh : To reduce the overcrowding in prisons, additional barracks and new jails have been
constructed under the first phase of the scheme of modernisation of prisons which will increase
the capacity of 13030 prisoners.
Uttarakhand : No overcrowding
West Bengal : There is no overcrowding at the macro level. However, there is overcrowding in
some of correctional homes which the Department is trying to resolve by developing further
infrastructure.
Further Comments of the Governments
3.4.3 D uring the course of the oral evidence, the issue of overcrowding in various jails of the
country was raised by some Members of the Committee. The representatives of Ministry of Home
Affairs presented a rosy pictures of occupancy rate in the jails at 122.8 per cent. In 1374 prisons
against the authorized capacity of 3,07,052 the actual number of inmates are 3,76,969. However,
the Members of the Committee expressed concern over the languishing and the pathetic condition
of the inmates in some of the prisons due to overcrowding.
3.4.4 Responding to the query raised by the Members, the Home Secretary responded as under:-
“On over-crowding situation, overall the position of over-crowding has improved in the
sense that over-crowding has declined. But, Sir, these statistics need to be looked at more
closely. Prima facie, if you take overall numbers, over-crowding has declined. But if you
analyse it, you will find that over-crowding has declined because the occupancy in the sub-
jails or lower category jails is less. Whereas the occupancy in the district jails and central
jails is more than the capacity and bulk of the over-crowding lies there. So, the difficulty
in central jails and district jails is acute. If I recall the figures, in 2009 over-crowding in
district jails was to the extent of about 143 per cent; in central jail it was about 21 per
cent higher as against the capacity. Therefore, sub-jails comparatively have less population.
Over-crowding does remain a problem in district jails and central jails.”
Further Recommendation
3.4.5 The Committee is not happy to learn that the overcrowding has not decreased in
district and central jails even after completion of the 1st phase of the scheme. The
Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take stock of the latest status
of overcrowding in the districts and central jails and assess the requisite fund for combating
the problem of overcrowding there for ensuring the humane condition for the inmates as
prisoners are, after all, also the human beings. The Committee strongly recommends that
requisite funds may be provided in the second phase for capacity addition in the district and
central jails.
Recommendation
3.5 The Committee is disappointed with the routine reply of the Ministry. Although ‘Prison’ is

27
a State subject, the Committee feels that the Ministry should take the initiative for ensuring that
the State Governments comply with the Model Prison Manual. The Committee is of the considered
view that the young offenders/under trials need to be kept separately as it has been observed that,
when they are kept with other hardened criminals, they often commit more serious crimes after
release from Jails. The Committee desires that serious action may be taken to address this issue.
(Para 4.4.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.1 State Governments have been asked for adoption of Model Prison Manual circulated by the
Government of India in December 2003. The recommendations were forwarded to the States/UTs
for compliance. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are
given below:
Andaman & Nicobar : The new Model Prison Manual has been implemented and the new A&N
Islands Jail Manual 2004 has been prepared and is being followed. The young offenders/under trials
are being kept separately.
Andhra Pradesh : As per the Rule NO. 213 of A.P. Prison Rules, UTs and young offenders are
always kept separately. New AP Prison Manual prepared and will be submitted to Government for
approval.
Assam : A committee has been constituted by the State Government for revision of the Assam Jail
Manual in the line of the Model Prison Manual. All Superintendents of Jails have been instructed
to keep the young offenders/Undertrials separately from hardened criminals.
Bihar : In Bihar jails, young offenders/under trials are kept separately in under trial wards. There
are separate wards for hardened criminals. A sub-committee has been constituted under the
chairmanship of IG (Prisons) for revision of Bihar Jail Manual. And recommendations have been
compiled.
Chandigarh UT : As per Punjab Jail Manual, the Undertrial prisoners are kept separate from the
convicted prisoners in the jail.
Chhattisgarh : A committee has been constituted for examine the Model Prison Manual in the
context of Chhattisgarh State. The necessary action will be taken after the recommendations of the
committee.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : The recommendation for keeping young offender and hardened criminal
separately has been noted and the Jailor has been instructed to ensure that young offender and
hardened criminal are not kept in the same cell.
Daman & Diu UT : The profile of the Under trials/Convicts in the Sub-Jails indicates the absence
of hardcore criminals. Therefore, there is no scope for such situations.
Delhi : A new Delhi Prison Manual is under preparation in which the concept of modern prison
management as enshrined in the Model Prison Manual has been incorporated. Young offenders are
kept in separate Jail till the inmate completes his 21 years of age. Undertrial prisoners are kept in
separate jails then those are convicts.
Goa : This State has formulated the Prison Manual for Superintendence and management of Prisons
in Goa on the basis of the Model Prison Manual prepared by the BPR&D, New Delhi.
Gujarat : The formulation of new Gujarat Jail Manual is under consideration of the State
Government. In Gujarat all adolescent prisoners are confined separately in Junagadh District jail

28
only. Under trials are segregated from other prisoners at every jail. Habitual prisoners are kept at
Bhavnagar District Jail.
Haryana : Draft of Haryana Jail Manual to replace the existing Punjab Jail Manual has been sent
to Govt. vide this office letter No.2259 dated 3-3-2010. Young offenders/undertrials are being kept
separately.
Himachal Pradesh : The provisions of the Model Prison Manual are being examined and accordingly,
the same shall be inserted in the existing State Jail Manual shortly as the same is under
consideration of the State Govt.
Jammu & Kashmir : The Manual for the Superintendence and Management of the jails in the State
of J&K has been introduced in the year 2000. Which has the provision of segregation of adolescent
offenders. Educational programmes are in place in all the jails for the inmates. Model Prison Manual
is being amended as per the guidelines issued by MHA by constituting a Committee by the State
Government of J&K.
Jharkhand : As per the recommendation of the Model Prison Manual, the young offenders and
Undertrial Prisoners are confined separately to the extent possible, Exclusive young offenders wards
with enclosures have been constructed in most of the prisons.
Karnataka : Government has been examining the revision of Karnataka Prison Manual on the basis
of Model Prison Manual. Segregation of prisoners is made as per the prevailing Rules. No young
offenders/under trials are kept or clubbed with hardened criminals.
Kerala : Govt. of Kerala complied with the model prison manual. State Govt. enacted Kerala Prisons
and Correctional Service (Management) Act, 2010 to incorporate the guidelines of Model Prison
Manual. Juvenile Justice Act 2000 was also enacted which brought children below the age of 18
to 21 under Social Welfare Institution.
Lakshadweep UT : Undertrial prisoners are kept in Sub Jails and the long term prisoners are
transferred/shifted to central jails in the state.
Madhya Pradesh : According to Model Prison Manual adequate amendments have been done in the
Madhya Pradesh Jail Manual 1968. Young offenders are being kept in the separate wards of the
jails in Madhya Pradesh.
Maharashtra : In every prison in the region hardened and convicted prisoners are separated from
under trials as per classification rules and the precautions are being taken about their
communication. The IG of Prisons has also initiated steps to adopt and comply with the Model
Prison Manual.
Manipur : State Government is active processing a new Model Prison Manual for Manipur. The
efforts to separate young offenders and under trials are in process. The High Security Prison under
construction at Sajiwa is nearing completion the young offenders and under trial prisoners will be
separated. Once the High Security Prison construction is completed separate enclosures/sectors will
be made available.
Meghalaya : Jails in the State do not offer such scope for segregation.
Mizoram : As per the rules prescribed by the Jail Manual, young offenders/Undertrial prisoners are
segregated from the hardened criminals as far as practicable. In Aizawl District, the District Jail
Aizawl is utilised for detention of such young offenders.
Nagaland : The State Government has taken the Model Prisons Manual into active consideration but
so far no comments have been given by the State Government. Also all the jails were constructed

29
on emergency basis during 1970 and so, all the Jails except Central Jail Dimapur are not in the
proper shape for segregation of Prisoners. However the Department is taking serious views on this
matter and expected to improve the Jail infrastructure accordingly at the earliest.
Orissa : The Model Prison Manual is under study. The young offenders/UTPs will be kept
separately from other harden criminals after construction of separate wards.
Puducherry UT : On completion of Phase-II, segregation of different category would be possible.
Presently only two categories of undertrials are kept separate those charged with murder and other
charged with other crimes.
Punjab : With the construction of new jails the problem of classification/separation of various
inmates will be solved to a large extent. However it may be submitted that the young offender aged
18-21 are confined in Borstal Jail Ludhiana where they are given vocational training to help them
in rehabilitation after their release.
Rajasthan : Undertrial prisoners are kept separate from the convicted prisoners in the jail. A
committee has been formed by the State Government to give suggestions in respect of prison
reforms in the state.
Sikkim : Sikkim Prison Manual 2010 has been prepared on the lines of Model Prison Manual of
BPR&D The young offenders are lodged separately.
Tamil Nadu : Separate cells/barracks for lodging hardcore criminals are available in all Central
Prisons in order to ensure that they do not access the ordinary or first time offenders.
Tripura : The State Government has option either to adopt Model Prisons Manual or to frame or
follow separate manual considering the cost which may involve in the implementation of Model
Prison Manual framed by the Government of India. Hardcore criminals and convicted hardened
prisoners are kept in separate wards.
Uttar Pradesh : Young offenders are being kept separate in the prisons of the State.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is well addressed in the State
West Bengal : West Bengal have their own Correctional Services Act, 1992 (put to use since 2000)
which has detailed provision for classification of inmates. Young offenders and under-trials are
supposed to be segregated from repeat offenders and convicts.
Further Comments of the Government
3.5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that a Compendium of Advisories
was printed by the Ministry of Home Affairs and circulated to the States/UTs Governments for
implementation. When Committee sought to know the status of implementation of advisories at
the ground level. The Home Secretary could not give direct reply to this. He, however, stated
as under:
“you are right that we have given a number of advisories but there are two things, which
we need to understand as a system. One is that ‘prisons’ is a State subject and these are
funded by the States. There was a period when most of the State, barring one or two
exceptions, were in financially very difficult circumstances, and, therefore, when a State
goes through the difficult financial situation, the first thing, which takes a hit is the non-
Plan expenditure, and, unfortunately, police and prisons are in the non-Plan side. In fact,
that happens throughout the country, whether it is the State or the Union Government
department.”

30
Further Recommendations
3.5.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
for printing and circulation of Compendium of Advisories on Prison Administration.
However, the Committee feels that though everything appears to be good on paper, but on
a visit to any jail, one does not get a good impression of the conditions there. The
Committee recommends that the Central Government must give impetus to the proper
implementation of the advisories, including model prison manual.
3.5.4 The Committee also takes note of the fact that several States have yet to revise the
prison manuals on the basis of Model Prison Manual. The Committee recommends that all
the States and UTs should be advised to adopt the model prison manual without delay.
Recommendation
3.6 During its study tour to various jails, the sub-Committee found that many poor prisoners
were languishing in jails despite being granted bail due to their inability to provide surety. The
Committee feels that the State Governments have not been able to effectively invoke Sections
436A, 436(i) and 265  to 265  L of the Cr. PC, 1973  with the objective to reduce the overcrowding
and languishing of undertrials in jails. The Committee urges upon all the concerned authorities to
extensively use these legal provisions which would help in reducing the burden on the prison
infrastructure.
(Para 4.5.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The same was also forwarded to the ministry of law and justice and the national law
Commission for due awareness amongst the judiciary.
3.6.2 The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : No prisoner is languishing in this jail who has completed more than half of
the terms prescribed as a undertrial prisoner.
Andhra Pradesh : All the Unit Officers of this Department were instructed to take to this notice
of the concerned courts about the details of the prisoners who have completed (1/2) half sentence
as per the provisions of the new section 436-A Cr. P.C. as to enable the courts to release the
prisoners on personal bonds.
Assam : All Superintendents of Jails are regularly pursuing the Courts with the request for extensive
use of the legal provisions as laid down under section 167, 436(A), 436(i) and 265 to 265(i) of
the Cr. P.C. The Superintendents of Jails are regularly submitting the list of Undertrial prisoners
to the courts detained in jail more than 60 days and 90 days. The Judicial Magistrates are holding’
Jail Adalats’ in every month and disposing of some eligible cases in Jails itself.
Bihar : No poor prisoners were languishing in jails despite being granted bail. Jails are being
monitored regularly by Distt. Magistrates and Jail Superintendents, High court of Patna is also
monitoring the cases on monthly basis. Section 436A, 436(i) and 265 L of Cr.P.C, 1973 re
effectively invoked.
Chandigarh UT : The Lok Adalats are held in the Jail premises by their Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Chandigarh under the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and prisoners involved in
petty offences cases are released by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chandigarh on the spot.

31
Chhattisgarh : Many NGGs and Social Service Organisations are associated with the jails that help
the poor prisoners by depositing surety for their bail.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Necessary steps are being taken and the authorities are being requested
to invoke the appropriate sections case to case.
Daman & Diu UT : There is no such case in UT of Daman & Diu.
Delhi : The cases of undertrials who are unable to furnish surety are regularly taken up with the
District & Session Judge, Delhi for their release on relaxed surety condition. Special courts are
being organised for disposal of cases of Undertrial who are facing charges under the minor
offences. As on date 126 such courts have been organised and 5059 cases of Under trial prisoners
have been settled. In addition the plea bargaining courts are also being organised and through these
courts 666 cases have been settled.
Goa : All the under-trial prisoners who have been granted bail have been released after following
the required formalities. Action is also being initiated to invoke Sections 436A, 436(i) and 265 to
265L of Cr.P.C, 1973.
Gujarat : The recommendation needs to be pursued vigorously and requires immediate
implementation, followed by close monitoring by higher judicial authorities. Jail Department has no
role to play in this regard, However, necessary instructions have been circulated to all Jail
Superintendent to sensitize the undertrial prisoners about their rights under the law.
Haryana : This recommendation do not relate to prisons department. Action under Section 436A,
436(1) and 265L of the Cr.P.C are to be taken by the prosecution agency and judicial offices.
Himachal Pradesh : Section 436A CrPC has been invoked effectively. At present no Under trial
prisoner lodged in jails inviting application of S-436A CrPC.
Jammu & Kashmir : The points under this para pertain to judiciary and Police Department.
Divisional Commissioner & Sessions Judge shall visit the Jails once every six months and those
in the district when on tour. And Distt. and Sub-Divisional Magistrates visit jails once every quarter.
All regulations and orders are duly followed in letter and spirit.
Jharkhand : The list of prisoners covered under 436A, 436(i) or Cr.P.C are sent to the concerned
courts with prisoners petition for rules of P.R. Regular Jail Adalats also look into the matter.
Karnataka : Necessary circular instructions will be given to observe Section436 A and 265 to 265L
of Cr.P. CI Recommendation of the committee is also circuited to Supdts. of Prisons in the State.
Kerala : There is no prisoner languishing in jail after being granted bail due to their inability to
provide security. District level Committee can take decisions in the case of undertrials invoking
section436A, 436(1) as the Sessions Judge and Chief Judicial Magistrate are present to review the
long pending cases of undertrials.
Lakshadweep UT : Undertrial prisoners are kept in Sub Jails and the long term prisoners are
transferredlshifted to central jails in the state of Kerala.
Madhya Pradesh : Jail Department forwards the application to the concerned courts for necessary
action under section 436(A) and 436(i). No case has been handled under Section 436(A) to 436(i)
however, 32 cases have been handled under Section 265A to 265L.
Maharashtra : Efforts are being made consistently in case of needy prisoners to release them on
baiI/P.R. Bond by the District Legal Aid Authorities keeping in view the maximum punishment under
that particular section in which undertrial prisoner is confined as per provisions laid down in 436A,
436(1) of Criminal Procedure Code. Overcrowding in prisons is reducing by implementing the

32
procedure by Hon’ble High Court, Bombay in C.W.P NO. 1135 of 2005 on 22.10.2008 regarding
release of maximum undertrials admitted in bailable offences within seven days from their
admission in prison.
Manipur : Efforts are being made to effectively use the legal provision.
Meghalava : Instructions are being regularly issued to the Superintendent of Jails and such prisoners
are being regularly released under the provisions of the law.
Mizoram : With a view to reduce the overcrowding and languishing of Undertrial in jails, the
Magistrate hold Camp Court from time to time inside the jails in which Undertrial prisoners who
cannot be charge-sheeted within 90 days and detained for petty offences are released on personal
bonds.
Nagaland : Since Criminal Justice System are liberal in Nagaland, application or not application of
U/S 436, A/436(1)  and 265 to 265L of the CrPC 1973 does not arise. However any directives from
the Courts or Central Government for the Welfare of the General Public are strictly observed.
Orissa : Necessary steps have already been taken in different jails relating to release of UTPs U/
S 436A of Cr.P.C. and Plea Bargaining. Steps will be taken to invoke Section 436(1) & 265 to 265L
of the Cr.P.C. of 1973 as per recommendation of Government in Law Department.
Puducherry UT : Govt. of India has initiated a National Mission for delivery of Justice. A
communication has been received from M/o Law and Justice. A list of under trial prisoners have
been forwarded to Registry, High Court, Chennai for further action.
Punjab : It is for the judiciary to use the recent amended provisions extensively for the benefit of
the jail inmates.
Rajasthan : In every District, a committee has been formed under the chairmanship of Chief
Judicial Magistrate to review the cases of undertrials, in which cases of undertrials are being taken
every month.
Sikkim : Legal provisions are attracts in the grant of bail. However, it is seen that in most of the
cases bails are granted to the prisoners on furnishing surety of local citizens having landed
properties or any person(s) serving as government employee in the state.
Tamil Nadu : Poor undertrials are given sufficient legal aid through the Tamil Nadu legal services
authority and legal cells.
Tripura : Jail authority are giving all help for the release of poor prisoners as far as possible within
the scope of existing rules. Regarding invoking of Section 436A, 436(i) and 265 to 265L of the
Cr.P.C. 1973, the Home (Jail) Department has limited role in this matter except to move the Ld.
Court for speedy disposal.
Uttar Pradesh : From June, 2008 to April, 2010, a total number of 57784 prisoners have been
released under section 436 A and 436 (1) of Cr PC.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is being implemented
West Bengal : The Deptt. of Correctional Administration organised workshop with the correctional
services officials for awareness generation and with support from the Commonwealth Human
Rights Initiative (CHRl), developed simple leaflets on bail and release provisions under Section
436A, Cr.P.C for making the inmates aware of their right to bail/release etc.
Further Recommendation
3.6.3 The Committee notes the varying responses from the State Governments. While
some States are invoking the provisions under CrPC effectively, others have issued

33
instructions for implementation. The Committee is of the considered view that effective
implementation of legal provisions viz. Section 436 A, 436 (i) and 265 to 265 L of the CrPC
1973 would go a long way in reducing the overcrowding and languishing of under-trials in
various jails of the country. Therefore, nationwide awareness programme of these legal
provisions should be launched. In this regard, the “National Mission for Delivery of Justice”
launched by Union Ministry of Law & Justice is a step in the right direction which needs
to be further taken to the State Governments. The Government should start special fast
track courts for petty offences.
Recommendation
3.7 Contrary to the claim of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the sub-Committee, during its study
visits to the various States, found that the Model Prison Manual was not being implemented
properly. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should impress upon the State
Governments to implement the Model Prison Manual in its letter and spirit so as to maintain
uniformity in the prison administration throughout the country which will go a long way in
effecting prison reforms.
(Para 4.6.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.1 MHA has circulated the Model Prison Manual to all the States in 2003 for adoption.
Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary action.
3.7.2 The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : The Andaman & Nicobar Islands Jail Manual 2004 has been prepared on the
basis of Model Prison Manual and is being followed in this UT.
Andhra Pradesh : Most of the contents of Model Prison Manual were incorporated in the draft
Revision of Andhra Pradesh Prison Manual-2005.
Assam : The revision of Assam Jail Manual in the line of the Model Prison Manual is nearing
completion which will be followed in letter and spirit after approval of the Government. Some
important amendments have already been done in some relevant Rules of the existing Jail Manual
and the follow up action have been taken accordingly.
Bihar : The draft of new Bihar Jail Manual is under final stage of its completion, which is based
on the provisions of Model Prison Manual.
Chandigarh UT : Any Order with regard to adoption of the Model Prison Manual the same will be
complied with in letter and spirit.
Chhattisgarh : A committee has been constituted to examine the Model Prison Manual in the context
of Chhattisgarh State. The necessary action will be taken after the recommendations of the
committee.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : The recommendation of the Committee for implementing Model Prison
Manual has been noted and the staff of Sub-Jail Silvassa is being instructed to follow the Model
Prison Manual.
Daman & Diu UT : The Model Prison Manual prepared by the BPR&D is being examined.
Delhi : A new Delhi Jail Manual is in the process of drafting and the provision of model prison
manual have been taken into account while drafting this Jail Manual.

34
Goa : The Prison Manual formulated by the State is being implemented properly.
Gujarat : The Model Prison Manual prepared by BPR&D may serve as a broad framework within
which state Jail Manuals can be suitably revised. Revision of Gujarat Jail Manual is under
consideration of State Government.
Haryana : Draft of Haryana Jail Manual to replace the existing Punjab Jail Manual as applicable to
Haryana has been sent to the Govt.. However, the provisions of existing manual are being
implemented.
Himachal Pradesh : Directorate of Prisons, HP has already sent a proposal to the Govt regarding
implementation of proposal made in the Model Prison Manual. Same is under consideration.
Jammu & Kashmir : Comments mentioned at point 7 are submitted in this regard. Most of the
provision of the Model Prison Manual are incorporated in the Manual for the Superintendence and
Management of the Jails in the State of J&K.
Jharkhand : The Model Prison Manual is in the process of adoption.
Karnataka : Government has been examining the revision of Karnataka Prison Manual on the basis
of Model Prison Manual. Decision would be taken as expeditiously as possible.
Kerala : The State Government enacted the Kerala Prisons and Correctional Service (Management)
Act 2000 incorporating the guidelines of Model Prison Manual.
Madhya Pradesh : According to Model Prison Manual adequate amendments have be done in the
Madhya Pradesh Jail Manual 1968.
Maharashtra : Almost maximum provisions of Model Prison Manual 2003 are already included in
Maharashtra Prison Manual, 1979. The IG Prison is examining the provisions of the Model Prison
Manual 2003 and the Maharashtra Prison Manual 1979 will be modified suitably.
Manipur : State Government is actively processing a new Model Prison Manual for Manipur.
Meghalaya : No comments from the State Govt.
Mizoram : The draft Prison Manual based on the model prison manual of BPR&D/MHA is being
prepared and is expected to be completed very shortly.
Nagaland : With regard to implementation of Model Jail Manual, the Prison Department of Nagaland
is trying its best for effective implementation and taking keen interest in maintaining uniformity in
the Prison administration and status of the Prison Officers at par with Police in the State.
Orissa : The Model Prison Manual is under active examination of a committee of State Govt. After
receipt of the recommendation of the committee, a new Prison Manual of the state will be prepared
with necessary changes and shall be implemented in due course.
Puducherry UT : Proposal to constitute a Committee to study in detail the various provisions of
Model Prison Manual and existing Puducherry Prison Rules 1969 is under consideration of the
Government Notification for Prison Rules as per Model Prison Manual will be initiated by the
Government once the Committee is constituted.
Punjab : The Prison & Correctional services Act is being framed to cope with present need of
Punjab Prisons. On its approval, various recommendations and guidelines provided in Model Prison
Manual will be taken into consideration with suitable local changes.
Rajasthan : The jails in Rajasthan is maintained under the Rajasthan Jail Rules 1951 and also on
the basis of rules made from time to time. A high level committee has been formed by the State
Government to give suggestions with reference to prison reforms.

35
Sikkim : State prison manual is being framed on the lines of the Model Prison Manual.
Tamil Nadu : No comments.
Tripura : The State Government, being fully dependent on Central Government on funding, may not
be able to implement all provision of the said manual with existing financial resource under State
Plan. The Government of India may launch time bound programme by providing adequate financial
assistance to the State Government for implementation of this manual.
Uttar Pradesh : On the recommendation of Model Prison Manual, draft of the new Prison Manual
in U.P. State is being initiated.
Uttarakhand : The State Government is examining the adoption of Model Prison Manual and a
decision is likely to be taken shortly.
West Bengal : As they have their own Correctional Service Act which is proactive, the State’s own
Jail Code too is in the process of modification. It is supposed to be replaced by the Correctional
Services Rules and Correctional Services Code.
Further Recommendation
3.7.3 The Committee is surprised to observe that most of the State Governments are yet
to adopt the Model Prison Manual which is a stepping stone towards prison reforms. The
Committee underscores the significance of Model Prison Manual in maintaining uniformity
in prison administration. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should vigorously pursue the matter with the State Governments and ensure the effective
implementation of the Model Prison Manual and if needed suitable scheme for assisting
State Governments, as stated by the State Government of Tripura, may be formulated to
ensure effective implementation of the manual.
Recommendation
3.8 The Committee takes note of the disappointing reply of the Ministry. The guidelines for the
preparation of action plan by the individual States lay down specifically that all the States will
have at least one prison exclusively for women. The States which do not have prison exclusively
for women have to plan for the construction of at least one such prison with the capacity
depending upon the average number of women prisoners in the respective State. The guidelines also
lays down the requirement of creation of infrastructural facilities like creches for the accompanying
children of women prisoners, hygienic living conditions and provision of separate kitchen for
women prisoners. The Committee feels that the State Governments should be advised to give
priority to construction of separate women jails, repair and renovation of existing women jails and
provision of facilities such as creche for minor children lodged with their mothers; and hygienic
living conditions for the children and separate kitchen for women prisoners.
(Para 4.7.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.1 The Government of India has issued a comprehensive advisory on Prison Administration to
all the state Governments on 17.7.2009.
3.8.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from’ State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:

36
Andaman & Nicobar : This UT Prison have a separate enclosure for women prisoners (6 female
inmates lodged) and they are looked after by female guarding staff and no male is allowed to enter
into women enclosures. A separate kitchen is also provided. Due care is given to the children (upto
6 years) accompanying women prisoners.
Andhra Pradesh : Already 2 separate Prisons for Women exist in the State at Hyderabad and
Rajahmundry in addition to a separate enclosure at Central Prison, Kadapa where creche like
arrangements are made for small children of inmates to play and learn. However, separate kitchen
for women is difficult to open as the number of women prisoners is of very short stay.
Assam : The female prison population in Assam Jails is very less and can be accommodated in the
Jails in a separate enclosure as is done at present. The Superintendents of all Jails have been
instructed to provide facility of creches for the accompanying children of women prisoners. In  the
meantime some Jails, the female barracks have been repaired and renovated under the scheme of
Modernisation of Prisons.
Bihar : One exclusive female prison exists as a Mahila Mandal Kara, Bhagalpur. Many steps are
taken for welfare of women prisoners e.g. Distribution of sanitary napkins, vocational training
programmes like teaching sewing, embroidery; separate kitchen with LPG equipment, distribution
of new clothes on National festivals; also there is facility of creche for small children of inmates.
Chandigarh UT : A new Female Ward is being constructed adjoining the main jail building. All basic
facilities and also creche has also been opened in Jail Complex. Training in tailoring, embroidery,
bag making and also Computer education is imparted to female prisoners. Lady Doctor regularly
visits Female ward.
Chhattisgarh : The jails in the State have separate enclosure for women prisoners and they are
being kept in the separate female ward. Separate kitchen is also available. The children
accompanying women prisoners are also kept in fresh environment.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Number of inmates in this Union Territory are very small and normally
1 or 2 women Prisoners occasionally lodged for short duration. A Cell is exclusively reserved for
woman prisoners.
Daman & Diu UT : There is only one woman convict charged under section 302. There is a
separate Woman Cell in Sub Jail, Daman. Therefore there is no need to establish a separate jail for
women in UT of Daman & Diu.
Delhi : Delhi Prisons have a separate prisons for women offenders/inmates i.e., Central Jail No.6
where on an average about 480 women prisoners are kept against the sanctioned capacity of 400
prisoners. A woman prisoner can keep her child upto 6 years of age in the Prison and for that
creche and nursery facilities have been provided. There are round the clock medical services
provided to the prisoners by the female medical as well as para medical staff in well equipped
dispensary and MI room in the jail itself.
Goa :  Considering the very negligible number of women prisoners, it was felt that there is no need
to construct a separate women prison in the State. There is separate women cell in the jail
premises. Where all facilities are provided to women inmates.
Gujarat : New female prison is under construction at Vadodara which is about to be completed.
This female jail will be exclusively administered by female staff. Female staff have been sanctioned
by the Government. Separate female sections exist at every jails with adequate facilities.
Haryana : There is one Borstal Jail at Hissar having capacity of 355 prisoners exclusively for
women. Creches and other facilities like hygienic living condition and provision of separate kitchen
are available in the jail

37
Himachal Pradesh : In HP there are 67 women prisoners against authorised capacity of 91. The
living conditions of women prisoners are good and they live in hygienic conditions.
Jammu & Kashmir : Average population of prisoners remained 2300-2600 in the State which
includes women prisoners at a population of 85 to 100 in the 13 jails.. A separate women block
has been constructed. They are being provided all the facilities including modem kitchen and other
hygienic facilities where women prisoners are kept under the charge of female staff. Other
amenities which include food, clothing, shelter and nursery/elementary education as per the standing
instructions issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Jharkhand : Separate Women Jail in the state will be identified soon. Creches are functional in all
the prisons of the state. Separate kitchen for women is functional in Central Jail, Ranchi and
construction of kitchen in other prisons has also been planned and efforts are being made to get
it constructed at the earliest possible.
Karnataka : Old District Head Quarters Sub Jail Tumkur has been earmarked as Central Prison for
Women which is yet to start functioning. Separate female prisons at Bangalore, Dharwad, Belgaum,
Mysore, Bijapur, Gulbarga are also in the Phase-II plan for construction of female prisons.
Kerala : The Indian Jail Committee had recommended as far as in 1920 the establishment of
separate Jails for women prisoners or at least separate enclosures in Central Jails. Two separate
jails for women prisoners and 30 Jails have separate blocks for women prisoners. Adequate
attention is paid to health and hygiene etc.
Madhya Pradesh : In Central jails and District jail Indore where women prisoners are kept, creche
and other necessary facilities have been provided to the women prisoners accompanying children.
Separate kitchens are also made for women prisoners.
Maharashtra : There are already separate prisons for women functioning at Yerawada, Pune and
Byculla, Mumbai. There are pre-primary schools for children of women prisoners. Creche is also
functional in Yerawada Central Prison Pune.
Manipur : There is no exclusive Women Prison in Manipur. Women prisoner are lodged in Central
Jail Imphal and male prisoners shifted to Sajiwa. Exclusive Women Prison is included in 2nd phase
of Modernization Plan.
Meghalaya : The population of women prisoner is very nominal. The women wing is in a separate
enclosure with facilities for cooking, hospital, V ocational training centre and recreation rooms.
Nagaland : Nagaland Jail Department does not have a separate Jail for Women but felt necessary
to have a separate Jail for Women. There used to have some cases that Women Prisoners having
babies are facing problem in all with the other Male Prisoners.
Orissa : There is a separate prison for women at Sambalpur named Nari Bandi Niketan. In newly
constructed sub-jails under the Scheme of Modernization of Prisons, separate female wards with
separate kitchen facilities have been constructed. Facility of Creches for minor children lodged with
their mothers is also considered and steps are being taken.
Puducherry UT : The number of women inmates are less than 10. Therefore, a separate women
inmate yard has been provided but separate Prison is not feasible.
Punjab : There is already one prison exclusively for women where the facility of creche is also
available for children of women prisoners. Steps have been taken to improve the living conditions
women inmates as per the directives of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.
Rajasthan : At present Rajasthan State have two female jails at Jaipur and Jodhpur. Separate
enclosure for the women is available at all the jails in the States.

38
Sikkim : Construction of separate Prison for Women is not felt necessary due to very less number
of female prisoners. Construction of creche and separate kitchen for female prisoners will be taken
up in the second phase of schemes on Modernization of Prisons.
Tamil Nadu : Facilities are provided to the women prisoners in the State.
Tripura : There is a women Prison at Agartala. There are facilities for the education of the children
inside the Female Prison. Also there are separate ward for women in each district jail and sub-jail
with required amenities. Facilities such as creches, study room etc. are available at women prison.
Uttar Pradesh : Nari Bandi Niketan, Lucknow has been established for the convicted women
prisoners. Separate enclosures for women prisoners are also available in rest of the prisons in the
state, in which separate kitchens are also available. In 17 prisons in the state, separate hospital,
kitchen and creche have been established. Women prisoners are provided with 4 sari-blaows or
Salwar suit in a year along with one cardigan, shawl etc.
Uttarakhand : Women are lodged in separate ward exclusively meant for women with adequate
facilities.
West Bengal : West Bengal has two Correctional Homes exclusively for women inmates. One is in
Kolkata and other in a remote district. There are separate women enclosures with separate facilities
for women inmates.
Further Recommendation
3.8.3 The Committee desires to highlight the need for at least one separate jail for women
in each State with basic civic amenities. The Committee, on the other hand, finds that there
are only 18 jails for women in the country and many of the States have either separate
enclosures or separate wards for women which does not solve the purpose keeping in view
the problems being faced by women prisoners. The Committee strongly recommends for
setting up of at least one separate jail for women in each State with basic amenities.
Recommendation
3.9 The Committee recommends that steps should be taken to make the procedure of visits to
jail inmates transparent in all the prisons of the country and there should be a mechanism to get
the feedback from the relatives of the inmates. The Committee strongly recommends that modern
visitors’ chamber should be constructed in place of ramshackled ones in which there would be
transparent glass facade and intercom facilities so that the prisoners’ visitors can talk while looking
at each other.
(Para 4.9.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.9.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : As per Andaman & Nicobar Jail Manual 2004, this Deptt. Allows all the
inmates to meet their relatives and friends once a week (20-25 minutes) Separate Visitor’s room
has been provided with all amenities at the Main Gate of the Jail.
Andhra Pradesh : Construction of a Modern Visitor’s Chamber being a policy matter which will
have to be examined thoroughly.

39
Assam : In every Jail, there is a Visitor’s shed. There is no scope of passing in or out of any
objectionable articles due to fitting of expanded metal netting in the windows. Superintendent of
Jails have been instructed to think over the suggested process of interview depending upon the
security aspect of the jail and proceed accordingly.
Bihar : There are separate visitor shades constructed in most of the jails.
Chandigarh UT : New Interview room has been constructed in the jail and Modern visitor chambers
are being constructed.
Chhattisgarh : Modern Visitor Chamber is constructed in Central Jail, Raipur. Visitor Chambers will
be constructed in other jails of the State.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : A Modern Visitor Chamber will be constructed shortly in accordance
with the recommendation.
Daman & Diu UT : Time is fixed for visitors to meet their imprisoned inmates. A separate place
is earmarked for visiting the inmates face to face.
Delhi : Office of the Central Public Relation Officer has been established at Gate No.3 & 4 for
conducting the interview of visitors with their prisoners in hassle free environment. A visitor can
meet his visitor after collecting photo identity slip from the O/o CPRO where article brought by
him are thoroughly scanned and then he is sent to the concerned jail for holding of interview.
Goa : Modern visitor’s chambers will be constructed in order to maintain transparency between
inmates and visitors at Central Jail at Colavale
Gujarat : This recommendation seems to be agreeable.
Haryana : This suggestion would be taken care of while constructing new prisons. In old prisons,
the suggestions can be implemented in phases depending upon the availability of funds.
Himachal Pradesh : There is a separate room for interview in the jail premises for the relatives and
friends of the prisoners.
Jammu & Kashmir : The proposal for modern visitor chamber is also under active consideration
with the intercom system so that noise pollution is reduced and privacy maintained.
Jharkhand : Visitor Management System has been installed in all 26 prisons of the State through
e-governance. Transparent glass facade and intercom facilities will be included in 2nd Phase of
C.S.S.
Karnataka : Recommendations of the committee are being examined.
Kerala : Interviews and communications with prisons are allowed. They can communicate with
their friends and relatives.
Madhya Pradesh : Modern visitors chamber, intercom facilities has been included in the second
phase of perspective plan.
Maharashtra : System in interview rooms of prisoners is improved in most of the prisoners.
Intercom facility is not yet installed as possibility of untoward incidents and security threats cannot
be ruled out.
Manipur : Proposal for construction of a Modem visitors’ chamber with transparent glass facade
and intercom facilities in jails is under process under 2
nd Phase of Modernization.
Meghalaya : The suggestion will be given due attention.

40
Mizoram : Steps for construction of modern visitor chamber with transparent glass facade and
intercom facilities so that the prisoners and visitor’s can talk while looking each other, are being
contemplated.
Nagaland : Visitors of prisoners are not restricted unless a Prisoner’s interview is restricted by the
Magistrate. Their parents or family visits are always allowed and meeting with face to face in the
interview room are going on.
Orissa : Instruction for proposals for construction of modem visitor’s chamber in place of old ones
have been given to all Supdts. of Jails and sub-Jails.
Puducherry UT : Prison Department has initiated a project for computerization at a cost of Rs.25
lakhs. Inmate interview system is also purchased by the Prison Department.
Punjab : Visitors Chamber’s in Punjab jails are being modernized and will be taken up in the 2nd
phase of Modernization of Prisons Scheme.
Rajasthan : Visitor’s room has been constructed in all the jails of Rajasthan. Waiting shades are also
constructed in the jail premises.
Sikkim : Sufficient time is given to visitors of prisoners. Visitor Chambers are made spacious. At
a time 3 visitors of 2 to 3 minutes are allowed. Prison Barber is provided with sufficient blades
for shaving.
Tamil Nadu : Public Address Systems are being used to call the visitors who assemble in the
visitors chambers to allow them to interview the prisoners.
Tripura : The State Government is following Bengal Jail Code which does not provide the intercom
facilities for prisoners. However, in many jails visitors chamber has been provided where visitor
may visit and talk to the prisoners face to face. Iron net is provided in the prisoners’ Interview
Room so that their faces are visible to each other.
Uttar Pradesh : Visitors chambers have been constructed in five old prisons in the state. Complaint
boxes have been provided in the prisons. The new prisons in the state have been constructed with
the view to provide visitors chambers etc.
Uttarakhand : The required construction works shall be carried out to facilitate the implementation
of this recommendation.
West Bengal : The State Government is introducing a transparent visiting system in phases, like
replacing the old ram shackled chambers with transparent glass facade etc.
Further Recommendation
3.9.2 The Committee notes that the construction of the modern chamber for visitors in
most of the States is either at contemplation/proposal/examination stage. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Union Ministry of Home Affairs should vigorously pursue
the matter with the State Governments to ensure implementation on the ground level.
Moreover, in some States viz. Punjab, Haryana, Manipur, Jharkhand, etc., implementation
of this recommendation has not been taken up due to non availability of fund and also
due to the fact that initiative to commence the work is dependent upon the funds to be
released in the second phase of the scheme, which underscores the need for continuation
of the scheme. The Government therefore, should note this fact and ensure the
commencement of the second phase of the Modernisation of Prison Administration at the
earliest. In the second phase, emphasis should be laid on the construction of modern
visitor chambers.

41
Recommendation
Telephone facility for inmates
3.10 The Committee recommends that telephone facility should be provided in some selected
prisons of the country on a trial basis. The inmates could use this facility in the presence of a
jail staff. The telephonic conversation could also be taped which would help in tracking the
connections of the hardened criminals. In the opinion of the Committee, telephone facility for
inmates could check illegal use of mobile phones in the prisons.
(Para 4.11 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : The matter for providing telephone facilities for inmates as prescribed in new
A&N Jail Manual,2004, is under consideration. Mobile Jammer is installed to detect the illegal use
of mobile phones.
Andhra Pradesh : The proposal for providing telephone facility to all the inmates is under
examination of the Government.
Assam : For taking a decision on this facility, discussion with all Superintendents of Jails is
required.
Bihar : Bihar Govt. has decided to install telephone booths inside the jails for prisoners with some
security restrictions.
Chandigarh UT : Necessary action will be taken in due course of time.
Chhattisgarh : No telephone facility has been provided to the prisoners in the jail by the State.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : For the time being the telephone facility is not being provided,
however, in future the recommended facility will be provided.
Daman & Diu UT : Telephone facility is not provided to the prisoners but the recommendations
of the Committee are duly examined.
Delhi : Hon’ble Delhi High Court has extended the facility of telephones to foreigner prisoners to
remain in contact with their families as they are not able to get their family visitors. Only
emergency telephone facility is available for Indian prisoners like serious sickness/death etc. and no
telephones in routine as this facility could be misused.
Goa : Telephone facility is available in Jails/Judicial Lock Ups. Telephonic conversations are closely
monitored by security personnel. Mobile phones are not allowed.
Gujarat : A proposal to set up telephone booth for the prisoners at Ahmedabad Central Prison and
Vadodara Central Prison is under consideration of Government.
Haryana : Department has no scheme at present to implement the same. A decision would be taken
on it depending upon the feed back after visiting the prisons.
Himachal Pradesh : For providing telephone facilities the process is under consideration with the
Government.

42
Jammu & Kashmir : The present security scenario in J&K State does not permit the Govt. to
provide such facilities to the prisoners who are lodged in connection with the prevailing situation
of J&K including crime.
Jharkhand : The Government has in principle taken a decision to install telephone facilities with
voice recording system. Central Jail Ranchi is in the process of installation of the same and will
be replicated in other prisons also.
Karnataka : Karnataka Prisons Department has already introduced Telephone facility for inmates
across 7 Central Prisons in the State. Inmates can converse with their spouse.
Kerala : This facility exists only in selected Jails such as Central Prison, Open Prison and Women
Prisons. Coin Box facility has been introduced and inmates can make calls.
Manipur : Providing telephone facility for inmates on trial basis is under active consideration by Jail
Department Manipur.
Madhya Pradesh : The State Government has provided incoming telephone facilities for inmates in
8 Central jails and 22 District jails.
Maharashtra : There are already security threats to the Prison administration from hardened
criminals who are lodged in Prisons. Therefore, providing the telephone facility to few prisoners
and withholding the same for other prisoners would attract discriminatory utilisation of such
facility.
Meghalaya : Telephone facility can be provided and PCO installed/opened in jails with facilities for
recording the conversation.
Mizoram : Telephone facilities in the prisons are being introduced.
Nagaland : So far the use of Telephone for the prisoners has not been realised in our jail. However,
we shall try to install as per recommendations on experimental basis in one or two jails.
Orissa : Directions to Supdt. of Circle, Distt. Jail, Special Sub-Jails are given for giving facility
of Emergency use of office telephone in presence of one responsible officer by inmates. Tapping
of telephonic conversation of inmates for tracking down hardened criminals is also there.
Puducherry UT : A Coin Collecting Box Telephone (CCBT) facility has been introduced at Central
Prison, Puducherry.
Punjab : Telephone facility in selected prisons is useful so as to curb the illegal use of mobile
phones, which is at present a big problem.
Rajasthan : A high level committee has been constituted to examine and give suggestions for prison
reforms in the State.
Sikkim : Prisoners are allowed to talk to their parents and relatives in the telephone (hands free)
in presence of Prison officers in the language understood by such Prison Officer.
Tamil Nadu : Proposal to install Public Telephone System in all Central Prison/Special Prison for
Women has been sent to the State Government.
Tripura : Existing Bengal Jail Code adopted by the State Government does not allow the use of
telephone and mobile for security reason. This restriction should be continue as security measure.
Uttar Pradesh : It is not possible to provide the telephone facilities to prisoners due to security
reasons.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is under consideration of the Govt.

43
West Bengal : State Government has introduced telephone facilities for inmates at Dum Dum
Central Correctional home on a trial basis. It is totally secured and paid facility. One can call on
pre-notified numbers twice a week for 40 minutes at a rate of Rs.70/-  per month. V odafone is
providing the service.
Further Comments of the Government
3.10.2 The Members of the Committee, during the course of the presentation felt that the issue
of misuse of cell phones in prisons is a ‘serious menace’ and observed that there have been many
instances where the few gangsters who were inside the jails, were controlling their subordinates.
The Committee desired to know the concrete steps taken/being contemplated by the Ministry of
Home Affairs to completely eradicate the menace of misuse of cell phones in prisons.
3.10.3 Responding to the query, the Home Secretary expressed as under:-
“On the misuse of cell phones in jail, off and on, raids are carried out to recover cell
phones but they do manage to smuggle phones inside jails again and again. Some States
have deployed jammers, but not all States. In some cases, we find it more useful to allow
the cell phones because that enables us to monitor conversation and see what is
happening.”
3.10.4 Responding further to the query on the nexus between jail officials and the prisoners and
committing crimes like drug trafficking in collusion and therefore, the dire necessity to monitor that
situation, the Home Secretary stated that this problem has been concerning them and has been
concerning the States.
Further Recommendations
3.10.5 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in 142
nd Report that telephone
facilities may be provided in select jails on trial basis to inmates as the measure would
check illegal use of mobile in the prison and also track the connection of hardened
criminals. Wherever necessary, Jammers may also be installed.
Recommendation
Wages of Prisoners
3.11 The Committee is of the firm opinion that daily wages of the convicted prisoners working
in the prison workshops need to be increased. Simultaneously, these prisoners should also be given
the option of working extra hours to earn more money. The Committee also desires that under trials
should be given an opportunity to work in the prison workshop, if they willingly agree to do so.
(Para 4.13.1 ibid)
Action Taken
3.11.1 The Government of India has issued a comprehensive advisory on Prison Administration to
all the state Governments on 17.7.2009
3.11.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : Prisoners wages have been increased by the A&N Admn and paying the
wages for Skilled Rs.24/- and Semi-Skilled Rs.18/- per day per head. Undertrials are allowed to
work.

44
Andhra Pradesh : The term “wages” changed to “incentives” and revised as follows- skilled
workers in Open air jails –Rs.70/-, skilled prisoners in prison industries-Rs.50/-, semi-skilled
prisoners –Rs.30/- w.e.f. 6-8-10.
Assam : Government has enhanced the wages payable to the prisoners with effect from 1.1.2010.
There is a provision of engagement of U.T.Ps in works inside the jail only if they desire to work
for which they are entitled to wage at the specified rate.
Bihar : Under the chairmanship of IG Prisons, a committee has already been constituted for fixing
the wages for hard, medium and light labour.
Chandigarh UT : Wages of prisoners have been increased by Chandigarh Admn. From Rs.8/- to
Rs.10/- and Rs.12/- to Rs.20/-, 25/- and 30/- per day. Half of the wages are deposited in Banks
for use by prisoners in case of emergency.
Chhattisgarh : Proposal is being considered by constituting a committee to enhance the wages of
the prisoners.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Since prisoners are stayed for short time span, recommendations are
not applicable.
Daman & Diu UT : There is no scope for creating work opportunities to prisoners for earning
wages, being in very small number of inmates.
Delhi : Tihar convicts are given upgraded scale of wages against their labour. There is big increase
in the wages of Un-skilled, Semi-Skilled and Skilled labour. New Wage Scheme implemented in the
prisons and provision of Victim Welfare Fund was made. According to this provision 25% of the
wages earned by convicts are credited to this Fund. Option of working extra working hours is also
made and they can earn more wages for that.
Goa : Prisoners are being paid as wages with deduction towards Common Victim Fund as
Rs.70/- -Skilled; Rs.50/- -Semi-skilled and Rs.40/- -Un-skilled prisoner. However, these are being
revised.
Gujarat : Rates of wages have been enhanced with effect from 16.12.2009. Undertrial prisoners are
given opportunity to work if they desire.
Haryana : Wages of prisoners are revised as Skilled: Rs.40/- per day, Semi-skilled: Rs.25/- per day
and Un-skilled: Rs.20/- per day.
Himachal Pradesh : Wages to the prisoners are provided as per the rate fixed by the Government.
At present for all wages Rs. 120/- are provided and for weaving, tailoring etc. they are getting
good rates.
Jammu & Kashmir : Wage earning scheme and canteen facilities has been introduced in the State.
Skilled convicts are paid Rs.24/- per day as wages out of which 1/3 goes to convict, 1/3 to victim
and 1/3 to Govt. Besides under trials prisoners can also avail this facility. Proposal for revision of
wages is also sent to the Govt. e.g. 10% to be credited to Govt.; 45% to prisoners and 45% to
Victim Relief Fund.
Jharkhand : Daily wages must be increased and should be linked automatically with the price index.
Security aspect must be taken into consideration for extra hours to work.
Karnataka : The State Government is examining the issue of revision of rates of wages given to
inmates working in the prison workshops.

45
Kerala : As per Kerala Prison Rules all able bodied undertrials shall be provided with labour if they
are willing and shall be treated on par with the convicted prisoners in the matter of payment of
wages.
Manipur : Prison workshops for imparting vocational training to inmates were stopped due to jail
riots. However, the wages of convict prisoners was revised as per Supreme Court’s Order and
Judgement dated 24.9.98. This scheme was also applicable to under-trial prisoners who work
voluntarily.
Madhya Pradesh : The wages of prisoners have been revised from 2008 and accordingly trained
prisoners are getting Rs. 27/-, untrained prisoners are getting Rs. 21/- and prisoners who are
serving in jails and field are getting Rs.10/- per day.
Maharashtra : The wages are being given in accordance with minimum wages Act in force in the
State. A committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of IG Prisons for further revision
of scale of wages.
Meghalaya : Prisoners are being paid wages for the labour they do at the approved rates approved
by the Government.
Mizoram : The existing wage is being reviewed. Undertrials are also allowed to avail working in
prison workshop on wage system.
Nagaland : As we have introduced Mora making and Tailoring in Jails, the State Government has
fixed wages in three categories: l.Skill 2. Semi-Skill and 3. Labour and the Prisoners, those who
are working in the said works are enjoying as accordingly to their capacity and experiences.
Orissa : A proposal for enhancement of daily wages of the convicted prisoners is under
consideration.
Puducherry UT : The issue of increasing working hours by inmates will be examined by the Model
Prison Manual Committee.
Punjab : Prisoners in Punjab jails are being paid wages at the rates, Unskilled Rs.8/-, Semi-skilled
Rs.10/-, Skilled Rs.12/-. Under trials are also encouraged to work if they so desire in the jail
factories.
Rajasthan : At present skilled prisoners are given Rs. 46 and unskilled prisoners are given Rs 44
for as wages in the jails. Due to large number of convicted prisoners, it is not possible to give
work to the undertrials.
Sikkim : Skilled and Unskilled prisoners are paid the wages at the rate of Rs.15 and Rs.12
respectively. They are given the option to work on holidays for extra wages. Even under trials are
given the opportunity to work and earn wages.
Tamil Nadu : As per Government order the wages are paid to the prisoners from 20.10.2000
onwards to till date. The proposal for further enhancement of wages is under consideration with
the State Government.
Tripura : Regarding increase of daily wages of prisoners, the Government of India may come out
with specific uniform policy. For giving opportunity to Undertrial to work in the prison workshop
may not be feasible as the stay of same Undertrial is very short and depend on the nature of case.
Uttar Pradesh : The wages of the prisoners are revised from time to time.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is under consideration of the Government.

46
West Bengal : A Committee for enhancement of wages of inmates was constituted by the State
Government. Regarding wages to under-trial inmates, willing ones are given work and wages
against work at the same rate as those of the convicts on rigorous imprisonment. Department is
promoting alternative initiatives like formation of Self-help Groups/Societies of inmates to earn their
livelihood while in correctional homes.
Further Recommendation
3.11.3 The Committee observes that the daily wages of the convicted prisoners are meager,
as low as Rs. 8/- to 20/- in the State of Punjab, only a few States give good wages viz. in
Himachal Pradesh prisoners are provided Rs. 120/-. The Committee recommends that all
State Governments be instructed to bring forth suitable revision of the wages to the
prisoners in all the jails. The Committee also recommends that the term ‘incentives’ be
used in jails instead of the word ‘wage’ as is used in Andhra Pradesh because incentive is
a better term for payment to the prisoners in lieu of work. The Committee further desires
that the steps taken to encourage under-trials to work in the jails be also furnished by the
State Governments. The Committee also endorses the view of the State Government of
Tripura that suitable specific uniform policy for revision of wages to prisoners may be
formulated by the Union Government. Initiatives like formation of self-help groups of
inmates as promoted in West Bengal may also be replicated in other States.
Recommendation
Literacy among Prisoners and Vocational Training
3.12 The Committee desires that there should be an effort to achieve total literacy among prisoners
across the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be facility of
correspondence courses in vocational disciplines in the prisons and degrees/diplomas should be
awarded to the prisoners after successful completion of their course so that they could lead a
normal life in the mainstream of society, after their release.
(Para 4.14.1 ibid)
Action Taken
3.12.1 The Government of India has issued a comprehensive advisory on Prison Administration to
all the State Governments on 17.7.2009. An advisory regarding guidelines for education programme
for prison inmates has also been issued on 15.6.2011 to all States/UTs.
3.12.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : An Adult Education Centre is being run by this department with the help of
Education Department where all illiterate are taught at least how to sign and interested prisoners
are also provided chance to pursue higher studies.
Andhra Pradesh : At present prisoners are imparted practical training-cum-production in certain
trades by National Academy of Construction, Madhapur, Hyderabad.
Assam : In some Jails primary level education is given to the illiterate prisoners. In some jails there
is no full time appointed teacher, the literate convicts are engaged or imparting education to the
inmates. The Superintendent of Jails have been instructed to contact the DRDA and the District
authority and request them to extend the benefit of some training programmes on vocational
subjects.

47
Bihar : More than 1500 prisoners have been reported to have benefited from the training provided
to inmates for various fields like computers, typewriters, embroidery, sewing machines etc.
Chandigarh UT : Education for illiterate prisoners with the help of Social Welfare Deptt. IGNOU
Centre has also been set up in Jail for higher education.
Chhattisgarh : Initiatives are being taken to literate the prisoners of the State.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Since prisoners are stayed for short time span, recommendations are
not applicable.
Daman & Diu UT : Recommendation will be examined for implementation at the earliest.
Delhi : Delhi jails are pioneer in starting technical courses in collaboration with Directorate of
Technical Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and NGOs. Higher studies facility from IGNOU is also
provided to those who want to go for higher education.
Goa : Literacy classes are conducted in jails with help of co-ordinator of Prison Ministry and
NGOs from Goa. Computer education is also provided. Distance learning, correspondence courses
are also for those who want to avail such facilities.
Gujarat : There exist study centres of Indira Gandhi National Open University and Dr. Baba Saheb
Ambedkar Open University at Ahmedabad Central Prison, Vadodara Central Prison and Junagadh
District Jail. It is being considered to establish study centres at other District jails also. Prisoners
are getting higher education and vocational education. V ocational activities are being conducted in
all jails with special emphasis for such programmes for female and convict jail.
Haryana : Jail factories are run to train the prisoners so that they could get employment on their
release. They are imparted training for making chemical detergents, cutting and tailoring etc.
Himachal Pradesh : All concerned Superintendents have been directed to send a list of prisoners
interested to join correspondence courses and the local branch of IGNOU shall be accordingly
asked to organise courses in prisons as per the requirement.
Jammu & Kashmir : In addition to imparting vocational programmes, adult education programme
to the prisoners, distance learning through IGNOU/ Special study centres are established in Distt.
Jail Jammu, Udhampur and Central Jail KB Jammu is also taken into consideration.
Jharkhand : V ocational course like computer literacy programme, certificate course in computer
education, senior secondary and higher education are already functional through National Institute
of Open Schooling/IGNOU. Total literacy and education upto class VIII is going on under like
agencies of Sarva Siksha Abhiyan.
Karnataka : Prisoners are given opportunity to pursue their studies through Open Universities at the
Department’s cost.
Kerala : All Central Prisons and Women’s Prison have one post of teacher for imparting primary
education to the prisoners. 10 inmates attended the SSLC examination from CO Kannur and 9
passed. Indira Gandhi Open University has expressed willingness to start educational programmes.
Madhya Pradesh : CIDC, New Delhi has started Engineering Diploma Training course in Central
Jail Bhopal for the prisoners from year 2008. Degree courses have also been started by the IGNOU
and Bhoj Open University for the prisoners. Two ITIs are being established in District jail Betul
and Dhar.
Maharashtra : Prisoners are provided with facilities to pursue primary, secondary and even graduate
and postgraduate education as well as computer education. Training in different skills continue to

48
be imparted to the prisoners with a view to enable them to earn their living and rehabilitate
themselves on release.
Manipur : There is no adequate infrastructure for rehabilitation of skilled prisoners. However, it is
proposed to take up Mat making by local ‘Kouna’ cane and bamboo works, wood carving and
furniture making etc. to inmates.
Meghalaya : In some jails in the State, non formal adult education are being imparted to those
prisoners will to learn. The IGNOU has set up a special study centre in Shillong Jail for those
inmates who wants to take up correspondence course.
Mizoram : Adult education programmes are being introduced in prisons in the State with the
collaboration of Adult Education Wing of the Directorate of School Education for the illiterate
prisoners. For those who want to pursue higher education, the Study centre of IGNOU is opened
at Central Jail, Aizawl.
Nagaland : As stated on Jail infrastructures we have no such feasibility to introduce in our Jails
till now but we shall try our best to introduce such Literacy Programme and when State
Government provided fund for such programme.
Orissa : Total literacy campaign has been launched in different jails in collaboration with the Mass
Education Department. Adult Education Programme is also being carried out in jails through the
State Resources Centre, Orissa jails. Full time teachers have been engaged in 23 jails to impart
primary education. Computer Training centres have been started in Circle Jail, Berhampur and Distt.
Jail Bolangir by active support of NGOs. Library facility and also Distance Education under IGNOU
are also provided.
Puducherry UT : Prisoners are encouraged to take up correspondence courses.
Punjab : Jail inmates are provided full opportunity to improve upon the educational qualifications
so that they may lead a normal life after release from jails.
Rajasthan : To literate the prisoners, literacy programmes are being initiated in the jails with the help
of literate prisoners, Adult Education Committee, Rajasthan Education Extension Committee and
different NOGs. IGNOU has also established their study centre at Central Jail Jaipur.
Sikkim : The State Prison Administration has put an earnest effort to achieve total literacy among
the inmates. Education is made compulsory to all prisoners while in custody. A full-fledged library
is opened and made compulsory. Further studies are also encouraged.
Tamil Nadu : In Tamil Nadu every Central Prison has a School where elementary education is
imparted. Adult education is imparted to aged prisoners under adult education programme.
Professional courses are also conducted by the reputed Universities.
Tripura : Prisoners are given scope to pursue regular educational course from Madhyamik standard
to post graduate courses. V ocational training is also provided in basketry, weaving, tailoring,
printing press etc. However, the State Government is taking initiative to modernise and revamp the
vocational training programme.
Uttar Pradesh : Technical as well as basic educations are being provided to the prisoners in the
state. For higher education, three prisons have the facilities of IGNOU classes.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is being implemented.
West Bengal : Facilities for studying different courses through correspondence and distance learning
mode are extended to the inmates V ocational courses are also being initiated.

49
Further Comments of the Government
3.12.3 Some Members raised the issue of access of inmates to education including vocational
education and also sought to know whether education could be made compulsory in the prisons
so that when the prisoners come out of the prison they could lead a decent life with their own
means of livelihood.
3.12.4 Responding to the query the Home Secretary stated that most States have now been trying
to introduce some facilities for education of their prisoners. They are also trying for facilities for
prisoners to be able to give exams from within the jails. The Home Secretary further added that
the Government can not compel the undertrials to undertake education but the convicted inmates
can be persuaded to undergo some education or professional course.
Further Recommendation
3.12.5 The Committee feels that facilities of access to education needs to be examined
thoroughly because undertrials in the age group of 18 to 30 years constitute a huge section
of the prisoners. The Committee recommends that the undertrials should also be motivated
to pursue vocational education of their choice.
3.12.6 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by various State Governments in
imparting literacy including higher education through IGNOU to the prisoners. It, however,
appears that all the states are not providing vocational/technical education to the prisoners.
The State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and NCT of Delhi are doing some pioneering
work in imparting Engineering courses and hopes that other State Government would follow
the suit and make arrangements for similar professional courses for the prisoners. The
Committee further desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue with other State
Governments including Manipur and Nagaland to put in place adequate infrastructure for
introducing literacy programmes in various jails of the States.
Recommendation
3.13 The Government may consider opening of ITI-like institutions within the jail premises to
impart industrial training in various disciplines to the inmates, which would go a long way in
rehabilitating them after their release. In thi8 context, the State authorities can also consider
converting existing prison workshops into ITIs.
(Para 4.14.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.13.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman & Nicobar : This will be taken into account for future guidance.
Andhra Pradesh : There are no such institutions in any jails in the State. Proposals are being sent
to Director, Technical Education for opening ITI within the jails.
Assam : This is being taken up with the Government and also the Industry Department to let us
know for opening of I.T.I like institution of Jails for imparting training in various discipline to the
inmates.
Bihar : As there are already industrial training in several sections, there is no need for opening of
ITI in prison workshop.

50
Chandigarh UT : Necessary action will be taken in due course of time.
Chhattisgarh : Ashta Petrol pump and Astha Motor Workshop are working in the Central Prison
Raipur.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : Since prisoners are stayed for short time span, necessary training with
short span of time is not possible.
Daman & Diu UT : There are no prison workshops. Therefore, the question of converting
workshop into it is does not arise.
Delhi : The Prison Administration strongly recommend opening of ITI like institutions within jail
premises so that the prisoners are involved in different vocational activities and are given
certificates by the ITI for rehabilitation of the prisoners after their release from jail.
Goa : Being very negligible number of inmates in Sub Jail in Goa, it is not feasible to install it is
in the jails.
Gujarat : This recommendation is agreeable.
Haryana : MES (Modular Employment Scheme) training are being provided in the jails by the
S.R.Industrial Training Centre at Ambala.
Himachal Pradesh : There are technical masters posted in important jails and they are providing
training to the inmates in the field of tailoring, weaving, blanket making carpentry.
Jammu & Kashmir : There is need to attach the prisoners with ITI institutions for running the skill
development programmes in jails.
Jharkhand : Proposal is encouraging and steps are being taken to adopt this proposal.
Karnataka : Efforts would certainly be made to implement this suggestion.
Kerala : The Department is planning to start ITI’s in Jails in the 2nd Phase of the Scheme of
Modernisation of Prisons.
Madhya Pradesh : ITIs are being established in District jail Betul and Dhar where the prisoners
from other jails will also be trained in the trade of carpentry, tractor mechanic and wireman etc.
Maharashtra : Necessary steps are being taken in this direction.
Manipur : State Government will consider the possibility in this regard as and when adequate funds
are allocated by the Centre in the 2nd Phase of Modernization of Prisons.
Meghalaya : The Government will be requested to set up such institutions.
Mizoram : Opening of ITI like institutions will be very beneficial to the jail inmates, but this cannot
be easily implemented at the moment.
Nagaland : As per the present conditions and status of different Jails in Nagaland there is very
less chance to set up ITI in our jails. However, we shall look forward whenever possibility
arises.
Orissa : Steps are being taken for opening ITI like institutions such as TV/Radio repairing, Motor
repairing, electrical appliances repairing, plumbing etc. in different jails to impart training to inmates
for their rehabilitation after release from the jails.
Puducherry UT : Feasibility of setting up of ITI at Central Prison Puducherry will be explored.

51
Punjab : Jail inmates are provided training in shoe making, tractor repair, electrical rewinding etc.
which will help in their rehabilitation after release. State authorities are considering to convert
existing factories into it is and Training Institutes.
Rajasthan : Besides 9 industry centres in the jails in Rajasthan, two ITIs are also functioning at
Central Jails, Jaipur and Ajmer.
Sikkim : The proposal for converting prison work shops into ITI-like institutions may be placed
in the near future when the prison population is high.
Tamil Nadu : No comments.
Tripura : ITI like institution shall be considered as soon as the existing construction work of
Central Model Prison at Bishalgarh under 32 acres of land is completed.
Uttar Pradesh : Technical instructors are posted in the prison department to give industrial training
to the prisoners.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is being examined by the Government.
West Bengal : No such facility still exists in the State. However, recommendation would be
considered and action will be taken soon.
Further Recommendation
3.13.2 The Committee notes that several States have not taken any steps so far to set up
ITIs in jails, though, certain States has agreed in principle. Some States would like to take
up this in the second phase of the scheme. The Committee is however, happy to note that
Rajasthan has set up two ITIs in Central Jails at Jaipur and Ajmer. The Committee
recommends that all other States may replicate the work done by Rajasthan. The Ministry
of Home Affairs may take up the matter of setting up of the ITIs in various jails in the
country. A blue print for setting up of ITIs in jails may be prepared and circulated amongst
States.
Recommendation
Grievance Redressal System
3.14 The Committee is of the opinion that a grievance redressal mechanism should properly
function in every jail in the country and there should be transparency in its functioning. The
Committee, therefore, suggests that every State Government should introduce “Mobile Petition Box”
for prisoners to give suggestions and complaints.
(Para 4.15.1 ibid)
Action Taken
3.14.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman and Nicobar : A Complaint Box is provided in each and every barrack.
Andhra Pradesh : It already exists in all the jails. Grievances Boxes are installed in all the jails.
Assam : The Grievance Boxes are in use at present. These boxes are opened by the Judicial
Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners on their visits to jails and take out the written papers put inside
the boxes by the inmates and action taken accordingly.

52
Bihar : System of Mobile Petition Box is going to be introduced for suggestions and complaints.
Chandigarh UT : Petition Boxes have been installed in the jail to redress the grievances of the
inmates.
Chhattisgarh : Grievances Boxes are installed in all the jails. The complaints are attended by the
controlling officers.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli UT : Recommendation will be implemented shortly.
Daman and Diu UT : Petition Box is provided in every Prisoner Cell for receiving suggestions and
complaints from the inmates. Regular interaction of Asstt. Jailor is done for redressal of grievances.
Delhi : Practice of Mobile Petition Box exists in Delhi jails as a part of grievance redressal
mechanism. This box is taken in each jail by representative of Prison Headquarters to every
prisoner and their grievances are put in the sealed box for complete confidentiality of the grievance
of the prisoner.
Goa : Grievances/petitions of inmates are properly addressed. Besides Complaint Boxes are also
installed in the jail. Keys of these boxes are with Principal District and Sessions judge.
Gujarat : Complaint boxes of sessions courts and IG Prisons are kept at every jails. Members of
Visitors Board Committee and core committee visit the jails quarterly. Senior Judicial Officers also
frequently visit the jails. Thus, there exist sufficient mechanism for redressal of grievances of the
prisoners.
Haryana : To provide effective grievances redressal system for inmates “Complaint and Suggestion
Boxes” have been installed inside the jail and outside the Jail Main Gate which are opened by the
Distt. and Sessions Judge.
Himachal Pradesh : In all jails a complaint box has already been installed so the prisoners can give
their suggestions and complaints.
Jammu and Kashmir : Major and minor problems faced by the prisoners are brought to the notice
of the concerned Superintendent Jail for redressal.
Jharkhand : Fixed Petition Boxes are installed in all prisons. Mobile Boxes will be incorporated soon
for taking complaint from the prisoners.
Karnataka : Grievances Redressal System is functioning in all jails of Karnataka. Grievance Boxes
have been installed at suitable locations and boxes are being opened in presence of Distt. Sessions
Judge.
Kerala : Grievance deposit boxes have been established in the jails of kerala. These boxes are
opened by the Court and necessary action is taken on the petitions.
Madhya Pradesh : Complaint boxes have been provided in the jails of States for suggestions and
complaint of the prisoners.
Maharashtra : Complaint boxes are provided in all prisons in the State. Superintendent along with
other senior officers on their round every morning address grievance of prisoner, if any. Bandi
Panchayat is also organised to address the grievances of prisoners.
Manipur : Matter of introduction of “Mobile Petition Boxes” for prisoners is being taken up in
consultation with Jail Deptt.
Meghalaya : The suggestion is well taken and instructions will be issued for introduction of a
“Mobile Petition Box” to all the Superintendents of Jails in the State.

53
Mizoram : The grievance redressal system mechanisms are properly followed in the prisons in the
State with transparency in its functioning. However, steps will be taken to introduce “Mobile
Petition Box”.
Nagaland : Since jails in Nagaland is very small and less prison population, everything is maintaining
on transparency basis and to have such “Mobile Petition Box” for prisoners are not so necessary/
advisable at this stage.
Orissa : Prisoners submit their petitions to the Superintendent of Jails to send them to different
quarters as per rules of Orissa Jail Manual. Introduction of “Mobile Petition Box” for prisoners will
also be taken up.
Puducherry UT : Complaint Boxes had been installed in all yards of New Jail Complex, Kalapet.
Punjab : Superintendent Jails too hold parades and listen to problems of inmates. Complaint Boxes
have been provided for prison inmates in jails. Mobile Petition Box is also considered.
Rajasthan : Complaint Boxes have been installed in the prisons of the Rajasthan, which is opened
in presence of representative of District Administration for necessary action in this regard.
Sikkim : Total transparency is maintained in the running of affairs of the prison. A complaint box
is placed at every prisoner’s barrack to file complaints and suggestions which is opened in
presence of Supdt of Prisons
Tamil Nadu : No comments.
Tripura : All prisons of the State has grievance redressal mechanism. A complaint box has been
kept in all prisons where the prisoners may drop written complaint. Since the keys of the said
boxes are with the respective judges of the Sub-Division and Districts, they are responsible for
taking required redressal measure. This may be changed and prison authority may be made
responsible for redressal measure. However, this may require framing of new rule.
Uttar Pradesh : Complaint boxes have been provided at the important places of the prisons. Prison
officers have been directed to provide complaint boxes at main gate, every circle, kitchen, fields
and hospitals to enable the prisoners and their relatives to use the same.
Uttarakhand : The grievance redressal mechanism is functioning properly in every jail in the State.
West Bengal : NI
Further Recommendation
3.14.2 The Committee, in its 142 nd Report, made the recommendation for a ‘Mobile Petition
Box’. Many States have stated that Petition/complaint boxes have been provided in jails as
grievance redressal mechanism. But this may not prove convenient to prisoners living in
various cells, barracks and enclosures of the jails to raise their voice in writing. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that State Governments may set up
Mobile Petition Box also, besides fixed complainant box, for seeking suggestions and
complaints, as is in practice in jails in Delhi. The Committee is of the further view that
the Ministry of Home Affairs should also pursue the States to adopt a transparent grievance
redressal mechanism in every jail.
Recommendation
Vacancies
3.15 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the existing vacancies of prison staff must

54
be filled up expeditiously and new posts for which proposals have already been sent, be created
at the earliest. The Committee also feels that the duties and responsibilities of Jail Superintendents
are of a very sensitive nature requiring high degree of commitment, discipline and good physical
fitness. Under the Jail Manual the Superintendent of a Jail is the back-bone of the entire
supervision and governance of a particular jail. Most of the present incumbents are promotees, in
the age group of 56-59 years and not capable of withstanding the high-stress assignment and
unable to exercise effective supervision and control in managing the Prison affairs. The Committee
recommends that State Governments should be advised to post young and dynamic officers as Jail
Superintendents for effective and meaningful management of Jails.
(Para 4.16.1 ibid)
Action Taken
3.15.1 The State Governments have been advised to fill up all the vacancies in their jail set up at
the earliest.
3.15.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman and Nicobar : Sufficient staffs are available to maintain the Prison Department. But
proposal for recruitment of vacant posts has been sent to A&N Admn.
Andhra Pradesh : Commission recommended filling up the vacant posts in all categories for smooth
and effective functioning of the jails.
Assam : Steps have already been taken up to fill up the remaining vacant posts of different
categories and now under process.
Bihar : Recommendation for appointment of 5 Jail Superintendents is received from Bihar Public
Service Commission. Requisition for selection of 72 jail clerks, 90 compounders and 3825 warders
was sent to the Staff Selection Commission.
Chandigarh UT : Model Jail Chandigarh is under staffed. The Burail Jail Break Inquiry Committee
also recommended certain additional posts to the Central Government.
Chhattisgarh : Direct recruitments are conducted by the State Government for Qualified Officers
for the Jails.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli UT : A proposal has already been sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs
for creation of post and its approval is awaited.
Daman and Diu UT : One post of Head Guard, 2 posts of Jail Guards are vacant. In Diu Sub Jail,
1 post of Head Guard and post of Jail Guard are vacant. Recruitment process has been started.
Delhi : There is acute shortage of prison staff in Delhi jails. Against 1,357 cadre staff posts 310
are lying vacant, as on 31.8.2011 which amounts to 25% of posts. Young and dynamic officers
should be posted as Jail Superintendent. For effective and meaningful management of jails as most
of the promoted officers are not capable of withstanding high stress assignment.
Goa : Vacant posts are being filled immediately. The Officer of Sr. Scale Officer of Goa Civil
Service cadre is posted as Superintendent of Central Jail Aguda. Normally young incumbents are
posted to various posts.
Gujarat : Existing vacancies are being filled up. New posts are also created in accordance with the
necessities. There exists the provision of direct recruitment of the Superintendent in Gujarat State.

55
Since there are good chances of promotion, generally Superintendents are promoted in the age
group of 50-55. Thus, the question of un-ability to exercise effective supervision does not arise.
Haryana : There is no provision of direct recruitment for appointment of Supdt. of Jails. It is done
only by way of promotion.
Himachal Pradesh : The vacancies involving direct recruitment will be filled after completion of
required formalities.
Jammu and Kashmir : The posts falling vacant will be filled as per the purview of the procedure
laid down in J&K Prisons Recruitment Rules. Besides a proposal has been sent to the Government
for creation of posts in various cadres.
Jharkhand : The existing vacancies are in the process to be filled. New post creations are in the
pipeline. The recommendation regarding Jail Superintendent will be considered.
Karnataka : Action is being taken to fill up the existing vacancies in the Deptt. Through Direct
recruitment and promotions. Young Asstt. Supdt. of Prisons have been recruited. A comprehensive
reorganization proposal with the creation of 8080 under examination of the State Government.
Kerala : All existing vacancies have been reported to the PSC and urgent follow up action is taken
to fill up the vacancies.
Madhya Pradesh : The recruitment for different posts of prison staff and promotion of chief
warder and clerks are under process at State Government level. As on August, 2011, 427 posts
are vacant in all categories. 397 new warders have completed basic training on 25.7.11 and joined
duties. Another 50 warders are undergoing basic training to join active duty in 2012.
Maharashtra : There are 4587 sanctioned posts out of them 893 posts are vacant as on 1.4.2010.
Efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies through promotion or direct recruitment.
Manipur : State Government is under consideration for deputation of young and dynamic talented
officers in place of Senior IPS and MPS officers, for effective and meaningful management of jails.
Meghalaya : Recruitment to the post of Superintendent of Jail is by promotion of 75% and direct
recruitment of 25%.
Mizoram : The Department is making all possible efforts to expedite the filling up of the vacancies
of Prison staff and for creation of new posts. The Department has no objection to the appointment
of young and dynamic officers as Jail Superintendents for effective and meaningful management
of jails.
Nagaland : Since very less posts in Prison Organisation and there is no vacancy on Sanctioned
Posts. Many adhoc appointments are being used as according to the needs and necessity in
different Jails. And to have young and dynamic officer in Prison Organisation as Superintendent,
it depends upon the avenue under Service Rules and so on. Such drastic changes for a post within
Hierarchical System are found impracticable unless Service Rules are made changed.
Orissa : Posting of young and dynamic officers in the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Jails
through Direct Recruitment by Orissa Public Service Commission is under consideration.
Puducherry UT : Seven Warders have been given promotion. Action has been initiated to finalise
Recruitment Rules for post of Dy. Supdt. of Jails. Action is being taken to fill up the posts of
Asstt. Supdt. of Jails and warders. Additional posts would be created as per Model Prison Manual.
Punjab : Proposal for promotion of 6 posts of Superintendent Central Jail have been sent to
Government As regard posting of young and dynamic officers, these posts as per rules can be

56
filled only by promotion on merit-cum-security basis. For recruitment of Medical Officer and 5
Pharmacists on contract basis, is under consideration of Government.
Rajasthan : During the year 2010-11, the process for direct recruitment of 550 guards is under
consideration. Posts of Asstt. Jailor, Chief Warder, Guard and Jr. Clerks have been sanctioned for
newly constructed Sub Jail, Anupgarh. Various posts have also been sanctioned for the newly
constructed Women Jail, Jodhpur.
Sikkim : All vacancies are being filled up and the duties and responsibilities of all related Prison
officers and staff have been spelt out in the State Prisons Act, 2007.
Tamil Nadu : Action is being taken to fill up the vacancies.
Tripura : New posts have been created as per requirement. Action is being taken to fill up all
vacant post.
Uttar Pradesh : Efforts are being made to fill the different posts through promotions and direct
recruitments.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented.
West Bengal : Early filling up of vacant posts is being initiated. Low pay scales for correctional
service officers often act as a deterrent in getting and retaining the officers Regarding posting of
young and dynamic officers as Jail Superintendent, the State Government goes for a mix between
direct recruits and officers appointed on promotion.
Further Comments of the Government
3.15.3 During the course of the presentation, the media reports about large-scale vacancies of
doctors in Tihar Jail came up for discussion. Responding to the query of the Committee, DG
(Prisons), informed the Committee that the Delhi Government was in the process of recruiting
doctors and would be able to fill up vacancies soon. Responding to the reasons for delay and the
mechanism to deal emergency cases, the DG (Prison) stated that for the interim period, they have
provided doctors on contract basis to fill the gap but regular recruitment to fill the vacancies was
in the process.
3.15.4 In regard to general scarcity of staff in jails, the Home Secretary stated that with regard
to operationalization of new jails and barracks, one impediment has been staff, that is, wardens,
jailors etc., and, the staff has been a constraint. Ministry has been advising the States to increase
the staff and the matter is being pursued.
3.15.5 The Committee takes a serious note of the staff scarcity in the jails, as has been
admitted by Home Secretary. The Committee is anguished to observe that despite its
recommendation for filling up of vacancies of prison staff, no concrete steps have been
taken either by State Governments or by the Central Government. Even after lapse of more
than two years, the State Governments are in the process of recruitment. This is a pathetic
condition which needs immediate correctional measure. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry of Home Affairs should take stock of the vacancies in various jails of the
country and pursue the matter with the State Governments to fill-up the vacancies within
a time-frame. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should not just act
as nodal agency in procuring the details of vacancies of staff and officers but pursue the
State Governments to set a time-frame to fill up the vacant posts. The Union Ministry
should itself set an example by promptly filling up the vacant posts of prison staff and
officers in UTs. Government of Delhi may take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies of
doctors in the Tihar Jail.

57
Recommendation
Open Jail
3.16 The Committee feels that every State should have such open jails where the prisoners having
good conduct and who have spent considerable years of their sentence, could be sent.
(Para 4.17.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.16.1 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman and Nicobar : There is no Open Jail in this U.T. Good Conduct prisoners are promoted
to act as Convict Night Watchman as well as Convict Warders.
Andhra Pradesh : There are two Prisoner Agricultural Colonies in the State at Anantpur and
Cherlapalli in addition to Semi Open Prisons established in all the Central Jails and some Districts/
Sub Jails. Hence Open Air System is already being followed.
Assam : At present one open jail at Jorhat (Mahendranagar Open Air Jail) has been functioning with
a capacity of 100 convicted prisoners only. Only those convicts who have completed 1/3 of their
substantive sentence in a closed prison are eligible for keeping in the open jail.
Bihar : An Open Jail at Buxar Central Jail is going to be started soon.
Chandigarh UT : Chandigarh being a UT, there is no need for open jail.
Chhattisgarh : At present no open jail in the State. Previously there was an open jail at Masgaon,
which is closed by the State Government.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli UT : Only under-trial prisoners and prisoners sentenced to less than 3
months are being kept in Sub Jail Silvassa and hence at the moment Open Jail is not required.
Daman and Diu UT : In Daman and Diu there is no Open Jail.
Delhi : The Prison Department has initiated the process of acquiring land at Baprola, western part
of Delhi for Open Jail. Correspondence with DDA is continuing process but land is yet to be
allotted.
Goa : This aspect is being actively considered depending upon the feasibility.
Gujarat : There exist two open jails in Gujarat State.
Haryana : Suggestion will be put up before the State Government for consideration.
Himachal Pradesh : There is one Open Air Jail at Bilaspur in the State where good conduct
prisoners are sent to spend their sentence. Presently 62 prisoners are lodged there.
Jammu and Kashmir : Present scenario of J&K State does not found opening of Open Jails feasible.
Jharkhand : First Open Jail of 100 prisoners’ capacity at Hazaribag is complete and will be made
functional soon.
Karnataka : The State of Karnataka has one Open Air Jail. Prisoners work here under minimum
security and being trained in modem methods of agriculture, horticulture, sericulture etc.

58
Kerala : There are two Open Prisons. First was opened in 1962 in Nettukaltheri Thevancode Hills
and the has capacity of 492 prisoners. Prisoners are engaged in agricultural activities mainly rubber
plantation, coconut and vegetables are cultivated. 2 nd Open Prison in Taluk of Kasargod Distt. They
generate income to the exchequer.
Madhya Pradesh : An Open Jail Colony has been constructed in Hoshangabad district which
operationalised in December, 2010.
Maharashtra : At present the open prisons are operative at Paithan in Aurangabad district, Yerawada
in Pune, Morshi in Amravati, Atpadi in Sangli and Aurangabad.
Manipur : There are no Open Jails in Manipur due to existing law and order problems in the State.
Meghalaya : The suggestion is well taken and will be taken up with the Government for setting
up of an open jail in the State.
Mizoram : The State does not have open jails at present and it is very desirable to have one.
Nagaland : Open Jails and its Projects are beneficial to the Life Termed Prisoners as well as the
Department and Society. “To set up these Open Jails depend upon concerned authorities open mind
on experiences. Where as Government should provide fund for purchase of Land and Construction
of its Project.
Orissa : There is an Open Air Jail at Jamujhari, named Biju Patnaik Open Air Ashram. Around 100
inmates are confined in this jail. Construction of 2 more Open Jails has been approved. Provision
of Rs. one crore has been proposed for this purpose.
Puducherry UT : Setting up of Open Jails is one of the items included in Phase-II of Modenisation
of Prisons.
Punjab : There is Open Jail in Nabha and also in Kapurthala where prisoners of good conduct are
sent for conducting agricultural operation.
Rajasthan : Presently 13 open prison camps are running in Rajasthan with the capacity of 529
prisoners. Besides these open prison camps, Government has initiated process for constructing
more open prison camps in the State.
Sikkim : Opening of Open Prisons in the State may be required at the later stage which shall be
looked into as per the requirement.
Tamil Nadu : Tamil Nadu has Open Air Jail and action has been initiated to construct more open
jails in the districts of the State.
Tripura : This is a policy matter involving construction of new infrastructure. The State
Government may consider this matter later on. At present modernisation of existing prisons is the
priority of the State Government.
Uttar Pradesh: At present, there is no open jail in the State. However, efforts are made to establish
open jail at village Naipura and Kamiyar of Barabanki District.
Uttarakhand : The recommendation is already being implemented.
West Bengal: There is one Open Air Correctional Home with a capacity of 100 inmates which is
providing ample opportunities to the inmates to interact with the society and also pursue income
earning vocations.

59
Further Recommendation
3.16.2 The Committee notes that in some States open jails have been set up and functioning
successfully, however, some States including bigger States like Uttar Pradesh do not have
open jail. The concept of open jail is very good from the standpoint of correctional
philosophy. The Committee is of the considered view that jail should become correctional
centres rather than a place of condemnation. The Committee desires that the concept of
open jails may be given emphasis in the second phase of the scheme.
Recommendation
Drugs in Jail Premises
3.17 During the study visits to various jails, the inmates complained to the sub-Committee about
the nexus between officials of the jails and some inmates resulting in the supply and use of drugs
inside the jails. The Committee takes a serious view of this and strongly recommends that necessary
steps should be taken by each of the State Governments and the prison officials to prevent such
a nexus and use of drugs in jails.
(Para 4.20.1 ibid)
Action Taken
3.17.1 The Government of India has also issued an advisory on 25.5.2010 requesting the Stare
Governments to take effective measures to keep check on supply of drugs in the prisons.
3.17.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman and Nicobar : No such reports have been received so far but necessary steps are being
taken for preventing nexus between Jail Officials and inmates and use of drugs in jails.
Andhra Pradesh : No drugs are either supplied or used by Prisoners in jails in Andhra Pradesh.
Superintendents of jails are keeping strict vigil over this issue and if any incident of smuggling of
drugs in to jails comes to their notice, they are taking stem action against the concerned.
Assam : There is no such reported incident of nexus between the Jail officials and the inmates
regarding supply and use of drugs inside the jail. The Superintendent have been directed for
reporting of any incident of supply or use of drugs in jails for immediate necessary action.
Bihar : No such case is reported in the Bihar Jails, but precautionary drug addiction camps are
being organised in some of the jails.
Chandigarh UT : Two sniffer dogs have been purchased for detecting Narcotics and explosive
substances under orders of High Court of Punjab and Haryana. More modern devices will be
purchased under new phase of Modernization of prisons.
Chhattisgarh : Directions have been issued to all the Superintendent Jails to ensure that no
prohibited items are supplied into the Jails.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli UT : In Sub-Jail Silvassa since its inception no case of drug is noticed.
However, administration keeps strict vigil on this account.
Daman and Diu UT : No case of drugs within the jail premises has been reported till date.

60
Delhi : Drug addict prisoners are segregated on the very first day of their admission to jail and
are treated in de-addiction centre and thereafter shifted to drug rehabilitation centre. Serious and
stringent punishment is given if any undue linkage between the official and prisoner is reported.
CRPF and ITBP personnel are also posted to help Jail administration for prohibition of such
articles.
Goa : Thorough frisking is being done at main gate of the Jail. X-rays screening machines, metal
detectors, CCTV s in each Cell are also being installed.
Gujarat : As far as the jails of Gujarat State are concerned, nexus between officials of the jails and
some inmates in supply and use of drugs inside the jails is not reported. However, superintendents
are frequently instructed to keep vigilance over maintenance of discipline and security of the jails
and if such cases are reported, strict actions are taken against the responsible officials.
Haryana : Supdt. of Jails are instructed from time to time keep vigil on such nexus.
Himachal Pradesh : Strict directions have been issued to all the Superintendent Jails to ensure that
no drug is supplied into the Jails. Suitable preventive steps are being taken if any such incident
is noticed.
Jammu and Kashmir : In view of the hard frisking/checking procedures by different agencies in
J&K jails, the smuggling of drugs and other prohibited articles are ruled out. If any breach is
observed, person is punished under proper rules.
Jharkhand : Drug menace in prisons should be strongly dealt with.
Karnataka : Instructions have been given to Jails to prevent entry of prohibited articles such as
liquor, drugs, mobile phones etc. And also stringent action is being taken against stringent staff.
Kerala : Tight security measures are taken to prevent smuggling of drugs into Jails. Surprise
checks of cells and barracks are conducted. CCTV based Surveillance system has been introduced
in Central Prison Thiruvananthapuram to prevent use of drugs in jails.
Madhya Pradesh : Efforts are made to not reaching of drugs in the jails.
Maharashtra : The Prison authorities are already cautious and being over cautious as regard taking
certain necessary action in this regard.
Manipur : All efforts including disciplinary action are being made to prevent use of drugs in jails
by State Jail authorities.
Meghalaya : There is no such nexus, anyone who enters or comes out of the jail are being frisked.
Mizoram : Necessary steps are being taken to prevent any possible nexus between jails officials and
some inmates resulting in the supply and smuggling of drugs inside the Jail.
Nagaland : Use of drugs in jails in Nagaland are strictly prohibited and does not have such nexus
with Jail Officials except unexpected smuggled but whenever caught they re-dismissed from
Service more over Legal action are initiated against such erring officials.
Orissa : To prevent use of drugs by the prisoners in jails necessary instructions have been issued
to the Superintendent of all Jails to conduct surprise raids of different wards of jails from time
to time.

61
Puducherry UT : Effective measures are being taken to see that no contraband items enter into
prison.
Punjab : The Jail Manual is against any proximity of staff with convicts. Strict action is taken
where any such violation or smuggling or use of drug is reported.
Rajasthan : Drug addict prisoners are kept in separate barracks. Efforts are made to ensure that
no banned/prohibited articles reach to the addicted prisoners. Search operations are also carried out
from time to time.
Sikkim : All efforts are put in to ensure that no banned/prohibited articles enter the prison
premises and that regular searches are carried out for any contraband items. Efforts are made
to ensure that there is no nexus between Prison officials and the criminals and no drug
trafficking in the prison.
Tamil Nadu : To avoid this, Prison Intelligence-cum-Vigilance wing has been formed in all Central
Prisons headed by the Sub-Inspector of Police. The Deputy Superintendent of Police is supervises
their activities.
Tripura : Drug is totally prohibited in the prisons in this State. Nexus between the Jail staff and
prisoners in such matter are not tolerated.
Uttar Pradesh : Necessary steps have been taken in this regard.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented.
West Bengal : Every effort is being made to tackle the problem of drug abuse. Nexus angle is
examined too and appropriate action is taken whenever any problem is detected.
Further Recommendation
3.17.3 The Committee is surprised to note that no State Government is conceding the
reported facts about the nexus between officials of the jails and supply and use of drugs
inside the jails. However, pre-cautionary measures must be put in place against such
possible nexus and as part of this measure, drug-addict prisoners be segregated on the very
first day of the admission to the jail as being done in Tihar Jail, Delhi. The Committee
further recommends that the ‘Prison-Intelligence cum Vigilance Wing’ must be created in
each jail as a continuing vigilance mechanism to guard against the jail officials-inmates
nexus. Steps may also be taken to prevent drug trafficking by use of sniffer dogs and
advanced modern devices.
General Recommendations
3.18 During the oral evidence of the Home Secretary on 8th November, 2011, following fresh
issues emerged:–
Shifting of Prisons out side Cities
3.18.1 During the course of the presentation on ATN, the Chairman of the Committee, citing the
example of shifting of prisons from the heart of the cities to outside as has been done in Chennai,
Visakhapatnam and Bangalore, desired to know whether similar advice could be given to other
State Governments to shift the jails outside the cities so that the proceeds from the sale of the
existing valuable land of the jails, could be utilised for the modernization of the prison

62
administration. Some Members also expressed the view that the modernization of prison
administration could be carried out under the public private partnership model.
3.18.2 The Home Secretary responding to the query of the Chairman replied as under:–
“......we will do that, and, as you said, many States are already doing it. In Patna also,
the old jail was shifted to the outskirts of the town. Apart from that, we are of the firm
belief that the second phase of the present modernization programme needs to be sanctioned.
We are pursuing this. Last time, we had taken it before the Committee on Non-Plan
expenditure which is with the Ministry of Finance.”
3.18.3 The Home Secretary also admitted that the land which was likely to be vacated by the
prisons would be very valuable. The guidelines for PPP had been laid out. He further stated that
by and large, the guidelines are transparent and the Ministry would consider so that it can make
things easier for the States.
3.18.4 The Committee is of the considered view that one of the ways of modernization of
prison administration is shifting of prisons from the existing congested sites in the cities
to the open area outside the cities. Presently, many of the jails across the country are
facing not only the problem of overcrowding but most of them are not adequately equipped
and facilities available there are not up to the mark. Keeping in view the sorry state of jails
and the sufferings of the inmates, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government for shifting of jails from the
existing sites to outside the cities and the proceeds received from the sale of existing
valuable sites of the jails may be utilized for improving the condition of prisons with
modern facilities which would go a long way in combating the problems being faced by the
prison administration. The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should suggest the State Governments to consider undertaking the modernization
programme of the prison under the public private partnerships.
Funding of Modernization of Prison Administration from International Agencies
3.19 The Committee sought to know from the representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs
whether any efforts have been made for getting the requisite fund for modernization of prison
administration from the World Bank or the Asian Development Bank in the form of soft loan/grant/
aid.
3.19.1 The representative of the Ministry of Horne Affairs stated that the Government has not
given any thought to the idea of getting either the soft loan or grant or aid for the purpose of
modernization of prison administration.
3.19.2 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs may explore the
possibility of approaching international financial institutions for getting aid/grant/soft loan
for modernization of prison administration in the country.
Non-Allocation of Fund to the Northern States
3.20 During the course of the presentation, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed about the
allocation of Rs. 609 crore by the Thirteenth Finance Commission to the select eight States viz.
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Orissa and Tripura
for the purpose of modernization of prison administration. On a query, the Ministry expressed its
inability to explain the reasons as to why the other States were left out by the Finance Commission.
However, the Ministry assured to look into the matter and get back to the Committee.

63
3.20.1 The Committee desires to know the criteria adopted by the Thirteenth Finance
Commission for allocation of fund amounting to the tune of Rs. 609 crore for up-gradation
of prisons. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the reasons for not allocating any
fund for other States for modernization of the prison administration. The Committee would
further like to know the alternative measures proposed to be undertaken to assist other
States lagging behind in the prison administration for financing them.
3.21 The Committee observes that in the emerging situation, prison modernization is very
important and the direction appears to be correct and good, but, despite that, the number
of under-trials remaining in prisons for quite considerable time is a matter of serious
concern. The committee is of the view that Home Ministry should take forward prison
reforms, provisions of the Fast Track Courts, so that, cases could be expedited and young
people could be released.

64
CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
Prison Workshops
4.1 The Committee observed that barring a few prisons, the prison workshops were still of
primitive type. In these workshops activities like carpet making, carpentry, etc. were still being
done. The Committee recommends that prison workshops need to be urgently modernized and they
should function like small modern industrial units with latest equipments. The Ministry may look
into this aspect in the second phase of the scheme.
(Para 4.12.1 ibid)
Action Taken
4.1.1 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The observations of the Committee shall be
kept in mind at the time of second phase of the scheme as and when finalised.
4.1.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:
Andaman and Nicobar : 5 hectares of land has been allotted for construction of Modem Industrial
Unit, adjacent to the existing jail.
Andhra Pradesh : Prisons Workshops/Industries are running well and new units like Cashew Nut
peeling, Printing Press etc. are introduced at Central Prison Visakapatnam recently.
Assam : Directions have been issued to bring change in the prison workshop including some
innovative ideas in the manufacturing skills of goods and articles which are open to public for
purchasing. It is also requested that the DRDA and District Industry authority may be contacted
for advice so that our existing Jail Industry may have some changes as desired.
Bihar : New industries like offset printing have been installed in Special Central Jail, Bhagalpur.
Advanced Bakery Plant is also going to be installed. This will be in addition to old workshop of
spinning, weaving, carpentry, carpet making, tailoring and other vocational set ups.
Chandigarh UT : Prison Factory will be modernised on receipt of funds from Government of India.
Chhattisgarh : Different workshops are functioning in the Central Jails of the State.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli UT : This being a small Union Territory, the convicted prisoner sentenced
for more than 3 months are being sent to Central Jail Vadodara (Gujarat) and hence the facilities
of workshop are not applicable and accordingly there is no provision of wages of prisoners.
Daman and Diu UT : There are very few under-trials/convicts. Therefore the recommendation is
not feasible.
64

65
Delhi : The convicts earn working in Jail Factory for 8 hours a day except on holidays and
Sundays. He can get remission in his sentence upto one third for maintaining good conduct and
excellent labour. There has been big increase in wages- Rs. 70/-(unskilled), Rs.81(semi-skilled) and
Rs.99 (skilled) are being paid. Hon’ble Supreme Court have given direction for Victim Welfare
Fund. Prisoners can credit 25% of their wages in this Fund.
Goa : Various workshops such as carpentry, tailoring, bakery, horticulture are functioning in Central
Jail. Candle making, screen painting, book binding has also been added.
Guiarat : Weaving, Carpentry, tailoring, bakery, chemical, leather, printing press and steel furniture
industries are being conducted in jails of Gujarat State. Prison industries is being modernised by
installing modern machineries.
Haryana : Jail factories of Haryana State, modern equipments are provided to inmates. Training for
Iron bed, welding, barbed wire, tents, Computer Operator, hair dressing and garments
manufacturing are imparted to inmates.
Himachal Pradesh : In HP industrial units like weaving, carpentry, tailoring are working in the big
jails and to set up small modern industrial units the scheme is under process.
Jammu & Kashmir : Various vocational programmes are running in the Jails of J&K like
manufacture of cotton cloth and candle making, handicrafts etc. Skill development programmes in
various trades like computer courses through DOEACC/IGNOU etc.
Jharkhand : Modern prison workshops are functional in the prisons of the State.
Karnataka : It is proposed to upgrade exiting prison workshops in the State and also to introduce
new trades with latest equipments.
Kerala : In the jails of Kerala also the inmates are given training in the traditional occupation such
as carpentry, smithy, weaving, tailoring, printing, binding etc. An expenditure of Rs.57.46 lakhs for
modernisation of prison manufactory has been incurred.
Manipur : Prison workshop as reformation, integral/rehabilitation process is being noted and has
been strongly emphasised in the 2nd Phase of Modernization of Prison scheme.
Madhya Pradesh : Prison workshops such as stitching, printing, doll making power-loom etc. in
different jails have been initiated by the State Government.
Maharashtra : The Prison authorities are keen on making this kind of change and accordingly
necessary steps is being taken to implement such kind of modern industrial units.
Meghalaya : Industries should be set up in very jail, with the idea of becoming self sufficient and
also in collaboration with business houses who want to tie up with such jails.
Mizoram : The Prisons workshops are not modernized yet.
Nagaland : No such workshops are available in our Jail except Mora making and Stitching Clothes
with Sewing Machines. However, the Prison Department is contemplating to introduce such
V ocational Programmes in some Jails.
Orissa : There are various industrial units functioning in 23 jails and one correctional home in the
State of Orissa. Weaving and Durry making are functioning in almost all manufacturing jails.
Introduction of new industrial units like TV/Radio repairing, motor repairing, plumbing etc. to utilize
the services convicts is also taken into consideration.
Puducherry UT : 25 spindle chakras and mat weaving unit is functioning. Classes for making of
detergent powder with the help of Khadi & Village industries Commission, Chennai are being

66
conducted for convicts. There are also classes for making of Utensil cleaning powder, candle
making and phynol making. Bakery, Tailoring unit, Koramat weaving are also being conducted by
Puducherry Management Council.
Punjab : Proposal for modernization of jail factories by repair of old machinery and purchase of
new machinery, training of prisoners and working of jail industries is sent to Government of India
for approval.
Rajasthan : Presently 9 industries are running in the jails of Rajasthan, where prisoners are working
after getting training.
Sikkim : In the State vocational activities like carpentry, bamboo products and Buddhist carving
units function like a small industrial unit with the latest available equipment.
Tamil Nadu : Various industries are functioning in the Central Prisons of the State. As the Prison
Department was declared as Service Department, the prisoners made article in the prisons are
supplied to the other Government Departments at free of cost.
Tripura : The State Government has initiated the process to modernise the prison workshop
alongwith training for prisoners.
Uttar Pradesh : Different products are produced in the jails which are used in the prisoners in the
State. There are grains and spices packaging industry in the Nari Bandi Niketan Lucknow and
Jardoji work in district jail Lucknow by the prisoners.
Uttarakhand : The prisoners are being trained in various trades which are productive and returned
based. The farms of the prisons are being used for growing medicinal and herbal plants.
West Bengal : Prison Workshops are mostly primitive in nature. The Department is seriously
considering a complete overhaul of the system.
Further Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee may be apprised of the final action taken in this regard once the
second phase is approved. A comprehensive plan may be prepared.
Recommendation
4.2 As stated elsewhere in this Report, the condition of most of the jails in the country leaves
much to be desired and require a complete change of mindset of those providing administration to
these prisons. The ideals of reformation and resettlement should be a predominant feature of
reforming the inmates in a democratic society. The purpose of the present Report would be more
than achieved if it attracts the attention of the concerned quarters in the administrative machinery
and this modest effort is continued further to ensure that our country has prisons of global
standards with all basic and primary facilities for the inmates.
(Para 4.21.2 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.1 Special courses/training modules are being designed for the training of the jail staff by the
BPR&D and the Institute of Correctional Administration, Chandigarh.
4.2.2 Recommendations/observations were forwarded to the State Governments for necessary
action. The compliance report received from State Governments/UT Administrations are given
below:

67
Andaman & Nicobar : No comments
Andhra Pradesh : No comments
Assam : No comments
Bihar : Main objective of Bihar prison is to maintain human dignity inside the prison without
compromising the security effectively and efficiently.
Chandigarh UT : Model Jail, Chandigarh has all the basic facilities/amenities and actions for their
improvement are being taken.
Chhattisgarh : Efforts are being made to enhance basis standards.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli UT : All the recommendations have been noted and steps towards
implementation of these recommendations, whenever applicable will be initiated.
Daman & Diu UT : UT Administration is taking all necessary action to solve the problem if any
in Sub Jail.
Delhi : No comments
Goa : Regarding chancing of mind set of Jail Admn. It is proposed to have refresher orientation
courses for Spdts., Jailors and Asstt. Jailors. Attention is being given to reformation and re-
settlement with the help of NGOs.
Gujarat : Total allocation of funds amounting to Rs. 65.88 crore under the Modernisation of Prison
have been utilised. Maximum efforts are being made with available resources to create an
environment of reformation, correction and rehabilitation of the prisoners.
Haryana : Meditation programmes/yoga/pravchan etc. are being organised at various jails for
reformation of prisoners. V ocational courses are also being run so that prisoners can join the
mainstream after their release.
Himachal Pradesh : Most of the inmates in Himachal Pradesh belong to agriculturist families and
they join the agricultural work/farming after release. However training in such fields as carpentry,
tailoring, weaving, blanket–making is also provided to them so that they are resettled once they
come out of prisons.
Jammu & Kashmir : There is good effort on the part of the prison department to focus fully on
the reformation and rehabilitation of prisoners.
Jharkhand : In order to comply with the recommendation refresher courses, training programmes
and inter State prisons meet should be regularly organised for the staff and officers of the prisons.
Karnataka : The State Government shares the concerns and anxiety of the Committee in promoting
healthy, hygienic and conducive atmosphere in all jails of Karnataka.
Kerala : Follow up action will be taken to tackle the issues explained in the report of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Manipur : The idea of reformation and resettlement is a predominant feature of reforming the
inmates in Jail Department for the inmates.
Meghalaya : No comments.
Madhya Pradesh : Efforts are being made by way of giving yoga training teaching and other
discipline of training to the prisoners to enable them to associate with the society.

68
Maharashtra : The State Government is keen on bringing about such changes. Most of which have
already been implemented and necessary steps are being taken to implement them.
Mizoram : NIL. Necessary efforts are taken to solve the problem by making co-operation to the
treatment devices enabling an offender to return to the social milieu as a normal citizen.
Nagaland : No comments
Orissa : Necessary steps are being taken in a phased manner in providing adequate sleeping
accommodation, resettlement, reformation, sanitation etc. for prisoners of the State.
Puducherry UT : Nil
Punjab : Condition of most of the jails in the State is much better than other jails of the country.
Jail inmates are given vocational training inculcating the work habits, discipline and ethical values
to rehabilitate them and make them good citizens.
Rajasthan : A high level committee has been constituted to give suggestions in prison reforms in
the State.
Sikkim : All officers and staff members of Sikkim Prisons are motivated and dedicated towards
reformation, rehabilitation and reintegration of the prisoners back to society.
Tamil Nadu : The complaints of atrocities and inhuman treatment or torture of prisoners by the
prison staff is being enquired into by the concerned range DIG of Prisons and by the Intelligence-
cum-Vigilance Wing attached to each prison.
Tripura : The State Government has notified entitlement of rice, vegetable, egg, meat, fish and
other essential for the prisoners which is scrupulously adhered to in the interest of the prisoners
health.
Uttar Pradesh : Training rules have been initiated to change the mindset of the all level of the
officials in the prisons of the State.
Uttarakhand : The recommendations are being implemented.
West Bengal : Govt. of West Bengal has expressed its gratitude to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs for going into the maladies affecting the prison system in the country
and reiterates its commitment in bringing about reforms in correctional system in the State.
Further Recommendations
4.2.3 The Committee may  be informed of the modules prepared by BPR&D and the
Institute of Correctional Administration and the action taken by the Ministry thereon.

69
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
SHIFTING OF THE SCHEME OF MODERNISATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION FROM
NON-PLAN TO PLAN
The Committee takes note of the fact that the second phase of the scheme has not
yet been finalized nor approved. The matter is still under active consideration as to whether
it should be made under non-plan or plan expenditure. The Committee is of the view that
the Government should take a positive view in regard to taking up the second phase of the
scheme from 2012-13. Whether the scheme continues under non-plan expenditure or shifted
to plan-expenditure head, it is left to the Government to decide but the Committee desires
that scheme should be continued from next financial year. (Para 13)
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR MODERNIZATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION FROM
NLCPR
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs should consider the
financial constraint of the North-eastern States and also examine the possibility of reducing
the States’ contribution of fund under the scheme from existing pattern of 25 per cent to
10 per cent. The Committee also desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs should persuade
the State Governments of North-East to allocate funds for modernization of prison
administration from NLCPR. (Para 1.2.4)
SPIRIT OF CORRECTION AND REFORMATION
The Committee observes that most of the State Government are conscious of the idea
of prison as a place for correctional and reformation. In this regard, the Committee
appreciates the steps taken by the Government of Punjab where jails are now being called a
“Sudhar Ghar” i.e. a place for physiological transformation of offenders. The Committee feels
that other State Government should follow the suit and impart the jail officers and staff
requisite training and skill with the intention to treat jails not just a place of custody but also
a place for reformation. The Committee also recommends that steps be taken to ensure that
the advisories issued are strictly implemented at the ground level. (Para 1.3.3)
SLOW START OF THE SCHEME
The Committee has examined the issue in detail and made its observations and
recommendations in response to Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation
of the Committee in Para 3.3.5 of this chapter. (Para 3.1.4)
EV ALUATION OF THE SCHEME
The Committee is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry and feels quite
69

70
concerned to note that the BPR&D had not requisite staff and expertise to evaluate the
Central Scheme of Implementation of Modernisation of Prison Administration despite the
fact that it has undertaken several research studies of high calibre. The Committee does
not buy the argument given by the Ministry. The Committee is of the considered view that
BPR&D should be provided the requisite staff to undertake this kind of evaluation in
future. However, the Committee hopes that the Ministry of Home Affairs would examine the
observations of the Ernst & Young and would leave no stone unturned in the
implementation of the recommendations made by the expert body. (Para 3.2.9)
SHORTFALL IN THE ACHIEVEMENT OF PHYSICAL TARGETS
The Committee understands that the unspent amount to the tune of Rs. 21.76 crore,
which is only a marginal gap for this near achievement of the financial target, is not
reflected in the physical targets because against the total number of 162 jails to be
constructed under the scheme, only 119 were constructed and out of that, only 87 jails got
operationalized. Further, against a total target of 1731 barracks, only 1572 barracks were
constructed and out of that, 1435 got operationalized. Again, against the target of 8803 staff
quarters, only 8568 staff quarters were actually constructed and out of that only 8304 staff
quarters got occupied. This is a sorry state-of-affairs. Now the basic question arises as to
whether the remaining unspent amount to the tune of Rs. 21. 76 crore would be sufficient
to meet the expenditure for the remaining projects. Obviously not, because the delayed
projects would by now have undergone cost overrun. Under the circumstances and as also
accepted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the whole matter needs a comprehensive review.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the entire issue, including requirement of fund
in the 2
nd phase of the scheme as well as funds required for completion of pending
unfinished works, may be comprehensively reviewed at the earliest. The Committee also
desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs may undertake a detailed review of lapses in the
implementation of the projects under the scheme in the first phase and apprise the
Committee of the conclusions so arrived. (Para 3.3.5)
OVERCROWDING IN PRISONS
The Committee is not happy to learn that the overcrowding has not decreased in
district and central jails even after completion of the 1st phase of the scheme. The
Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take stock of the latest status
of overcrowding in the districts and central jails and assess the requisite fund for combating
the problem of overcrowding there for ensuring the humane condition for the inmates as
prisoners are, after all, also the human beings. The Committee strongly recommends that
requisite funds may be provided in the second phase for capacity addition in the district and
central jails. (Para 3.4.5)
PROPER IMPLEMENTATION OF ADVISORIES
The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
for printing and circulation of Compendium of Advisories on Prison Administration.
However, the Committee feels that though everything appears to be good on paper, but on
a visit to any jail, one does not get a good impression of the conditions there. The

71
Committee recommends that the Central Government must give impetus to the proper
implementation of the advisories, including model prison manual. (Para 3.5.3)
MODEL PRISON MANUAL
The Committee also takes note of the fact that several States have yet to revise the
prison manuals on the basis of Model Prison Manual. The Committee recommends that all
the States and UTs should be advised to adopt the model prison manual without delay.
(Para 3.5.4)
EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION OF LEGAL PROVISIONS
The Committee notes the varying responses from the State Governments. While
some States are invoking the provisions under CrPC effectively, others have issued
instructions for implementation. The Committee is of the considered view that effective
implementation of legal provisions viz. Section 436 A, 436 (i) and 265 to 265 L of the CrPC
1973 would go a long way in reducing the overcrowding and languishing of under-trials in
various jails of the country. Therefore, nationwide awareness programme of these legal
provisions should be launched. In this regard, the “National Mission for Delivery of Justice”
launched by Union Ministry of Law & Justice is a step in the right direction which needs
to be further taken to the State Governments. The Government should start special fast
track courts for petty offences. (Para 3.6.3)
EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION OF MODEL PRISON MANUAL
The Committee is surprised to observe that most of the State Governments are yet
to adopt the Model Prison Manual which is a stepping stone towards prison reforms. The
Committee underscores the significance of Model Prison Manual in maintaining uniformity
in prison administration. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should vigorously pursue the matter with the State Governments and ensure the effective
implementation of the Model Prison Manual and if needed suitable scheme for assisting
State Governments, as stated by the State Government of Tripura, may be formulated to
ensure effective implementation of the manual. (Para 3.7.3)
SEPARATE JAIL FOR WOMEN
The Committee desires to highlight the need for at least one separate jail for women
in each State with basic civic amenities. The Committee, on the other hand, finds that there
are only 18 jails for women in the country and many of the States have either separate
enclosures or separate wards Jor women which does not solve the purpose keeping in view
the problems being faced by women prisoners. The Committee strongly recommends for
setting up of at least one separate jail for women in each State with basic amenities.
(Para 3.8.3)
CONSTRUCTION OF MODERN CHAMBERS
The Committee notes that the construction of the modern chamber for visitors in
most of the States is either at contemplation/proposal/examination stage. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Union Ministry of Home Affairs should vigorously pursue

72
the matter with the State Governments to ensure implementation on the ground level.
Moreover, in some States viz. Punjab, Haryana, Manipur, Jharkhand, etc., implementation
of this recommendation has not been taken up due to non availability of fund and also due
to the fact that initiative to commence the work is dependent upon the funds to be released
in the second phase of the scheme, which underscores the need for continuation of the
scheme. The Government, therefore, should note this fact and ensure the commencement
of the second phase of the Modernisation of Prison Administration at the earliest. In the
second phase, emphasis should be laid on the construction of modern visitor chambers.
(Para 3.9.2)
TELEPHONE FACILITY FOR INMATES
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in 142
nd Report that telephone
facilities may be provided in select jails on trial basis to inmates as the measure would
check illegal use of mobile in the prison and also track the connection of hardened
criminals. Wherever necessary, Jammers may also be installed. (Para 3.10.5)
WAGES OF PRISONERS
The Committee observes that the daily wages of the convicted prisoners are meager,
as low as Rs. 8/- to 20/- in the State of Punjab, only a few States give good wages viz. in
Himachal Pradesh prisoners are provided Rs. 120/-. The Committee recommends that all
State Governments be instructed to bring forth suitable revision of the wages to the
prisoners in all the jails. The Committee also recommends that the term ‘incentives’ be
used in jails instead of the word ‘wage’ as is used in Andhra Pradesh because incentive is
a better term for payment to the prisoners in lieu of work. The Committee further desires
that the steps taken to encourage under-trials to work in the jails be also furnished by the
State Governments. The Committee also endorses the view of the State Government of
Tripura that suitable specific uniform policy for revision of wages to prisoners may be
formulated by the Union Government. Initiatives like formation of self-help groups of
inmates as promoted in West Bengal may also be replicated in other States. (Para 3.11.3)
LITERACY AMONG PRISONERS AND V OCATIONAL TRAINING
The Committee feels that facilities of access to education needs to be examined
thoroughly because undertrials in the age group of 18 to 30 years constitute a huge section
of the prisoners. The Committee recommends that the undertrials should also be motivated
to pursue vocational education of their choice. (Para 3.12.5)
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by various State Governments in
imparting literacy including higher education through IGNOU to the prisoners. It, however,
appears that all the states are not providing vocational/technical education to the prisoners.
The State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and NCT of Delhi are doing some pioneering
work in imparting Engineering courses and hopes that other State Government would follow
the suit and make arrangements for similar professional courses for the prisoners. The
Committee further desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue with other State
Governments including Manipur and Nagaland to put in place adequate infrastructure for
introducing literacy programmes in various jails of the States. (Para 3.12.6)

73
SETTING UP OF THE ITIs
The Committee notes that several States have not taken any steps so far to set up
ITIs in jails, though, certain States has agreed in principle. Some States would like to take
up this in the second phase of the scheme. The Committee is however, happy to note that
Rajasthan has set up two ITIs in central jails at Jaipur and Ajmer. The Committee
recommends that all other States may replicate the work done by Rajasthan. The Ministry
of Home Affairs may take up the matter of setting up of the ITIs in various jails in the
country. A blue print for setting up of ITIs in jails may be prepared and circulated amongst
States. (Para 3.13.2)
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM
The Committee, in its 142
nd Report, made the recommendation for a ‘Mobile Petition
Box’. Many States have stated that Petition/complaint boxes have been provided in jails as
grievance redressal mechanism. But this may not prove convenient to prisoners living in
various cells, barracks and enclosures of the jails to raise their voice in writing. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that State Governments may set up
Mobile Petition Box also, besides fixed complainant box, for seeking suggestions and
complaints, as is in practice in jails in Delhi. The Committee is of the further view that
the Ministry of Home Affairs should also pursue the States to adopt a transparent grievance
redressal mechanism in every jail. (Para 3.12.2)
V ACANCIES
The Committee takes a serious note of the staff scarcity in the jails, as has been
admitted by Home Secretary. The Committee is anguished to observe that despite its
recommendation for filling up of vacancies of prison staff, no concrete steps have been
taken either by State Governments or by the Central Government. Even after lapse of more
than two years, the State Governments are in the process of recruitment. This is a pathetic
condition which needs immediate correctional measure. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry of Home Affairs should take stock of the vacancies in various jails of the
country and pursue the matter with the State Governments to fill-up the vacancies within
a time frame. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should not just act
as nodal agency in procuring the details of vacancies of staff and officers but pursue the
State Governments to set a time-frame to fill up the vacant posts. The Union Ministry
should itself set an example by promptly filling up the vacant posts of prison staff and
officers in UTs. Government of Delhi may take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies of
doctors in the Tihar Jail. (Para 3.15.5)
OPEN JAIL
The Committee notes that in some States open jails have been set up and functioning
successfully, however, some States including bigger States like Uttar Pradesh do not have
open jail. The concept of open jail is very good from the standpoint of correctional
philosophy. The Committee is of the considered view that jail should become correctional
centres rather than a place of condemnation. The Committee desires that the concept of
open jails may be given emphasis in the second phase of the scheme. (Para 3.16.2)

74
DRUGS IN JAIL PREMISES
The Committee is surprised to note that no State Government is conceding the
reported facts about the nexus between officials of the jails and supply and use of drugs
inside the jails. However, pre-cautionary measures must be put in place against such
possible nexus and as part of this measure, drug-addict prisoners be segregated on the very
first day of the admission to the jail as being done in Tihar Jail, Delhi. The Committee
further recommends that the ‘Prison-Intelligence cum Vigilance Wing’ must be created in
each jail as a continuing vigilance mechanism to guard against the jail officials-inmates
nexus. Steps may also be taken to prevent drug trafficking by use of sniffer dogs and
advanced modern devices. (Para 3.17.3)
SHIFTING OF PRISONS OUT SIDE CITIES
The Committee is of the considered view that one of the ways of modernization of
prison administration is shifting of prisons from the existing congested sites in the cities
to the open area outside the cities. Presently, many of the jails across the country are
facing not only the problem of overcrowding but most of them are not adequately equipped
and facilities available there are not up to the mark. Keeping in view the sorry state of jails
and the sufferings of the inmates, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government for shifting of jails from the
existing sites to outside the cities and the proceeds received from the sale of existing
valuable sites of the jails may be utilized for improving the condition of prisons with
modern facilities which would go a long way in combating the problems being faced by the
prison administration. The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should suggest the State Governments to consider undertaking the modernization
programme of the prison under the public private partnerships. (Para 3.18.4)
FUNDING OF MODERNIZATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION FROM INTERNATIONAL
AGENCIES
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs may explore the
possibility of approaching international financial institutions for getting aid/grant/soft loan
for modernization of prison administration in the country. (Para 3.19.2)
NON-ALLOCATION OF FUND TO THE NORTHERN STATES
The Committee desires to know the criteria adopted by the Thirteenth Finance
Commission for allocation of fund amounting to the tune of Rs. 609 crore for upgradation
of prisons. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the reasons for not allocating any
fund for other States for modernization of the prison administration. The Committee would
further like to know the alternative measures proposed to be undertaken to assist other
States lagging behind in the prison administration for financing them. (Para 3.20.1)
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee observes that in the emerging situation, prison modernization is very
important and the direction appears to be correct and good, but, despite that, the number

75
of under-trials remaining in prisons for quite considerable time is a matter of serious
concern. The committee is of the view that Home Ministry should take forward prison
reforms, provisions of the Fast Track Courts, so that, cases could be expedited and young
people could be released. (Para 3.21)
The Committee may be apprised of the final action taken in this regard once the
second phase is approved. A comprehensive plan may be prepared. (Para 4.1.3)
The Committee may be informed of the modules prepared by BPR&D and the
Institute of Correctional Administration and the action taken by the Ministry thereon.
(Para 4.2.3)

MINUTES

XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 7 January, 2010 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Raman Deka
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri A. Sampath
10. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
13. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri U.K. Bansal, Special Secretary (IS)
4. Shri Sada Kant, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
79

80
6. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary
7. Shri K. Skandan,Joint Secretary
8. Shri Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary
9. Shri L.K. Tewari, Director
10. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director
11. Shri Anju Sharma, Director
12. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director
Representatives of Intelligence Bureau
1. Shri Rajiv Mathur, Director
2. Shri R.N. Ravi, Additional Director
3. Shri Arvind Deep, Joint Director
4. Shri Avinash Manani, Joint Director
Representatives of CPFs
1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
2. Shri Rajan Medhekar, Special DG, BSF
3. Shri Alexender Daniel, Addl DG (Ops.), BSF
4. Shri Vikram Srivastava, DG, ITBP
5. Shri S.S. Harti, DIG (Ops.), ITBP
6. Lt. Gen. K.S. Yadava, DG , Assam Rifles
7. Col. A.S. Harge, Additional DIG , Assam Rifles
8. Shri M.V . Krishna Rao, DG, SSB
2.0 In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia was chosen by the
Committee to act as its Chairman, for the meeting.
3.0 The Chair welcomed the Members and wished them a happy and prosperous New Year. The
Chair then informed the Members that the day’s meeting had been convened to consider
Memorandum No. 1/2010 regarding action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the One Hundred and Forty Second Report of the Committee on
Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration and to hear
presentation of Home Secretary on ‘infiltration across the Borders’.
4.0 * * *
Memorandum No. 1/2010 regarding ATN on One Hundred and Forty Second Report
5.0 The Committee then took up Memorandum No. 1/2010  on the Action Taken Notes furnished
by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the One Hundred and Forty Second Report of the Committee.
The Committee noted that the Ministry had simply forwarded the Committee’s recommendations to
the respective State Governments and there was no follow-up on the implementation of the
recommendations by the State Governments. The Committee further noted that seven months had
elapsed since the recommendations were forwarded to the State Governments and no updates were
*** Relates to other matter.

81
available on the action taken by the latter. The Committee accordingly decided that the Ministry
may be asked to submit revised ATNs after obtaining inputs from State Governments and if
necessary by holding meetings with the concerned authorities. The Committee directed the
Secretariat to inform the Ministry of Home Affairs to take necessary action in the matter.
6.0 * * *
6.1 * * *
6.2 * * *
7.0 * * *
7.2 * * *
8.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

82
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 8th November, 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Shri L. K. Advani
6. Shri Khagen Das
7. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Babulal Marandi
10. Shri Baijayant Panda
11. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
13. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati B. Bhamathi, Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. K. Pathak, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. (Shrimati) P. K. Singh, Director
82

83
5. Shri Vikram Srivastava, DG, BPR&D
6. Shri R. Kini A., Director, (Pers), BPR&D
7. Dr. B.V . Trivedi, Deputy Director, BPR&D
8. Shri N. K. Tripathi, DG, NCRB
9. Shri R.B. Singh, Stats. Officer, NCRB
10. Shri Neeraj Kumar, DG (Prisons), Tihar Jail
2.0 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, including Shri
Khagen Das, who attended the meeting of the Committee for the first time, after nomination to the
Committee.
2.1 The Chairman then apprised the Members of the agenda of the day i.e. to hear the Home
Secretary on the updated Action Taken replies received from the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the 142
nd  Report of the Committee on the
implementation of Central Scheme of Modernization of Prisons Administration.
3.0 * * *
3.1 * * *
II. ORAL EVIDENCE OF HOME SECRETARY ON ATN ON 142
ND REPORT OF THE
COMMITTEE
4.0 The Chairman then informed the members that the Committee had presented 142 nd Report on
implementation of Central Scheme of Modernization of Prison Administration to Parliament on 26 th
February, 2009. After the presentation of the report, the same was sent to the Ministry of Home
Affairs, requesting them to furnish action taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee,
contained in the report. The Ministry furnished the action taken notes to the Secretariat. The
Committee discussed the said ATNs and found that the action taken replies, sent by the Ministry, on
most of the recommendations, were of routine nature. In view of that, the Committee felt that the
Ministry should come out with a concrete action taken notes and the Ministry of Home Affairs should
pursue the matter vigorously with the State Governments instead of just forwarding the
recommendations to the State Governments for necessary action. He also stated that after the receipt
of the further action taken replies by the Ministry, the Committee, decided to hear the Home
Secretary on 24
th August, 2011, however, that could not take place due to cancellation of the meeting
and therefore the Home Secretary had again been called for discussion.
4.1 The Chairman then pointed out that as per updated action taken notes, a meeting was called
on 16 th September, 2011by the Ministry of Home Affairs with the representatives of the State
Governments to review the physical and financial progress of the Scheme. As regards financial
targets, the overall gap between the allocation of funds and the amount spent was only Rs. 21.76
crores. However, the near achievement of the financial target was not reflected in the physical
targets. He observed various gaps with regard to number of jails to be constructed and number
of additional barracks to be constructed and also staff quarters. The Committee then decided to
seek a detailed explanation from the Home Secretary on the under-achievement of the physical
targets, though the Committee felt convinced by the achievement of financial targets.
4.2 * * *
5.0 * * *
5.1 * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

84
5.2 The Chairman then observed that the first phase of ‘Implementation of Central Scheme of
Modernisation of Prison Administration’ got a late start and ended on 31 March 2009, though the
Government assured that the second phase of the scheme would be continued. It was understood
that the Government was reviewing the whole issue and the second phase of the scheme was
under consideration. The Chairman sought to know from the Home Secretary the stand of the
Government and the present status of the proposal in this regard. He also stated that there were
little gaps between the allocation made under the scheme and the amount actually spent. However,
this near achievement of the financial targets was not reflected in the physical targets. He further
queried whether the Ministry was satisfied with the physical targets and what was the general
explanation of the State Governments in this regard and how they wanted to proceed about in the
second phase.
6.0 Thereafter, power-point presentation on the action taken by the Ministry on 142
nd Report of
the Committee on the Modernization of Prison Administration was made by Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs. The main highlights of the presentation are as under:-
(i) There are total number of 1374 prisons with authorized capacity of 3,07,052 and
inmate population of 3,76,969;
(ii) Occupancy rate stands 122.8 per cent in Central Prisons, 143.7 per cent in District
Prisons, 88.1 per cent in Sub-prisons, and 73.2 per cent in open prisons;
(iii) Prison demographics indicates one-third of convicted population, two-third of
under-trial and one per cent detenues;
(iv) Period of detention (unsentenced) stands 3.9 per cent upto 3 months, 22 per cent
upto 3 to 6 months, 18.5 per cent upto 6 to 12 months, 12.1 per cent upto 1 to
2 years, 5.8 per cent from 2 to 3 years, 2.7 per cent from 3 to 5 years and 1
per cent above 5 years;
(v) Women prisoners constitute 4.1% of the 15406 women prisoners, 4588 were
convicts and 10687 under-trials;
(vi) Declining trend of prison occupancy (percentage of overcrowding) i.e. 45.4 per
cent in 2005 to 22.8 per cent in 2009;
(vii) Increasing trend of foreign prisoners i.e. 284 in 2002 to 5262 in 2009. The
Repatriation of Sentenced Prisoners Act, 2003, to facilitate transfer of sentenced
foreign prisoners from India to their home countries and vice versa would help in
their social rehabilitation;
(viii) A sum of Rs. 1796.5 crores under non-plan scheme of modernization of prisons
was earmarked which constituted Rs. 1034.6 crores for Construction of new jails;
Rs. 248.6 crores for Expansion & Renovation of jails, Rs. 465.1 crores for Staff
quarters, Rs. 48.2 crores for sanitation and water supply. The scheme was
extended for a further period of 2 years without additional funds to enable the State
Governments to complete their activities. The scheme ended on 31.3.2009. The
central share of Rs. 21.76 crore was lying unspent with the State Governments as
on 16.9.2011;
(ix) Prison Modernization Project (with investment of about Rs. 1800 crores) included
Mega project; included construction of 119 new jails, 1572 additional barracks, and
8568 prison staff quarters completed, construction of 43 Jails, 159 barracks and
235 prison staff quarters was under completion;

85
(x) Many States have also made their own investments which inter alia , resulted in
decongestion in jails and improved civic amenities;
(xi) The Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended Rs. 609 crore for the up-
gradation of prisons for the eight States i.e. Andhra Pradesh - Rs. 90 crore,
Arunachal Pradesh - Rs. 10 crore, Chhattisgarh - Rs. 150 crore, Kerala - Rs. 154
crore, Maharashtra - Rs. 60 crore, Mizoram - Rs. 30 crore, Orissa - Rs. 100 crore,
and Tripura - Rs. 15 crore;
(xii) Several rounds of review meetings were held for physical/financial progress of the
Scheme by the Officers of Ministry of Home Affairs;
(xiii) A consolidated Compendium of Advisories issued by MHA over the years has been
published in June, 2011 and has been circulated to all the Prisons/Correctional
Administrators in the country for compliance;
(xiv) The State Governments being regularly impressed upon to invoke Sections 436A,
436(i) and 265 to 265 L of the CrPC 1973 with the objective to reduce the
overcrowding and languishing of under-trials in jails;
(xv) The Model Prison Manual being progressively adopted by the State Governments/
UTs to maintain uniformity in the prison administration throughout the country will
go a long way in effecting prison reforms;
(xvi) Exclusive prison for women depending upon the average number of women
prisoners in the respective States, ensured and infrastructural facilities, etc. like
creches created for the accompanying children of women prisoners, hygienic living
conditions and provision of separate kitchen for women prisoners and the existing
medical facilities in the prisons being overhauled;
(xvii) The old system of shaving dispensed with and by and large prisoners being
provided a separate disposable razor to check the spread of HIV/AIDS among the
prisoners;
(xviii) Procedure of visits to jail inmates is being made transparent in the prisons and on
construction of modem visitors’ chambers is being taken up;
(xix) Telephone facility is being provided in some selected prisons of the country on a
trial basis. The inmates can use this facility in the presence of a jail staff. The
telephonic conversation is also taped to track the connections of hardened
criminals;
(xx) Prison workshops being modernized with additional vocational activities and
emphasis on correctional programme/vocational training in the jails;
(xxi) The daily wages of the convicted prisoners working in the prison workshops have
been increased and the undertrials are being given an opportunity to work in the
prison workshop, if willing to do so.
(xxii) To ensure literacy among prisoners across the country, facility of correspondence
courses in vocational disciplines provided in some of the prisons and degrees/
diplomas being awarded to the prisoners after successful completion of their course
so that they could lead a normal life in the mainstream of society, after their
release. All States/UTs asked to make this a focus area in tandem with IGNOU and
involvement of NGOs and other non-profit organizations for education of the
prisoners as also their rehabilitation;

86
(xxiii) V iability of opening of ITI like institutions within the jail premises to impart
industrial training in various disciplines to the inmates, is under active consideration
of some States/UTs;
(xxiv) M/s Ernst and Young, the consultants appointed for Scheme review had made
various recommendations for improving the living conditions of the prisons and
prison personnel. Some of the recommendations/observations are: Overcrowding of
prisons and need for more prisons/additional barracks, Mechanism to monitor fund
flow from the Treasury Department to the implementing agency, Shortage of staff
at all the places particularly the staff related to correctional administration,
Recruitment of additional staff including medical, guarding, correctional staff,
clerical staff, etc. for the existing prisons; Technological improvements in security
arrangements by providing latest equipments such as CCTVs, walky-talkies, Video
Conferencing facility; Adoption of Model Prison Manual circulated by the
Government of India to all States/UTs; Increase in the wages given to the prisoners
for working in the prison workshops, etc. Introduction of rehabilitative scheme for
prisoners undergoing imprisonment for five years or more;
(xxv) The proposal amounting Rs. 4270 crore for second phase of the scheme was
placed before the Committee of Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) for consideration. The
meeting of the CNE took place on 27
th August, 2009 wherein it was decided that
no new scheme be taken up during the year 2009-10 or 2010-11 due to financial
constraints, since Prison is a State subject, the States must provide resources for
upgradation and modernization of prisons and the States that have no resources
have to project their requirement before the 13
th Finance Commission, States must
use innovative methods like public private partnership or to shift old jails outside the
city to reclaim and exploit old jails sites which can fund their modernization plans;
and the scheme to be shifted from non-Plan to Plan side.
(xxvi) Accordingly, the State Governments/UT Administrations informed about the
deferment of scheme with a suggestion that the Government of India will support
the proposals of the State Government seeking more funds for modernization of
prisons as and when it is submitted to the Planning Commission.
(xxvii) Since the proposal of second phase was deferred by the CNE for the period of
2009-10 and 2010-11 and also keeping the recommendation of Parliamentary
Standing Committee and demands of State Governments, a proposal for second
phase of the scheme for Rs. 5693.33 crore has now been initiated in this Ministry
and the proposal is under active consideration.
7.0 The Chairman wanted to know from the Home Secretary the gap between the financial and
physical targets and their achievement. Responding to that, the Home Secretary replied that some
States started very late and by the time they started, the cost had gone up, and, therefore, they
utilized the funds on lesser number of prisons or barracks. He however, stated that the whole issue
needed a detailed review.
7.1 Responding to the query of the Chairman about media reports about large-scale vacancies
of doctors in Tihar Jail, Delhi, the DG (Prisons), informed the Committee that the Delhi
Government was in the process of recruiting the doctors and would be able to fill up those
vacancies soon. The Home Secretary submitted that the second phase of the present modernization
programme needed to be sanctioned for which the Ministry was pursuing with the Ministry of
Finance and the Planning Commission to shift Non-Plan scheme to Plan Scheme. He, however,

87
stated that the Planning Commission seemed to have some reluctance. Thereafter, the Chairman and
Members sought some clarifications which were replied to.
7.2 The Home Secretary attempted to respond to the queries and stressed that ‘Prisons’ is a
State subject and these are funded by the States and most of the States, barring one or two, were
in financially difficult circumstances, and, therefore, when a State goes through the difficult
financial situation, the first thing, is to cut the non-Plan expenditure, and, unfortunately, police and
prisons are in the non-Plan side and in view of this, the second phase of prison modernization
scheme is necessary to assist the States.
8.0 * * *
8.1 * * *
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.21 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

88
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20 th December, 2011 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Baijayant Panda
13. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
2. Shri G.V .V . Sarma, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Anuj Sharma, Director
88

89
Representative of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shrimati Sarda Jain, JS & LC
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee apprised the Members of the agenda of the
day i.e. (i) to consider and adopt draft 156 th Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 142 nd Report of the Committee
on Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernization of Prison Administration, (ii) to review the
future programme of the Committee and (iii) to hear the presentation of Home Secretary on the
Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
I. Adoption of draft 156
th Report of the Committee
3. The Committee then took up for consideration draft 156 th Report of the Committee on the
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 142 nd
Report of the Committee on Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernization of Prison
Administration. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report with some minor
modifications. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out typographical and patent errors
in the Report. The Committee also authorized the Chairman, and in his absence Dr. V . Maitreyan,
and Shri D. Raja, Members, Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha on
22nd December, 2011. The Committee also authorized Shrimati Kakali Ghosh Dastidar and in her
absence, Shri Bishnu Pada Ray, Members, Lok Sabha to lay the Report on the Table of Lok Sabha
on 22
nd December, 2011.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

92

93
Annexure-I
Scheme of Modernisation of Prisons (Physical Progress)
(Position as on 16.9.2011)
Sl. Name of No. of Jails No. of Jails No. of jails No. of additional No. of addl. No. of addl. No. of staff No. of staff No. of staff
No. the States to be constructed operationalised barracks to be barracks barracks quarters quarters quarters
constructed constructed constructed operation- to be constructed occupied
under the under the alised constructed
scheme scheme under the
scheme
1 A.P. 4 4 2 141 141 141 632 632 632
2 Assam 2 2 2 7 7 7 249 202 202
3 Bihar 11 4 2 154 112 112 248 248 248
4 Chhattisgarh 6 3 0 36 36 36 351 309 309
5 Goa 1 0 0 0 0 ] 10 10 10
6 Gujarat 10 9 8 81 81 81 61 61 61
7 H.P. 4 2 1 4 4 4 18 18 18
8 Haryana 5 4 3 2 2 2 177 177 177
9 Jharkhand 4 1 0 12 12 12 65 65 65
10 J&K 6 3 1 60 60 60 230 212 193
11 Karnataka 11 11 11 66 66 66 456 456 456
12 Kerala 4 4 4 18 18 18 163 163 163
13 M.P. 8 2 2 411 324 200 1249 1249 1249
14 Maharashtra 8 3 1 49 45 45 406 394 212
15 Manipur 1 1 0 0 0 0 25 25 4
16 Meghalaya 2 2 0 9 9 9 76 64 64
17 Mizoram 4 4 1 36 36 23 69 69 38
18 Nagaland 5 5 3 11 11 11 13 13 8
19 Orissa 21 19 17 65 64 64 680 674 674
20 Punjab 2 2 1 81 75 75 279 261 261
21 Rajasthan 10 10 8 18 18 18 302 302 296
22 Sikkim 2 1 1 5 5 5 2 2 2
23 Tamilnadu 9 9 9 12 12 12 1001 926 926
24 Tripura 5 3 1 6 6 6 101 101 101
25 U.P. 9 5 3 400 381 381 1540 1535 1535
26 Uttarakhand 4 4 4 11 11 11 130 130 130
27 West Bengal 4 2 2 36 36 36 270 270 270
T
OTAL 162 119 87 1731 1572 1435 8803 8568 8304

94
Annexure-II
Scheme of Modernization of Prisons (Phase-I)
Unspent Balance with State Government as on 16.9.2011
(figure Rs. in crore)
Sl. State Release Expenditure Unspent Unspent
No. incurred Balance Balance of
Cen+State Central
Central S tate T otal Share
share share
1 A.P . 81.23 27.08 108.31 108.31 0.00 0.00
2 Assam 29.38 9.79 39.17 37.46 1.71 1.30
3 Bihar 134.57 44.86 179.43 179.43 0.00 0.00
4 Chhattisgarh 28.03 9.34 37.37 28.42 8.95 6.41
5 Goa 10.19 3.40 13.59 9.91 3.68 0.20
6 Gujarat 49.43 16.47 65.88 65.88 0.00 0.00
7 Haryana 77.08 25.69 102.76 102.76 0.00 0.00
8 H.P . 15.14 5.05 20.19 20.19 0.00 0.00
9 J & K 21.67 7.22 28.89 28.89 0.00 0.00
10 Jharkhand 31.68 10.56 42.24 42.24 0.00 0.00
11 Karnataka 40.35 13.47 53.82 53.82 0.00 0.00
12 Kerala 24.55 8.06 32.61 32.61 0.00 0.00
13 M.P. 116.30 38.84 155.14 151.01 4.13 3.09
14 Maharashtra 96.86 32.29 129.15 121.15 8.00 6.00
15 Manipur 1 1.78 3.92 15.70 15.70 0.00 0.00
16 Meghalaya 12.27 4.09 16.36 16.36 0.00 0.00
17 Mizoram 13.31 4.44 17.75 17.75 0.00 0.00
18 Nagaland 1 1.85 3.95 15.80 15.80 0.00 0.00
19 Orissa 80.55 26.85 107.40 107.40 0.00 0.00
20 Punjab 55.85 18.61 74.46 70.38 4.08 2.96
21 Rajasthan 48.84 16.29 65.13 64.76 0.37 0.00
22 Sikkim 13.64 4.12 17.76 16.24 1.52 1.52
23 Tamil Nadu 71.51 23.83 95.34 95.34 0.00 0.00
24 Tripura 20.99 7.00 27.99 27.99 0.00 0.00
25 U.P . 173.28 57.97 231.25 231.05 0.20 0.20
26 Uttarakhand 22.73 7.58 30.32 30.32 0.00 0.00
27 West Bengal 53.92 17.98 71.90 71.90 0.00 0.00
TOTAL 1346.95 448.76 1795.71 1763.07 32.64 21.76

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.