PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 163
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30  AUGUST, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 30  AUGUST, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30  AUGUST, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 30  AUGUST, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2012/BHADRA, 1934 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2012/BHADRA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY THIRD REPORT
ON
WORKING OF SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL 
NATIONAL POLICE ACADEMY, HYDERABAD

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY THIRD REPORT
ON
WORKING OF SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
NATIONAL POLICE ACADEMY, HYDERABAD
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30 TH AUGUST, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 30 TH AUGUST, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2012/BHADRA, 1934 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-318


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—53
CHAPTER I : Organisation . ........................................................................................... 1—14
CHAPTER II : Training Components and Methodology ............................................ 15—27
CHAPTER III : Issues and emerging areas of training .............................................. 28—42
CHAPTER IV : Observations/Conclusions and Recommendations of the Committee —
At A Glance ........................................................................................... 43—53
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 55—67

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
*7. Shri Javed Akhtar
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri L. Raja Gopal
16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
17. Shri Naveen Jindal
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
* Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21st September, 2012 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who resigned from the Membership of the
DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f. the 13th September, 2010.
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
Σ4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
♣5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh V ardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan,  Committee Officer
(ii)
Σ Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy nominated w.e.f.  4 th July, 2012 vice Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ceased to be Member consequent upon
expiration of term of membership from Rajya Sabha on 2 nd April, 2012.
♣ Shri Satish Chandra Misra nominated w.e.f. 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal who resigned from the membership
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 13 th March, 2012.
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee on
Rural Development.

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Sixty third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy, Hyderabad.
2.0 The Committee, in its sitting held on 11
th May, 2011, identified the subject “Working of
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy” for detailed study.
3.0 The Committee visited the Sardar V allabhbhai Patel National Police Academy on 5 th July,
2011 to have a first hand information on the working of the Academy.
4.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 7 th June, 2012 heard the views of senior retired IPS
officers, namely, Shri P.S. Rama Mohan Rao, Former DGP & Former Governor of Tamil Nadu;
Shri Shanker Sen, Ex-Director, Sardar V allabhbhai Patel National Police Academy and Senior Fellow,
Institute of Social Sciences; and Shri Prakash Singh, Ex-DG, BSF on the “Working of Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy”. The Committee in its sitting held on 29
h June, 2012
heard the presentation of Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs on the working of Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy in the light of the visit undertaken by it and views and
suggestions made by the above-mentioned retired senior police officers.
5.0 The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) Annual Reports 2010-11 and 2011-12 of the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Background Note furnished by the Ministry;
(iii) Presentations made by the management of the Academy and the Ministry of Home
Affairs;
(iv) Replies to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee;
(v) Proceedings of the Committee with the management of the Academy and verbatim of
the meetings of the Committee held on 7
h and 29 h June, 2012;
(vi) Replies to the queries raised by the Members during the Committee’s meetings held
on 7 th and 29 th June, 2012; and
(vii) The Gore Committee Report on Police Training.
5.1 The Report contains three chapters. Chapter I contains organization of NPA. Chapter II deals
with Training Components and Methodology and Chapter III deals with the Issues and Emerging
Areas of Training. The observations and conclusions of the Committee have been given at respective
narrative part of the Report in bold letters. However, for the sake of convenience, all observations
and recommendations of the Committee have been arranged at a glance in Chapter IV.
6.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 27
h August, 2012 considered and adopted the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th August,  2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
ORGANISATION
1.0 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), Hyderabad is a premier police
training institution in the country functioning as a ‘Centre of Excellence’ for conducting the basic
courses for the regular recruits and induction trainings for the SPS officers appointed to IPS by
promotion. The Academy conducts courses also for officers of Indian Administrative Service
(IAS), Indian Revenue Service (IRS), Indian Audit and Accounts Service (IA&AS), Indian Forest
Service (IFS) as well as for the officers of the Judicial Probation and Prison departments, Public
Sector Undertakings, Banks and Insurance Companies, etc.
1.1 The Academy was established in 1948 at Mount Abu under the aegis of Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel. The institution was rechristened as National Police Academy in 1967 and shifted to
Hyderabad in February, 1975. After the shifting to Hyderabad, it was named after its founder, as
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA).
MISSION STATEMENT
1.2 According to the Academy, the primary purpose of the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy is to prepare leaders for the Indian Police Service, who will lead/command the
force with courage, uprightness, dedication and a strong sense of service to the people. The
objective of setting up of the Academy was to forge a new uniformity of purpose and
professional competence and evolve a measure/mechanism to provide the needed protection to the
national fabric. The Academy informed the Committee that in a message, Sardar Patel had
proclaimed as:
“The College is the first institution of its kind in India. It has no precedents to look back
upon but has an inspiring example to set for future generations. It has to build itself and
build others. It has to create among its alumni that love and reverence for their alma mater
which are at once the pride and heritage of an educational institution. May it secure all
this from the devotion and attention of its inmates”.
These words have guided functioning of this institution ever since.
1.2.1 Regarding the Mission of the Academy, the Committee was apprised that the Academy
endeavours to inculcate in the trainees, such values and norms as would help them serve the people
better. In particular, it tries to inculcate integrity of the highest order, sensitivity to aspirations of
people in a fast changing social and economic milieu, respect for human rights, broad liberal
perspective of law and justice, high standard of professionalism, physical fitness and mental
alertness.
1.2.2 As regards the Vision of the Academy, the Committee was informed that towards the
intended goal to be a Global Centre of Excellence and the Nodal Centre of Police Training in India–
the academy aspires for setting Bench-marking standards, leading the Network of Police Training
Institutions in the country and contributing to their Capacity Building, developing training literature,
besides being a Centre for Research par excellence on Policing and Internal Security issues, ever
keeping pace with emerging challenges.

2
1.2.3 The Academy also endevours to build a cadre of exemplary police officers who will uphold
the Rule of Law, respect National values of Secularism, Democracy, Equality and Service to People
and ensure the dignity and Human Rights of the citizens with sensitivity.
1.2.4 The Committee notes with appreciation the purpose of the Academy and its vision.
The Committee hopes that the Academy would continue to endeavour to implement the
vision of Sardar Vallabbhai Patel and make it a world class police training institute.
PRESENTATION AND ORAL EVIDENCE
1.3 During the Committee’s visit to Hyderabad in July, 2011 the Director, NPA, made a detailed
presentation on the important activities innovations and developments of the Academy. The
presentation covered the work done in the Basic Courses, Tactics Wing, Senior Courses including
Mid-Career Training Programme, Research & publication and existing and proposed infrastructure.
The Committee, in its meeting held on 7
th June, 2012, heard the views of three retired senior police
officers and had valuable suggestions on existing physical and training infrastructure and
functioning of NPA. The Ministry of Home Affairs and the NPA Management further responded to
those suggestions in the Committee’s meeting held on 29th June, 2012 and also submitted their
views in writing.
KEY OBJECTIV E OF ACADEMY
1.4 The Committee was apprised by the management that the objectives of Academy training
are four-fold, namely,
(i) Imparting of professional knowledge and understanding;
(ii) Development of processional skills of excellence;
(iii) Nurturing of human values, right attitudes and appropriate behaviours in professional
and personal life;
(iv) Development of overall personality (Character, habits, self-discipline, norms values,
etiquette, etc.)
1.4.1 The management informed the Committee that Academy is a focal point for training of the
trainers of police training institutions all over the country and provides consultancy services to
sister training institutions for improving their management of training function. The Academy also
serves as a centre for research studies on police subjects and will expand its resource base through
tie-ups with similar institutions in and outside the country.
1.4.2 The Committee was informed that the Alumni of the Academy have served the largest
democracy of the world with commitment, dedication and selfless motive since independence. At
the alter of duty, so far, 28 IPS Officers have scarified their lives for preserving the integrity of
the nation. Many alumni have served the Government of India in various capacities like Governors,
National Security Advisors, Chiefs of various intelligence agencies, State Police and Paramilitary
Forces with distinction. In recognition of the outstanding achievements of the Academy and its
service to the Nation, the Academy received the President’s Colours on its 40
th Anniversary on
September 15, 1988.
MANAGEMENT BY ACTIVITIES AND MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES
1.5 The Academy Management apprised the Committee that approach of the Academy is activity
centered involving PDCA (Plan, Do, Check and Act) cycle. The Management by Activities (MBA)
focuses on managing activities to reduce cost and improve customer values. It is a technique for

3
managing organization better. It also facilitates long term strategic decisions and supports the quest
for continuous improvement by allowing management to gain new insights into activity
performance. Towards these objectives, the Academy certainly follows Management by Activities.
1.5.1 The Committee was also informed that working of Academy is fully guided by Management
by Objectives (MBO). The essence of MBO is participative goal setting, choosing of course of
actions and decision making. The basic principle behind MBO is for employees to have clear
understanding of the roles and responsibilities expected of them. Some of the important features
and advantages of the MBO are increased motivation, better communication and coordination,
clarity of goals, higher commitment by subordinates and greater team building and cohesion
between them. The Academy T raining is an intensive and rigorous process which requires
tremendous amount of coordination and highly dedicated staff.
1.5.2 The Committee was informed that the Academy’s functioning is very well structured on the
philosophy of MBO. Trainers’ and Staffs’ Responsibilities, standards of their Performance and the
Targets are set which are effectively followed by well structured monitoring mechanism.
Performance Counseling is further followed for imparting training to IPS Probationers in Indoor
and Outdoor Training. Performance levels are bench-marked in indoor and outdoor training tasks.
1.5.3 It was stated that the Academy lays stress in designing curriculum for the IPS Probationers
by keeping ‘Mission Statement’ in view. Training in leadership is also based on the Mission &
Vision of the Academy. Enough emphasis is laid on developing integrity, sensitization in respect of
the aspirations of people, professionalism, physical fitness, dedication and strong sense of service
to the people. For shaping Police Trainers, T raining of Trainers’ Courses are conducted. Active
research projects are undertaken to improve the quality of training inputs.
1.5.4 The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the academy is guided by
Management by Activities (MBA) as well as the Management by Objectives (MBO), is of the
view that the academy should always be open for continuous improvement and change in
achieving the set objectives.
DIRECTOR: POWER AND FUNCTIONS
1.6 The Academy is headed by a Director, an IPS Officer of the rank of Director General of
Police who is assisted by two Joint Directors of the rank of Inspector General of Police. Other
faculty members belong to Indian Police Service, Academic and Scientific W orld. The Academy
Board headed by the Union Home Secretary has senior police and administrative officers, social
scientists and eminent educationists as its member. The Academy Board is a policy formulating and
oversight board, and periodically reviews the functioning of the Academy.
1.6.1 During the course of interaction between the Committee and Academy Management, in
response to a query of the Chairman of the Committee regarding the tenure of the Director and
the faculty member of the academy, the Director, NPA apprised the Committee that there is no
fixed tenure for the Director, NPA while other faculty members have a fixed tenure.
1.6.2 Regarding the selection of the Director of the Police Academy an expert viewed as  under:–
“...we have to be very, very careful in the selection of the Director of Academy and not
just that anyone who could not become a State police chief or could not become head of a Central
Police Organisation and we send him to the Academy. Broadly, this has been happening, I would
not say always. There have been very distinguished Directors of the NPA but the selection process
is not as stringent and does not examine the suitability of an officer of the NP A on the basis of
certain yardsticks. I would say that even when the Director of the National Police Academy is
walking, it should be impressive. The manner in which he carries himself should have a bearing.

4
When he speaks, he should be able to inspire, he should be able to motivate. The Director of the
National Police Academy has to be a gem of an officer. His selection should be very carefully
done. I have seen officers wanting to head the State Police Organizations or the Central Police
Organizations, and, then, some find their way to the National Police Academy. Why not take the
officers who retire at the age of 60. Take them on a contract of two years. You will have a richer
talent to tap.”
1.6.3 Subscribing to the above view on the pivotal position of Director and the need for careful
selection of the Director, another expert viewed as under:
“...that success of the National Police Academy depends on a good Director. He is like the
Sun around which the planets move. And his selection has to be done very, very carefully. I have
seen Directors who have been thinking how to go to the CRP or the BSF or other organisations
from day one. They did not like the isolation of the National Pol ice Academy. So, selection has
to be done carefully. And then give him a fixed tenure. You are giving a fixed tenure to the
Directors of CBI, IB, and RAW Similarly, give a fixed tenure to the Director here so that he
remains there for some time. I will give you a practical example of the present Director. I know
him. He is an excellent officer. But he has eight months left. What can he do in this short period?
So, select properly and think of giving him a fixed tenure.
1.6.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs agreeing with the above suggestions felt that Director should
be carefully selected from among serving officer with a fixed tenure.
1.6.5 The Committee understands that Director of NPA is of a significant position in the
Academy so far its functioning is concerned. The personality of the Director leaves a lasting
impression on the functioning of the Academy. His job profile requires him to be a good
leader, motivator and communicator. Therefore, there should be a well laid procedure for
selection of the Director, NPA. The Committee also feels that the fixed tenure of the
Director would give a certain period for him for planning and executing the set objectives.
Since, the Directors of IB, CBI and RAW  are given a fixed tenure, the Director of NPA
should also be given a fixed tenure on the same analogy. Since the Ministry has agreed for
careful selection with a fixed tenure, the Committee recommends that Government may lay
down an appropriate selection procedure. The Committee agrees with the Ministry view
point that the Director should be a serving officer.
1.6.6 Some Members raised a query as to whether there are any powers available with Director,
Mussoorie Academy that need to be adopted by NPA. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the
comparative chart of delegated powers to the Director, NPA and the Director, LBS NAA.
1.6.7 While comparing existing financial powers of Director NPA, Hyderabad and Director
LBS NAA, Mussoorie, it has been observed that there are variations in respect of the following
items:
Sl. Item Delegated power to Director Director, LBS NAA
No. NPA after revision
12 3 4
1. Outsourcing of Rs. 1 lakh, relevant provision of [Engage consultants on
professional services GFR 2005 (GFR 178085) to be individual as well
followed & cases submitted to institutional basis]
MHA for approval of the Director is empowered to
number of manpower. engage consultants upto
Rs.1 lakh per case.

5
12 3 4
2. Works and Repairs Rs. 1.5 crores throug h PWD etc., New Works: Rs.3 crores
as per provisions of Rule – 126 Repair Works:
of GFR 2005. Rs.60 lakhs.
In respect of the minor works (to be executed by CPWD)
through PWD – Rs.15 lakhs w.r.t.
residential buildings and Rs.30 lakhs
w.r.t. office buildings. In case of
minor works to be worked out
departmentally the existing power
is only Rs.10 lakhs.
1.6.8 The Committee was further informed that delegation of similar powers to National Police
Academy is under consideration of Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation with Integrated
Finance.
1.6.9 The Committee takes note of the comparative position of delegated powers to
Director, NPA and LBS NAA. The Committee is constrained to note that Director, NPA, is
comparatively at a disadvantageous position so far as the exercise of delegated financial
powers are concerned even after the revision. The Ministry should have given similar
powers to Director, NPA at par with Director, LBS NAA. Now that the proposal is already
under consideration, the Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken in the
matter.
SELECTION OF FACULTY
1.7 Relating to selection of teaching staff of NPA, an expert stated as under:–
“the staff, the faculty has to be very carefully chosen. Do they have flair for training? Are
they interested in training subjects or they want to run away from their cadres and be nearer
homes? ...We should take an officer only if he has a flair for training and he can really
make an impression on the probationers…..Talking of A.D. level, I think, considerable
augmentation in the strength of the NP A is also required because the number of courses
have increased, the number of probationers have increased, and, the workload is
considerable. The ADs are in a spin most of the time. So, increase in the number of
Assistant Directors in the National Police Academy is also very necessary. And, after we
have inducted an officer, if it is considered necessary that he requires specialization in some
area, he should be sent for that. They generally stay in the Academy for a minimum of three
to five years. So, during that period, say, within the first three years, if necessary, that
officer can be sent for a course also to specialize in a particular area so that he is able
to impart that specialized knowledge to the probationers.”
1.7.1 The expert further stated that the selection of Speaker or lecturers in the National Police
Academy from outside should also be carefully done. On the issue he stated as under:
“Coming to speakers or the lecturers who come to the National Police Academy, of course,
we have the faculty there in the National Police Academy but officers from outside are also
invited. These officers and the people, whether they are police officers, management
specialists or law experts, have to be carefully chosen and the facility of distant learning
should also be there. There may be some such people who are staying abroad and it must
be expensive to call them to India just for a lecture. If they are not able to come to

6
Hyderabad, may be due to their commitments or due to poor health, they could be put
through video conferencing with the probationers. So, again, selection of lecturers or the
speakers to impart instructions to the probationers has to be carefully done.”
1.7.2 Another expert suggesting for careful selection of the trainers stated as under:
“…it is not that we have to choose only from ADs. We can have them from outdoor staff.
I still remember our Chief Drill Inspector. We had great respect for him. We can have that
kind of instructor from the field. The Gore Committee suggested certain incentives for them.
That 30 per cent one is there. It also suggested that after his tenure in the National Police
Academy, he should be given a good posting. That is the recognition for his duty. We need
good ADs. I would also suggest that it should not be done only by seeing the records. Here
the Director has to move and spot people. I can tell you that I was able to get some very
good Assistant Directors because I used to know them. I could persuade them to come there.
And they did a wonderful job there. In the selection process, the Director plays a very, very
important role….I would like to mention that we should get some good professionals in the
training staff.”
1.7.3 The other expert also suggested that the faculty of the National Police Academy should act
as role models.
1.7.4 The representative of the Academy and the Ministry of Home Affairs were in agreement
with the suggestions of experts. Regarding the augmentation in the strength of NPA, the Committee
was informed that the 274 newly created posts would take care of the requisite number of the
Assistant Directors. The Committee was informed that the faculty is from time to time nominated
for specialized courses. Moreover, Resource persons from fields of law, management, police
sciences, forensic sciences etc. are invited as guest speakers. The MCTP resource persons coming
from other countries are invited to address the IPS trainees as well.
1.7.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed that NPAs need to have criminologists,
sociologists, psychologists, management experts, jurists etc. on the faculty of NPA. Presently NPA
has 2 posts of Readers in the field of Teaching Methodology and Behavioural Science. However,
this may be further augmented with criminologists, psychologists and sociologists.
1.7.6 The Committee feels that since the nature and style of crimes are changing due to
technological development, modernization and sophistication, faculty needs to be chosen with
great care. Stringent yardsticks have to be laid down for the selection of faculty not only
at the teaching staff level but also at the level of Assistant Directors and Deputy Directors.
The teaching staff from all fields viz.  law, business management, human resource
management, police science, forensic sciences, criminology, sociology, Psychology, etc. must
be selected with due care keeping in view the requirement of the academy and also taking
into account its role and the responsibility. The Committee also understands that the post
of the Assistant Directors, is very important and their selection should be done through a
stringent selection procedure. High caliber, integrity and efficiency should be the criteria for
selection.
PAY-SCALES OF OFFICERS AND STAFF
1.8 An expert pointed out that the DG’s pay-scale, at present, is Rs.75,000-Rs.80,000. The
Chiefs of IB, CBI, BSF, and CRP get a higher pay-sca1e, whereas the Director, National Police
Academy, gets a lower pay-scale.
1.8.1 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for the anomaly in the scale of Director
and whether the Ministry would like to consider upgradation of the pay of the Director, National

7
Police Academy, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that the post of the
Director, Indira Gandhi National Fore st Academy, Dehradun is in the apex scale of Rs.80,000/-.
It was further stated that the post of Director, SVP, NPA Hyderabad is in the scale of Rs. 75,500–
80,000.
1.8.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs agreed to the pay parity of Director of NPA with Directors
of IB, CBI, BSF, and CRP as the same would facilitate the interaction at senior level and would
attract the best talent for the post of Director.
1.8.3 Since the Ministry of Home Affairs has agreed for pay parity of Director, NPA with
the Chiefs of IB, CBI, BSF and CRPF, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may
finalize the proposal and send it to appropriate Ministry for approval at the earliest.
1.8.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs in a written reply submitted that there is anomaly in pay-
scales of non-gazetted staff of National Police Academy, North East Police Academy and Bureau
of Police Research & Development vis-a-vis the CAPFs. To remove the anomaly and to bring Pay
Bands and Grade Pay of Non-Gazetted Uniformed Staff of these institutes at par with those of
CPMFs, a proposal is under consideration of the Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation with
Ministry of Finance. It was also stated that the Ministry of Finance has shown its reservation to
concur to the proposal. However the proposal has been taken up again with the Ministry of Finance
showing some saving by way of surrendering some teaching/non-teaching support staff such as
Constable (2), Head Constable (5), Sub-Inspectors (7) and Inspector (1).
1.8.5 The Committee agrees with the proposal of Ministry of Home Affairs that the pay
structure of the Academy should be brought at par with the CPMFs. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Finance may reconsider the case. The Ministry of Home
Affairs may, accordingly, pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission.
1.8.6 When pointed that there is a feeling that there is lack of sufficient incentives for training
staff to join the Academy and asked about the steps that are proposed to be taken by the Ministry
to improve the incentives to the training staff, the Ministry replied that at present the training staff/
faculty who are being taken on deputation from other organizations are paid training allowance @
30% of basic pay in terms of provisions contained in MHA order No.27012/42/85-FP-1 dated 18/
6/1986) read with DoPT OM No.12017/2/86-Trg (TNP) dated 31/3/1987 in addition to pay &
allowances applicable to them. This is at par with the other training institutes for other services.
1.8.7 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may explore other
incentives in addition to the above so that ef ficient staff is attracted to the Academy.
V ACANCIES IN NPA
1.9 On being enquired regarding the vacant posts lying in the NPA, the Ministry of Home
Affairs apprised the Committee that out of total sanctioned strength of 693, 445 posts have already
been filled and 248 posts are vacant at present in spite of ongoing efforts to fill the same. The
National Police Academy is basically a deputationist organization and largely depends on CPMFs and
State Police organizations for manpower requirement. Filling up posts on deputation basis is a
continuous process. Most of the Group ‘A’ posts are to be filled up by the IPS Officers on
deputation. But due to shortage of IPS officers especially at the level of SP rank, nomination of
IPS officers for the posts of Assistant Director on deputation are not forthcoming. Some of Group
‘B’ posts are to be filled up in consultation with UPSC which takes considerable period. The
Ministry, therefore, admitted that there are shortages of suitable personnel and delay in the process.
Besides, the proposed Recruitment Rules for newly created posts are in the process of getting
approved.

8
1.9.1 The Committee feels that serious efforts are required to fill up the vacant posts. The
Ministry may make serious efforts for posting of IPS officers in NPA. In regard to filing
up of group B posts, advance action may be initiated and regularly pursued with UPSC. The
recruitment rules for the newly created posts may be got approved at the earliest so that
the new staff are in place soon.
INFRASTRUCTURE
1.10 The Academy is situated in the southern part of the city of Hyderabad and is spread over
an area of around 275 acres. It has two campuses namely Site-A and Site-B, situated across the
road to each other. Site-A has the residences of subordinate officers, community facilities and the
riding section while Site-B has all the training facilities, including the residential facilities for trainee,
and residences of senior officers/faculty members.
1.10.1 During the presentation on Infrastructure facilities of the Academy, the Director NPA
apprised the Committee that various infrastructural facilities available at the Academy covered
facilities for training the IPS Probationers and senior police officers, existing buildings like
Millennium Training Complex, Diamond Jubilee Complex, IPS Mess, Senior Officers Mess, etc.
Some infrastructure to be upgraded under CNE includes 140 room Sr. Officers’ Mess-II, new IPS
Mess with 100 Rooms, indoor Sports Complex, new Stable Blocks, Multi-Purpose Hall at Diamond
Jubilee Complex, Miscellaneous Outdoor Training Facilities, Urban Shooting Range, Special Tactics
Wing Building etc. He further stated that the process for acquiring 400 acres of land at
Ibrahimpatnam was underway for Special Tactics Wing purpose and 5 acres land for construction
of residential building complex and 20 acres of land adjacent to NPA for further expansion. The
Academy was also taking steps to organize modern weapon and equipment for training purposes.
1.10.2 The Director further informed the Committee that the Academy has paid special attention
for comprehensive management of entire eco-system within the campus. For this, Drip irrigation
and Sprinkler System have been introduced to avoid wastage of water. Similarly Bunds, tanks and
roof harvesting systems have been created for water conservation. 80 solar street lamps have been
installed bringing down the electricity consumption. The future plans include all new construction
projects to follow GRIHA norms of GOI. The Academy is also trying to generate awareness among
the IPS probationers about the eco-system, rain water harvesting, utilizing the alternate sources of
energy, waste management etc.
1.10.3 The Committee, while taking note of the basic infrastructure of the academy and
future expansion, recommends that all projects pertaining to expanding the existing
infrastructure should be completed without time and cost over-run and to achieve that end,
Government should extend requisite fund in time. The process of acquiring additional land
for special tactics wing and other purposes may be completed soon so that other works
thereon may be taken up.
RESEARCH WING OF NPA
1.11 The mission statement of the Academy envisages it as a centre for research studies. In
keeping with the mission statement, the Police Fellowship Scheme was initiated to enable police
officers and others actively involved with police to conduct research in various fields of police
work and to facilitate systematic handling of problems, evaluation of the current practices and
formulation of alternative methods of handling such situations. Over the years a number of research
studies have been conducted under the Fellowship Scheme. Currently, the Research Studies which
are being conducted under the Police Fellowship Scheme inter alia  include Questioning an accused-
Prescriptions and Practice-Towards Greater Professionalism; Performance Indicators for Police
Stations District and State levels; Systematic Analysis of Training Needs of Police Personnel in

9
Naxal Prone Areas of Chhattisgarh and Orissa; Integrated Intelligence Management System for the
State Police Intelligence and Use of Psychological Profiling to Improve Standards of Policing. The
Committee was informed that the research activities at the Academy got a boost last year with the
establishment of Research Cell at NPA. The projects initiated by the Research Cell are of
contemporary relevance and practical utility for police officials at the cutting edge level.
1.11.1 During the course of the deliberation with the Committee, an expert pointed out that the
research facilities in the National Police Academy are very inadequate and felt that the faculty
members should be encouraged to undertake research in training related subjects. On the issue of
establishing a research wing in NPA, another expert suggested that the academy management
should widen the scope of research in NPA beyond the theoretical aspect. He emphasized the
applied research which has been strongly recommended by the Gore Committee.
1.11.2 The Gore Committee on Police Training was appointed in 1971 to undertake a review of
the existing police training programmes in the country and to suggest ways in which they should
be modified so that the country may have a police force which is professionally well-equipped and
capable of responding effectively to the changing social situation. Regarding the need for a research
cell, the Gore Committee in its report observed as under:-
“While fundamental research may be undertaken mostly by the Central and State police
research units, the training institution should also undertake a certain amount of applied
research through its instructional staff so that the hiatus between theoretical training and
practical police work may be eliminated as far as possible. Research is a vehicle through
which the trainers take note of the administrative reality and attempt to provide answers
to real life problems. In a developing country where the social milieu and administrative
reality undergo rapid changes, it is important for the training institutions to have a close
observation and an intimate understanding of changing situations. We recommend, therefore,
that every police training institution should have separate cell under a competent instructor
for this purpose. In taking up research work along with training assignments, the trainers
improve both their competence and credibility. They improvise and adapt techniques and
practices which lead to improvement in training. Realistic programmes and competent
trainers will together ensure greater trainee participation and effectiveness of the training
process.”
1.11.3 Emphasizing on the applied part of the research, Gore Committee recommended as under:–
“the proportion between theoretical and practical periods of instruction in a training programme
and the proper sequence in which they should be arranged; determining the suitability and
effectiveness of various training methods for different instructional purposes, keeping in view
the knowledge to be conveyed, the level of the students, the capability of the trainer and the
relative costs and benefits of various training methods; development of training since the lack
of this is a major limiting factor in the qualitative improvement of training methods; and
evaluation of the results of training to determine the extent to which the desired objectives have
been fulfilled and the areas in which there is room for further improvement. This research work
could be undertaken under the guidance of the Inspector General/Deputy Inspector General,
Training and in coordination with the Central Directorate of Police Training.”
1.11.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs also apprised the Committee that Bureau of Police Research &
Development is the nodal agency to undertake Research projects and disseminate the outcome of these
research projects to different institutes/organisations. However, a Research Cell is already functional at
NPA. A sum of Rs. 20 lakh per year has been earmarked for conducting 5 research projects by the
cell. It was also stated that a proposal for creation of ‘Centre for Applied Police Research’ at NPA has
been received from NPA vide their letter dated 03/7/2012 which is under consideration.

10
1.11.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs responded positively to the suggestion of the expert that it
would be appropriate to establish a research wing at the Academy to ensure imparting of need felt
aspects of training. The Ministry of Home Affairs also agreed that a research wing be placed in
NPA to undertake all essential research activities
1.11.6 The Committee is given to understand that the National Institute of Administrative
Research (NIAR) was established by LBSNAA, Massorie established in 1995 as a Training
and Research Wing of the Academy. The Committee recommends that the NPA may set up
an ‘Institute for Applied Police Research’ instead of a Centre for Applied Research on the
line of NIAR. An early decision may be taken and sufficient infrastructure may be created
near the campus of the Academy for the purpose.
PUBLICATIONS DIVISION
1.12 An expert suggested that National Police Academy should have a powerful publication
division. Emphasizing on the issue another expert added that National Police Academy can prepare
a number of important case studies as training material, not only for the NPA but also for the State
police academies. He further added that in no other sphere of governance is theory so much at
variance with practice as in the police. The Academy management and the Ministry of Home Affairs
were in agreement with the suggestion. NPA already has a publication division that can be further
strengthened. It was further stated that currently the Academy does not have any sanctioned staff
for carrying out its publications. As a result, it is not able to bring out quality publications in a
timely manner but would need to be strengthened.
1.12.1 The Ministry was also in agreement with regard to the suggestion to prepare monographs
on certain practical aspects of policing at the National Police Academy, based on the studies.
1.12.2 The Committee understands that the Academy, being the nodal centre of Police
Training in India, has to play a leading role in capacity building of State Police Training
Institutions in the country by way of developing and publishing training literature. To this
end, it is necessary to strengthen the Publication Wing in the Academy to publish Research
Papers, books, journals, monographs and other training material from time to time. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Publication Division of the Academy may
be appropriately strengthened. The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the
sanctioned staff are not in place. Director, NPA may take immediate necessary action in this
regard.
COMPUTER AND IT
1.13 The Committee was informed that the Computer Section of the Academy was established
in 1987 with a sanctioned strength of one Assistant Director (computers) and one Programmer.
1.13.1 The computer section of the Academy is equipped with Computers and Laptops, Systems
and Networking with adequate security Networked campus area across 2 kms by Optical Fiber
Cable and nearly 800 nodes Web server, IPS Mail server, POLNET server besides 10 other
important servers, 16 mbps leased lane facility to connect with Internet, Cyber forensic Lab in the
field of cyber crime investigations and computer forensics, Time attendance systems for capturing
attendance of the Officers trainees and staff, IP based cameras to monitor class rooms and other
training activities and Campus wide Wireless network.
1.13.2 Projects in pipeline are Office Automation, Document management and Workflow, Perimeter
security, E-Signage solution, Upgradation of LAN, Knowledge Management Program, Integrated
Learning Management System (ILMS), Virtual Class room/Video conferencing, Establishing of
National Digital Crime Resource and Training Centre.

11
1.13.3 The Committee was further informed that over the years the scope and responsibility of the
Section has increased and the Section has delivered the results vis-a-vis  the demands and
requirements of the faculty, staff and trainees successfully and satisfactorily despite its constraints
in terms of manpower and other resources.
1.13.4 The Committee was apprised that the Academy has been striving its best to impart modern
and updated training in ICT to IPS Officers. The Academy, however , felt that establishing a
Training Unit of National Informatics Centre at National Police Academy would go a long way in
not only streamlining the training but also bringing it up to the desired standard. It was stated that
the Training Unit of NIC is required for the following purposes:
(a) To impart ICT training to IPS Probationers, MCTP participants and other in-service
course participants;
(b) For imparting in-house training to NPA staff;
(c) Development and review ICT related training material;
(d) Development of training related software.
1.13.5 The Academy also brought to the notice of the Committee that a similar Unit is already
working at LBS National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie, which is doing a commendable
job there, and felt that establishing such unit at NPA would go a long way in ICT Training.
1.13.6 Since, in the contemporary electronic cyber age, success of crime investigation and
intelligence analysis is increasingly dependent upon well equipped computer lab, it is very
much pertinent that the academy management must ensure that NPA’s computer section is
equipped with latest technology and updated programming system. The Committee is of the
view that skilled, and well trained staff should be deployed to discharge the duties and
responsibilities of the computer cell. The Committee, therefore, recommends that NPA
management should take up the issue of constraints of the manpower with MHA for early
filling up of requisite staff. The Committee hopes that the project in pipeline must be
completed within the set time-frame. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs may take up the issue of setting up Training Unit of NIC in NPA with NIC
and Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (CIT).
RECRUITMENT TO IPS
1.14 The Committee, while taking stock of the existing procedure of recruitment of IPS Officers,
pointed out those sometimes reluctant candidates, who never wanted to join the police in the first
place, are in police by virtue of the option and due to the rank in the merit list they got. But their
aptitude or their personality may not match to that of a police officer. The Committee, in this
connection, sought to know whether NPA gave any inputs on selection criteria for IPS Officers or
suggested any improvements in this regard. The Committee was informed that since the UPSC selects
the probationers through Civil Services Examination at all India level, the NPA has no role in selection
of IPS Probationers. However, the Director said that he would place the views in the Meeting held
by Chairman, UPSC to review the selection process of All India Services Officers.
1.14.1 The Committee also desired to know whether the Ministry of Home Affairs would consider
conducting a separate exam to recruit IPS officers and not clubbing with IAS examination with
the purpose to recruit IPS officers with policing aptitude and motivation, the Ministry stated that
the concept of separate examination will be examined in detail in consultation with concerned
stakeholders like State Governments, DoPT, UPSC etc.
1.14.2  The Committee in its 161
st Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) made a
recommendation for exploring the possibility of conducting a separate examination for IPS

12
where the attitude and aptitude of the candidate must be thoroughly tested besides their
mental make-up and inclination for policing. The Committee further recommended that the
Government may impress upon UPSC to conduct a separate examination for recruiting of IPS
officer and SVPNPA may also be consulted in this regard. The Committee, reiterating the
recommendation made in its 161 st Report, desires that the Ministry may hold consultation with
the DoPT and UPSC and take an early decision for holding separate examination.
1.14.3 An expert suggested for reduction of recruitment age for selection of IPS officers under
civil services. He stated as under:–
“In the 50s or in the late 60s, the recruitment age for Civil Services was 21  to 24  years.
Then, at some point of time, it was liberalized and extended to 27  years. 1 think, now it
is extended to almost 29-30 years, and in the case of  Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes, 1 think, even a higher age limit up to 32  or 33  years has been allowed. 1 have
been told in the National Police Academy and by others also that a large proportion of the
Indian Police Service recruits belong to the higher age group. Many of them are married;
they have even one or two children; they would have worked in various other  organisations
and conditioned to mindsets and cultures which are entirely different from policing and the
ethics of policing. In fact, he touched on the ethics of policing. Now, you can’t teach ethics
to a probationer who is 34-35 years old, who has been accustomed to various other
practices in other departments of the Government or elsewhere.”
1.14.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the average age these days is 28 years. However,
the Academy does not face any handicaps in training them.
1.14.5 The Committee is of the view that age relaxation under different Government
services is a policy decision keeping in view various considerations. However, the
suggestions of the expert may be looked into.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
1.15 The Committee sought to know the budgetary allocation and expenditure incurred under
Non-Plan and Plan during the last 5 years. In response to that the NPA Management furnished the
following information:–
Projected/Budgetary Allocations
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. No. Financial Year Category Budget T otal
1. 2007-08 Non -Plan 22.55
Plan 1.00 23.55
2. 2008-09 Non-Plan 26.85
Plan 1.50 28.35
3. 2009-10 Non-Plan 61.34
Plan 0.60 61.94
4. 2010-11 Non-Plan 107.06
Plan 0.8 107.86
5. 201 1-12 Non-Plan 96.29
Plan 105.30 201.59
6. 2012-13 Non-Plan 98.87
(Current Financial Y ear) Plan 100.00 198.87

13
1.15.1 The Committee was further informed the projected demands during the last five years was
not pruned at the level of Ministry of Home Affairs.
1.15.2 Actual Plan and Non-Plan expenditure:–
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. No. Financial Year Category Expenditure Total
1. 2007-08 Non-Plan 20.32
Plan 0.98 21.30
2. 2008-09 Non-Plan 26.76
Plan 0 26.76
3. 2009-10 Non-Plan 60.96
Plan 0.52 61.48
4. 2010-11 Non-Plan 102.32
Plan 0.36 102.68
5. 201 1-12 Non-Plan 87.90
Plan 98.64 186.54
1.15.3 The Committee was informed that Rs. 118.00 crores would be required in 2012-13 and
2013-14 for completion of ongoing CNE works (Non-Plan Expenditure). The MHA allocated
Rs. 40 crores during 2012-13. New works costing Rs. 265.00 crores have been proposed during
12
th Plan (2012-17). Rs. 60 crores have been allocated in 2012-13 for new schemes. On getting
allotment of additional funds as requested for, the ongoing infrastructure projects will be
completed.
1.15.4 The Committee, while taking note of budgetary provision to meet the Plan and non-
Plan expenditure and also of the trends of actual expenditure during last five years,
observes that budgetary provisions have been optimally spent. The Committee further
desires that earmarked allocation for on-going infrastructural projects would be released in
time for completion of projects without time and cost overruns. The Committee also
recommends that sufficient allocations may be made available to NPA to complete the
ongoing infrastructure projects, CNE Works and other new projects and also for
strengthening publication division. Grants may also be provided for setting up the Research
Institute in case it is decided to set up the same.
AUDIT OBJECTION
1.16 The Committee desired to know about details of Audit objections over Plan and Non-Plan
expenditure pertaining to NPA made during the last five years and which still remains unsettled as
on date. The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that during the last five years, the Accountant
General, Andhra Pradesh conducted audit of accounts of NPA only once i.e. during the month of
January, 2010. They raised 20 audit paras on Non Plan expenditure for which reply was sent by
NPA. On seeing the reply sent, 1 para was dropped and further clarification in respect of 19 paras
has been sought for the AG , AP. Reply for the same is under preparation.
1.16.1 Further Internal Audit Party (IAP) of MHA carried out audit of accounts of NPA for the
period from 1.4.2007 to 31.3.2010 during the month of July, 2010. They raised 19 audit paras on
Non-Plan expenditure. Reply for the 19 audit paras were sent to IAP (MHA), which in turn dropped
7 paras and asked clarification in respect of 12 paras.

14
1.16.2 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that out of 20 audit paras
on non-Plan expenditure, only one para was dropped and response to the 19 paras were
further objected to. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that due care may be
taken in incurring expenditure, both Plan and non-Plan.

15
15
CHAPTER-II
TRAINING COMPONENTS AND METHODOLOGY
TRAINING PROGRAMMES
2.1 The Academy management informed the Committee that essentially the training programmes
being conducted at the Academy fall under two broad heads, viz., Basic Training for freshly
recruited IPS Officers (Officer Trainees) and In-service Training for serving IPS officers, gazetted
police officers from various police forces and senior officers from other All India, Central and
State Services.
Basic Training for IPS Probationers
2.2 The Committee was informed that the main objective of the training to IPS probationers is
to develop strength, endurance, flexibility and body coordination, to develop leadership qualities,
high levels of confidence, to inculcate a strong sense of internal and external discipline required
of an officer of the Indian Police Service, to build attitude to take in stress and work for long
hours without physical and mental fatigue, to develop skills of teamwork, to learn command and
control, to improve turnout, posture and personal drill of an officer of the uniformed service, so
as to act as a role model and earn respect of People, to develop pride in uniform. Further,
probationers are trained to learn skills of firing, weapon handling, tactical operations, combat, riot
control and others, which are critical and essential for any professional police officer.
2.2.1 During the course of presentation, NPA Director informed the Committee that the Basic
Course Training covers all the major modules and programmes conducted for the IPS Probations.
It covers modules on investigation, adventure sports, confidence building etc., and innovations such
as Interrogation Module by the CBI. The training is also conducted outside the Academy under
Jungle Survival Module at Satya Mangalam Forest, Tamil Nadu as well as Major Bandobust
attachments programmes in Elections, Common Wealth Games, Kumbh Mela, Ganesha Utsav. The
training encompasses innovative teaching methods such as brain storming sessions, public speaking
modules for development of professional standards. Measures are taken for instilling integrity and
strength in character of the IPS Probationers.
2.2.2 The Committee was apprised that the National Police Academy imparts training to the new
entrants to the IPS and so far 62 batches comprising 4486 officers of the Indian Police Service
and other officers of CPOs/State Police organizations have passed out of this Institution. 151
Probationers of 2010 batch including 4 Royal Bhutan Police Officers, 4 Maldivian Police Officers
and 3 Nepal Police Officers were being imparted training at the time of visit of the Committee.
2.2.3 The Academy management apprised the Committee that a number of subjects are covered
during the training programme which inter-alia include Physical Training, Drill (Lathi Drill, Tear
Gas Drill and Riot Control Drill and Sword Drill and Ceremonial Drill) and Weapon Training and Firing,
Yoga, Un-Armed Combat (UAC), Swimming, Field Craft and Tactics and Map Reading, Equitation,
First Aid and Ambulance Drill and Motor Mechanism. Other activities and Adventure Sports activities
include Rock Climbing – ITBP Team, Mysore, Powered Hang Gliding – by NAF, Para Sailing –
Army Adventure Sports Wing, Secunderabad, ITBP Module on River Rafting- ITBP, District
Practical Training (in 2 Phases), Life Saving and Scuba Diving- Dive Goa, Modules on Tactics
(Special Tactics Wing, NPA), Exposure to General Assembly Elections in 2 Southern States: Kerala

16
and Tamil Nadu, Attachment with Central School for Weapons and Tactics, BSF Indore, Attachment
with Spl. Task Force, Tamil Nadu at Satyamangalam for Reflex firing, Jungle Survival modules and
Attachment with Greyhounds. Moreover, annual athletic meet, annual aquatic meet and tonk cup are
also organized.
2.2.4 The Committee was given to understand that the duration of Basic Course Training was of
104 weeks, which included foundation course of 15 weeks, Basic Course Training Phase-l of 46
weeks. After passing out from the Academy, the probationers undergo attachments at various
CPOs/CPMFs for 5 weeks. The probationers have to undergo District Practical Training for 27
weeks and again they have to report to the Academy for Phase-II training of 4 weeks.
2.2.5 During Phase-I and II of Basic Training Course, the Probationers are evaluated through
Indoor and Outdoor Examination for 1200 and 600 marks, respectively, besides the Director’s
assessment for 400 marks. The Committee was further apprised that the final evaluation consists
of 600 marks which is done through Physical Training, Drill (including Sword and Ceremonial
drill), Weapon Training and Firing, Yoga, Unarmed Combat/Krav Maga, Swimming, Field Craft and
Tactics/ Map Reading, Equitation and First Aid and Ambulance Drill.
2.2.6 When the Committee sought to know the rationale for earmarking 400 marks to
probationers under Director’s assessment, the Academy submitted that the training, as defined by
the Gore Committee (1971) on Police Training, is a conscious effort to impart, improve or increase
knowledge and skills and to develop attitudes and values of an individual in a desired direction. The
SVP National Police Academy, in addition to imparting knowledge and skills, endeavours to
inculcate right attitude in the probationers whereas the transfer of knowledge to the probationers
and acquisition of skills by them is assessed through examinations in indoor and outdoor subjects,
the conduct and attitude are given due weightage through an objective process called “Director’s
Assessment’.
2.2.7 The Director’s Assessment Marks are meant to gauge these aspects that training seeks to
inculcate. While awarding marks for Director’s Assessment, the overall conduct and performance
of the probationer under training is taken into consideration. The probationer is expected to imbibe
the values and attitudes, which the Service demands. The focus is on discipline, integrity, ability
to work in a team, leadership aspects, attitude towards gender and weaker sections of the society,
fairness and objectivity, positivity, etc.
2.2.8 The Committee was further informed that the Director’s Assessment Marks were raised
from 100 to 400 in 1993 as a follow up to the introduction of sandwich pattern of training
wherein the probationers after institutional Phase-I training at the Academy, go for District Practical
Training in the allotted State and then come back to the Academy for Phase-II training. It was
deemed necessary to assess the overall conduct of the probationers not only during Phase-I training
at NPA but also during the District Practical Training and Phase-II training. Therefore, now the
Director’s Assessment takes into account the conduct as well as the core values, as mentioned
above, exhibited by the probationer during Phase-I Basic Training and during Phase-II Field
Training.
INDOOR VS. OUTDOOR TRAINING
2.3 The Probationers are taught fifteen subjects during the training at the Academy which
includes Police in Modern India, Indian Evidence Act, 1872, Indian Penal Code, 1860, Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, Special Laws, Crime Prevention and Criminology, Investigation I and II,
Forensic Medicine, Forensic Science (Theory and Practical), Maintenance of Public Peace and
Order, Internal Security, Police Leadership and Management, Rule of Law, Ethics and Human
Rights and Information and Communication Technology.

17
2.3.1 The Committee was apprised that the probationers are educated through modules and
simulation exercises like Public Speaking, Police Station, Traffic Management, Interrogation, Hurt,
Property Offences, Homicide, Investigation Module, Moot Court, Anti-Corruption, Economic
Offences, Disaster Management, Riot Module, Or ganised Crime, VVIP Security, Media
Management, SP and Supervision, Terrorism, IT, SIB, Tactics etc. to make them understand the
subject better. Moreover, various methods of teaching are adopted to make the subject easier and
interesting by using Case Study Method, Lectures, Recap, Forecast, SNAP Test, Squat
Presentations, Quizzes, Ex-tempore Public Speaking, Simulation exercise, Brain Storming,
Debriefing Presentations by Probationers and Discussion on current events of relevance to Police.
2.3.2 Commenting on the proportion of indoor as well as the outdoor training an expert suggested
as under:–
“.....I think, the indoor as well as the outdoor training is very important for the police
officers. It is difficult to qualify it in terms of percentage but even then, I would say that
if it is 60 per cent indoor, at least, 40 per cent outdoor has to be there, if not fifty-fifty.
An officer who is physically not fit, who is not trained in jungle warfare, who cannot
operate against insurgents, who cannot operate against Maoists, who cannot deal with the
North-Eastern rebels, who cannot operate in J&K, he would be a misfit in the police force.
He has to be good in outdoor training.”
2.3.3 Responding to the views of the expert, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the
emphasis as well as co-relation in regard to indoor and outdoor training is always maintained.
2.3.4 Though the quantum of the indoor and outdoor training cannot be fixed in terms of
percentage, however, sufficient outdoor training must be imparted to have the physical fitness
of the police personnel while indoor training should be so adequately imparted to ensure that
the police personnel possess requisite understanding of law and jurisprudential knowledge.
The NPA may have a relook at the present curriculum and reviewed with experts.
Field Visit
2.4 The Committee was further apprised that for the practical training, probationers are sent to
Infosys Training Centre, Village Visit, Burns and Post-Mortem Wards, Moharrum Bandobust, Ganesh
Chaturthi Bandobust, Police Station, Jail Visit, Study-Cum-Cultural Tour to give them first hand
information and to make them observe/learn the security arrangement/bandobust and management. In
recent past, they were sent to witness State Assembly Election held in Kerala and Tamil Nadu,
Kumbh Mela, Commonwealth Games, Rath Yatra. As a part of training they were also attached to
the various CPOs/CPMFs like CRPF , Army, BPST, NAI, E-Court, IB, CBI, SPG, RAW, etc.
2.4.1 The Committee is of the view that the basic training modules of the Academy must
consist of the courses keeping in view stark reality of society and the aim of the training
programme should be to impart knowledge and skill to face the ground challenges of the
country. The Committee also feels that training on management and administration should
also be provided. When the officers grow higher up the ladder, they are also required to
handle administration and finance. Training needs to be given on these aspects as well and
some modules may be prepared for these aspects.
MID CAREER TRAINING PROGRAMME (MCTP)
2.5 The management of the Academy informed the Committee that it imparts mid-career training
to the in-service IPS officers in order to further improve their competence and skill in discharging
entrusted duties effectively. The Academy has been conducting senior course, seminars and
workshops with an aim to develop skills of serving police officers and for strengthening policing

18
in the country. Some of the important and new courses conducted are Mid Career Training
Programme Phases III, IV and V , Workshops on ‘Cyber Crime and DNA technology’, Workshop
on ‘Strategies to Counter LWE’, Tactics Courses, National Security Seminar, Training of Traniners
Course, Training on Incident Management, IPS Induction Training Course, Course on Anti
Corruption Measures and Course on Right to Information.
2.5.1 Giving background of MCTP, it was informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs constituted
an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Trinath Mishra, IPS (Retd.) to finalise the
design, contents and delivery of MCTP for in-service IPS Officers. The Report of the Committee
was approved by the MHA in May, 2008 and according to the approved scheme of MCTP, the
eligibility of IPS Officers for inducting into MCTP is as follows-
Sl. Phases Duration Training for Year of
No. Promotion Service
(1) Phase-III 8 weeks: Superintendent of Between 7
th to
(6 weeks in India and Police to Junior 9 th year of
2 Weeks abroad) Administrative Grade service
(2) Phase-IV 8 weeks: Deputy Inspector Between 14 th
(6 weeks in India General of Police to to 16 th year of
and 2 weeks abroad) Inspector General of Police service
(3) Phase-V 4 weeks: (3 weeks in Availing increment after Between 24 th
India and 1 week abroad) 28 years and beyond to 26 th years of service
2.5.2 The Committee was informed that the Academy adopts innovative training methods to train
the in-service officers. The following innovative methods have been used for in-service training:-
(i) Introduction of small syndicate groups (approx. 10 persons) along with lectures in
MCTP courses.
(ii) Practical hands-on training in Cyber Crimes Detection and use of Unique Resource
Persons such as Ankit Fadia for Training in Ethical Hacking
(iii) Association of NGOs such as World Wildlife Fund, Transparency International, CHRO
and Civil Society members.
(iv) Use of Simulation in Training
(v) Workshops on important Field level Challenges.
2.5.3 The following Senior Courses were conducted in 2010:–
Type of Course No. of Courses No. of Participants
attended
MCTP 04 341
Tactics 16 624
Sr. Courses 18 639
Seminars 08 299
Workshops 01 20
T
OTAL : 47 1923

19
2.5.4 As per IPS (Pay) Rules, 2007, participation of IPS Officers in Phase-III and IV would be
the essential requirement for promotion to the grade/rank of Junior Administrative Grade (JAG) and
IGP respectively. Phase-V would be the minimum requirement for drawing next increment from
28th year and beyond and the same has been implemented w.e.f. 0l.01.2009.
2.5.5 While apprising the Committee about the in-service training being imparted in the Academy,
NPA Director outlined the drastic increase in the mandays of training conducted by the Academy
and the strain on the resources and the need for further expansion of the Academy.
2.5.6 The Committee enquired about any tie up with the foreign institutions on the modular
approach training as is being done for IAS Officers. The Director informed that the Academy is
collaborating with the foreign universities like Cambridge University, UK, Charles Sturt University,
Australia, London School of Business, UK, for conducting Mid-Career Training Programmes for
Senior Police officers. The details of University/Institute approved by the MHA for conducting
MCTP phase-wise are as under:–
Name of the University/Institute Phase-MCTP
Charles Sturt University, Australia (Indian School of Phase-III
Business, Hyderabad, as Indian partner
University of Cambridge, U.K. (with Jindal Global Law Phase-IV
School of O.P. Jindal Global University, Delhi, as Indian
Partner)
Indian Institute of Management, Ahme dabad (w ith Phase-V
London Business School, London as foreign Partner)
2.5.7 Indoor classes in the Phase-III of MCTP are organized by CSU along with ISB. The classes
cover the modules, namely Strategic Analysis, Personal Development, Crime and Traffic, Major
Event Management, Counter Terrorism, and Organizational Leadership. Morning outdoor programme
organized by the NPA, covers the 1 Min Drills, FAQ + Lane Shooting, GPS/Bharat Darshan, Jungle
Best Practices, Archery + outbound exercises, Night firing, Paint ball and Room intervention. The
NPA also organise Panel Discussions on the Terrorist Module, Hearts and Minds (Naxalite Module)
and Media Module.
2.5.8 The Committee notes that the Academy is collaborating with some of the foreign
universities of reputation viz. Cambridge, Charles Sturt, London School of Business for
conducting its pioneer Mid-Career Training Programme for senior police-personnel.
However, the Committee feels that the Academy should also explore collaboration with
institution in other countries having expertise in Police Training and Development (T&D for
Police) with the purpose of not only improving capabilities and skill among serving police
officers to combat effectively the ever changing wide ranging challenges of terrorism,
naxalism, caste and communal conflict, drug trafficking, accidents, natural calamities and
other disasters, but also to evolve different training modules concerning standard policing
practices to make the Academy a centre of excellence. The Committee, in this regard,
recommends that NPA management should prepare a comprehensive strategy in this
direction for further foreign collaboration and seek the requisite approval from the
Government for implementation. Besides different phases of MCTP programmes, need based
refresher courses may also be organized for a week at regular intervals.
2.5.9 When enquired whether the National Police Academy would like to have direct institutional
tie-ups with renowned police training institutions abroad for arranging training programmes and
whether the Ministry of Home Affairs has received any such proposal and its present status, the

20
Ministry replied that for future programmes it is being put as a condition that the Foreign
collaborators should have a tie-up with the Foreign Police Agencies. In these circumstances NPA
will be in touch with Foreign Police Agencies for arranging training programmes for the in-service
officers.
2.5.10 The Committee is of the opinion that exposure to best policing practices should also
be imparted at training stage, if feasible, preferably in countries with similar democratic
political set up. The Committee believes that training modules consisting of foreign
collaborations having police agencies of the country having similar political and economic
condition as that of India would have immense impact so far as their policing skill is
concerned. The Academy may consider this aspect.
SPECIAL TACTICS WING
2.6 The Committee was informed that on reviewing the police response to 9/11 attack on
Mumbai, it was felt that there was a big gap between training and present requirement of tactical
skills among Indian police. To meet the requirement of tactical training to Police officers, the NPA
took the initiative and established the Special Tactics Wing (STW) to impart tactical training to
Police Officers from State Police and CAPFs to enable them to conduct tactical operations against
anti national elements in Jungle and Urban environment.
2.6.1 The STW is manned by an Assistant Director, four Inspectors and 9 Constables from
various CAPFs which are on deputation against existing vacancies of NPA. In addition to this, MHA
has approved attachment of one Inspector/SI, one Head Constable and 5 Constables each from
BSF, CRPF, CISF and ITBP till dedicated manpower for STW is sanctioned. Recently 274 posts
of various ranks have been sanctioned to NPA which includes posts for STW also.
2.6.2 The tactical training inputs are imparted through training modules at three levels, namely,
foundation, functional and directional levels.
2.6.3 The tactical training inputs to officer trainees has been increased manifold. Apart from
modules conducted with Grey hounds, BSF and Tamil Nadu STF, trainees are imparted tactical
training in three phases, with progressive stages of incomplexity and difficulty and in the last
phase, the trainees are required to plan and execute operations on their own. Moreover, they are
also exposed to self sustained operations without administrative support.
2.6.4 The Officers of the ranks of SPs, ASPs and Dy. SPs and equivalent ranks from CPAF are
imparted tactical training through “Course on Tactics” which includes:
(i) Inputs on drills to combat terrorists and insurgents in Jungle and Urban environment
which includes simulation of incidents requiring police action and self-sustained-two-
day operations in Jungle adhering to the principle of “Fight the Guerilla like a
Guerilla”. The participants are also exposed to latest weaponry and equipment and
emergency drills like combat first aid rescue operations, etc. So far, the STW has
trained a total of 1074 officers in 28 “Course on Tactics” which comprise of 168
IPS, 595 State Police Officers and 311 from CPOs.
(ii) In addition to the courses conducted in NPA, the STW has taken the initiative of
providing tactical training assistance to State police by conducting requirement
specific courses at respective State police academies. So far NPA has conducted
eight such courses at Gujarat Police Academy, Ghandhi Nagar; NEPA, Shillong;
Karnataka Police Academy, Mysore (two courses); Kerala Police Academy, Thrissur;
EFR training centre, Midnapur, West Bengal; Bhilai, Chhattisgarh and Force One,
Pune.

21
2.6.5 The STW plans to start tactics course for senior officers of the rank of DIGs and above
exposing them to tactical knowledge to plan and execute counter terrorist operations in a more
efficient manner.
2.6.6 The Committee was informed that 400 Acres of land, separate STW Building, firing ranges
and latest tactical equipment and weapons has been sanctioned and the STW has the following
plans to be implemented shortly:
(i) Commencing Course on Tactics for Senior officers;
(ii) Providing training module on explosives and IEDs;
(iii) Developing the allotted piece of land to tactical training area;
(iv) Run simultane ous courses on Jungle and Urban warfare; and
(v) Planning and conducting need specific training modules at State police academies.
2.6.7 The Committee notes the initiatives and activities taken by NPA in imparting special
tactical training to police officers. The Committee, however, also takes note of the fact that
STW is having its man power on ad-hoc basis. This will not help in better functioning of
the work. Efforts may be made to put in place dedicated manpower at the earliest.
Directional level tactics course for senior officers of the rank of DIG and above be started
at the earliest. Fund requirements of NPA for developing allotted land for tactical training,
separate STW Building, procurement of equipments and weapons may be looked into
promptly so as to make the Special Tactics Wing par excellence. This level of excellence
may further be used for revenue generation by imparting such training to the police officers
of other countries.
FOREIGN TRAINING
2.7 The Committee received a proposal from the Academy that the IPS Probationers should be
sent to countries like Japan, Singapore and Australia for foreign exposure visits on community
policing, forensic criminology, etc. The proposal was forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs
for furnishing its comments.
2.7.1 In  this regard, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
Academy has sent a proposal to the MHA vide letter No. 11011/19/2010-Trg. IPS.(P) 62 RR (SV)
dated May
 19, 2012 for a 10-days foreign study tour during the Phase-II training of IPS
Probationers to Japan and Singapore which would help the probationers to improve their
perspectives through vivid demonstration of best practices being followed in other countries. This
is under consideration of MHA.
2.7.2 The Committee recommends that the proposal to send IPS probationers to Japan and
Singapore for training during phase – II  may be positively considered by Ministry of Home
Affairs. The Committee feels that community policing can play a major role in  curbing
crimes in India keeping in mind the low police population ratio and a big democratic set-
up in the country.
2.7.3 The Committee sought to know whether the quality of the training imparted in the Academy
is comparable with the training given in countries viz., USA, UK and other European countries. The
Committee also desired to know whether the trainees were sent there so as to give them exposure
to the latest modules of trainings. In  response to that, the Committee was informed that Indian
Police Service, as a service has no parallel in USA, UK or other European countries. The level of
induction in Police Service in USA, UK and other European countries is not at comparable level

22
to IPS who are trained to assume leadership position. Therefore, it would not be possible to
benchmark the training imparted at NPA with that of the Police Training Academies of USA, UK
and other European countries.
2.7.4 The Committee was further informed that the IPS Probationers are not sent to USA, UK
and other European countries or any other country abroad to give them exposure to latest modules
of training. In  the three compulsory Mid-Career Training Programmes (MCTP), junior, middle level
and senior IPS Officers are being sent respectively to Australia in MCPT Phase-III and to England
in MCTP Phase-IV and V .
2.7.5 Commenting further on the foreign trainers and foreign visits an expert viewed as under:–
“.....I find that the National Police Academy, not for probationers but for certain other
courses, has started getting trainers from Australian universities. I found Australian trainer
during one of my visits there. Trainers from the United Kingdom are coming. I think, it is
complete waste of money. A police officer from Australia has no clue of the ground conditions
in India. In fact, he would need one year to understand the ground conditions of India or
the kind of problems which the Indian officers have to deal with. It may be fashionable but
it should be dispensed with. It would mean a saving of foreign exchange also. In fact, the
probationer may, if the finances permit, go to the neighbouring countries or countries where
the conditions of work would be somewhat similar to those in India. I said about the United
Kingdom because a lot of police culture has flown in from there. They could go to China,
Sri Lanka, Indonesia or neighbouring countries, where conditions of work would be somewhat
similar, where you find Asian culture. For their education, they could go abroad.”
2.7.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs responded that the objective of MCTP is to explore IPS
officers to advanced system of policing. MCTP has been introduced for in-service officers after
careful consideration by MHA. For Indian police officers, it is more beneficial to be exposed to
such developed countries where democratic policing is the norm and not where the polity is
autocratic or theocratic etc.
2.7.7 Expressing the view on the foreign visit another expert felt that during the programme, for
the last phase they should be sent abroad for one or two weeks. He further emphasized that what
is taught to IPS officers must be based on experience, sound logic and principle.
2.7.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs is in agreement with the suggestion of the expert over the
foreign visit of probationers and the Committee was informed that IPS officer trainees may be sent
for foreign study tour in Phase-II. A proposal in this regard is under consideration with MHA.
Phase-II will serve this purpose very well wherein the training is evaluated on the basis of
experiences that the OTs gain during their field training phase.
2.7.9 Foreign visit of the probationers in phase-II of the training schedule is the
appropriate time when the probationers, after having an understanding of the system within
the country, can have a comparative study of the system of obtaining abroad. The
Committee recommends that the proposal under consideration of MHA may be examined
soon and an early decision may be taken.
Faculty and Linkages
2.8 The Committee was apprised that with the information available to the Academy, the efforts
are being made to bring the Academy training at par with that of training institutes of developed
countries. Currently, the Academy has no direct and dynamic linkage with the training institutions
of USA, UK and other European countries. However, in spite of the above handicap, the Academy
is making efforts to incorporate the Best Policing Practices being followed in these countries.

23
2.8.1 The Committee is of the view that if the Academy feels that linkages with training
institutions of developed countries such as USA, UK, etc. would be useful the Academy may
prepare a blueprint of the proposal and take up the matter with the Ministry of Home
Affairs. But the linkages should be productive, and result oriented instead of just
ornamental.
2.8.2 The Committee desired to know as to how the faculty for giving training in the Academy
is arranged for good training and the details of the expertise and experience of the faculty. In this
regard, the Committee was informed that the faculty posted at the Academy are permanent faculty
of the Academy or officers taken on deputation from various organizations including police officers
from the “Offer List’ of MHA. Visiting faculty is sourced both from within the police department
and experts or from other sources in India depending on the need and expertise. With regard to
MCTP, the required faculty is being arranged by the University/Institute who have been awarded
the task of conducting the programme. The expertise and experience of the faculty are made
available while furnishing the list of resource persons by the concerned.
2.8.3 On being asked whether any foreign expert(s) or renowned police personnel have been hired
for imparting training during the last five years, and whether the remunerations are adequate to
attract and retain them in the Academy, the Academy management apprised the Committee that for
the Basic Training of IPS Probationers, no foreign experts or foreign renowned personnel have
been either hired or invited. For compulsory Mid-Career Training Programme (MCT) Phase-III, IV
and V , contract has been given by MHA to Institutions abroad. These courses have been outsourced
on a turn-key basis to these institutions and the foreign faculty are involved in conducting of these
courses.
2.8.4 The Co mmittee was further informed that remunerations are not adequate to attract foreign
experts to invite and retain them in the Academy. Also the process for inviting foreign faculty is
cumbersome and long drawn. To overcome these hurdles, direct institutional tie-ups with the
renowned police training institutions abroad need to be developed. The administrative and financial
powers in this regard may be delegated to Director, NPA. The Ministry of Home Affairs further
stated that with the commencement of Mid-Career Training Programmes (MCTPs), the Academy
has entered into tie ups with institutions who invite faculty/resource persons from abroad for taking
sessions in these courses. Currently, at times, the Academy utilises their presence in the campus
to take sessions with the basic training course also. Many resource persons visit this country for
providing training under different programmes such as ATA and FBI. During this year FBI
conducted one course of Interview and Interrogation Training during April in NPA Hyderabad. The
possibility of arranging similar training in future can be explored.
2.8.5 The Committee notes that the Academy does not invite faculty or resource persons
from abroad and the main reason is lack of incentives and remunerations. However under
institutional tie up for MCTP, for eign resource persons are also involved. The Committee
is of the view that whenever any foreign experts comes to India, such visits may be made
use of by organizing their sessions for both basic training and MCTP.
2.8.6 When enquired whether the Ministry would consider exchange programme with foreign
training institute, the Ministry of Home Affairs replied that from next year, for Mid Career Training
Programmes, which would be undertaken in collaboration with Foreign Institutes, it is proposed to
name a tie-up with the Foreign Police Agencies. This will enable better training/exposure to the
trainers under tie-up.
2.8.7 Tie up with foreign police agencies would definitely give an opportunity to the trainee
officers to understand the nuances of working of police agencies in other countries. The
Committee is of the considered view that the faculty. exchange programmes with other

24
foreign police agencies and training institutes would give an opportunity for exchange of
views among the faculty and to refresh their knowledge. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that tie-ups with foreign institutes for both trainees and faculty maybe
organized for better exposure.
2.8.8 The Ministry agreeing about the field orientation of the training stated as under:–
“the current training introduced in 2012, for Officer Trainees is sufficiently field -oriented.
To this end, the trainees are given academic input in class rooms/Seminars/workshops
followed by simulation exercises which are further reinforced by actual field exposures and
field assignments. For example, after providing inputs on working of a Police Station, the
OTs run a Model Police Station in the Academy premises on 24 hour shift basis. The Model
Police Station at NP A has been upgraded as a full working (model) competency platform.
IPS probationers stay there turn by turn, and carry out all the routines of a police station
in the manner in which it should be done. The police station has four distinct and yet inter-
connected segments- Reception, Functional, Residential and Community. The experiment has
given the IPS trainees a good grip over police working and is also preparing them for an
appropriate interface with various client segments during their future professional life. After
giving sufficient exposure in Model Police Station, the OTs would be sent to a real Police
Station in Cyberabad Commissionerate area where they would be associated actively in
activities like—
(i) Manning of Reception of Police Station: The trainees would carry out all the
functions at Reception including first attender to the complainants, advising them on
registration of complaints and guiding them to functional units (SHO/Duty Officer/
Station Clerk/LOs., etc.), counselling the victims/witnesses, etc., providing relevant
information to any person visiting the Police Station for that purpose.
(ii) T aking part in Community outreach programmes of the Police Station.
(iii) Assisting in updating the Police Station and Malkhana Records.
(iv) Assisting the Investigating Officer in the preservation of scene of crime and
investigation process.
(v) Scrutiny of Case Files for evaluation of evidence.
(vi) Assisting the Police Station staff in all bandobust duties.
(vii) Undertaking Patrolling/Traffic assignments.
2.8.9 Some of such other training and field oriented modules are–
(i) Sensitisation modules (Sectarian conflict, Marginalised sections, Gender, Human-
trafficking, Visibly lost children (VLC), Third-degree, Integrity)
(ii) Turn-around module
(iii) Empowered society module
(iv) Non-lethal crowd management module
(v) Cyber-crime module
(vi) T ac module
(vii) V isible Crime module
(viii) V isible Intelligence module

25
(ix) Core Intelligence module
(x) Simulation module
(xi) Police Station module
(xii) Interrogation module
(xiii) Forensic modules (Poison, DNA, Scene of Crime, Ballistic, Death by hanging/
drowning, Road accident, Post-mortem/MLR, Reconstruction of age/sex/face etc.,
Lie detection)
(xiv) Case file scrutiny module
(xv) Court-craft module
(xvi) Composite Code module
(xvii) Drug module
(xviii) Traffic module
(xix) Media module
(xx) Soft Skill module
(xxi) Budget-Financial management module
(xxii) Disaster management module
(xxiii) Strategic Leadership module
2.8.10 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that these modules would give sufficient field
orientation to the OTs. It was further stated that in addition to above, all the IPS OTs are, as part
of their approved training profile, sent for a 2 weeks practical field exposure in their allotted cadre
state where they get a first hand exposure of working of Police Station, Police Lines and SP
Office.
2.8.11 The Committee feels that the training module introduced in 2012 may be assessed
and complete literature and manuals may be prepared.
LACK OF QUALITY TRAINING PROGRAMME
2.9 The Ministry stated that as and when foreign training programmes are available the faculty
of NPA is nominated for such training programmes. In  the last one year, 4 faculty members have
been nominated for ATA/FBI courses. Moreover under MCTP also, faculty is deputed along with
officer trainees which give good exposure to the faculty.
2.9.1 The Committee, however, feels that there is a lack of quality training programmes
for the faculty. For better training of the police officers, the faculty should have better
exposure to latest methodologies, technologies available within the country and abroad. NPA
may have a relook into this.
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF POLICE STRUCTURES AND POLICE SYSTEMS
2.10 Responding to the suggestion of an expert for the need to have training curriculum
containing a comparative study of police structures and police systems over the world, the Ministry
of Home Affairs replied as under:–

26
“This is being done through Mid-Career Training Programmes (MCTP) for IPS officers.
There are three stages at which MCTPs are held. MCTP Phase-III (for SsP) which is for
8 weeks includes 2 weeks of foreign study tour, Phase-IV (for DIGs) is also 8 weeks
programme including 2 weeks of foreign study tour while month long Phase-V  (for ADsG)
includes one week of foreign study tour.”
2.10.1 The Committee feels that teaching of a comparative study of police structures and
police systems over the world at NPA at the induction stage also would enable the
probationer to have a much wider horizon and a much larger perspective, and would further
enable them to introduce small improvements in police working on the basis of their
knowledge of the overall police systems and police structures. There should be a course on
comparative police systems. NPA may look into this.
Training on Administrative, Financial and Social issues
2.11 An expert suggested that the IPS probationers need to be taught the district administration
functions and how the police interact with other departments and wings of administration in the
district, like medical, revenue, and others. At Academy itself they should understand how budget
is made and how tenders are issued and how purchases are made. The expert felt that they should
know how to interact with the public representatives and the political personalities. He further
added that Officer Trainee should also be taught elements of personnel management and human
resource development because policing is largely an issue of morale also. He further emphasized
on the need to teach political and social environment in which they function.
2.11.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs responded that lessons on district administration and Human
Resource Management are intensively covered by both in-house faculty and guest speakers. These
aspects are integral part of the mandatory paper, ‘Police Leadership and Management’. Present lot
of probationers are being exposed to various Sensitization modules e.g.  Sectarian conflict,
Marginalized section, Gender, Human Trafficking, Media, Visibly Lost Children, Integrity, Third
degree etc. Moreover, there is a budget-financial management module. Further, this aspect is also
covered during District Practical Training of the OTs. Inputs on interaction of the police with
public representatives are being given during training. Interaction of the IPS probationers with
political personalities is also arranged at the Academy. There is a full module on ‘Public Speaking’.
Sensitization modules that are conducted provide an opportunity to the probatitmers to interact with
the concerned NGOs.
2.11.2 The Committee desires that NPA may have a relook at the present modules and
incorporate specific aspects on administrative and financial management if they are not
sufficiently covered.
TRAINING SCHEDULE
2.12 An expert, finding out that training schedules and formats be insulated from the personal
biases and personal preferences, observed as under:–
“.....What I have seen and what I have heard also is that some Directors, once they have
assumed charge of the National Police Academy , they inject their own likes, dislikes,
preferences, biases into the curriculum, and, that disorients the mandated training of the
probationers. Let me give you one example. I remember, there was a Director in the National
Police Academy who said to the probationers, look, if you do not want to come to the field
for physical training, you can do that in your rooms. That was terrible. Giving the
probationer an option to do the physical training in his room means either he may do that
or he may not do that. It is all left to his choice. Physical training is absolutely essential

27
for the IPS officers, and, if you give this much of option, you are playing havoc with the
training schedule. So, we should try to insulate the training schedule from the personal
biases and personal preferences.”
The Ministry replying to the above observation merely stated that this was being achieved
through various sensitization and orientation modules by Academy.
2.12.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the cryptic reply of the Ministry. The Committee
is, therefore, of the view that there needs to be some institutional safeguards to the syllabi
and curriculum. Attempt to derail the training schedule should not be allowed.
COORDINATION WITH OTHER POLICE ACADEMIES
2.13 One of the experts emphasized the need for integrated police training in the National Police
Academy and the States. He observed that what has been covered in the National Police Academy,
the practical aspects of that have to be gone into in great detail in the State Police Training Colleges
or Academies. Agreeing with the suggestion for integrated police training and devolution of the
same to the State Police Training Colleges, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that a formal forum
comprising all Police Training Academies may be thought of in this regard, under the aegis of NPA.
2.13.1 Deliberating on the issue another expert stated as under:–
“National Police Academy has a mission statement which says that it would give guidance/
consultancy to the State police training institutions. Unfortunately, we are not able to live
up to that. Today, the National Police Academy is one of the finest police training
institutions not only in this country but also in this part of the world. The facilities, staff
and all are excellent. But, the State police training institutions are in absolute doldrums.
Most of them have become dumping grounds of inefficient, demotivated elements. No
training is done there. There National Police Academy has to play an important role, of
course with the consent of the State Government.
2.13.2 The Committee feels that internal security is a major concern across the Country
and supervision and surveillance by the Police Personnel around the country is of utmost
significance.  With the sophistication and changing nature of crimes, a well equipped and
professional police personnel are required all over the country. Integrated police training is,
therefore the natural corollary. The Committee recommends that NPA should act like what
the NCERT does for other training schools of States and the experience gained at the NPA
must percolate to the State and the district training schools for the benefit of the police
training at the grass root level. The Committee agrees with the suggestion of the Ministry
for setting up of a common forum for all State Police Training academies with the NPA at
Apex and under its Aegis. A serious thought may be given to this suggestion.

28
28
CHAPTER-III
ISSUES AND EMERGING AREAS OF TRAINING
LAW AND JURISPRUDENCE IN TRAINING MODULES
3.1 An expert emphasing on the need to give impetus to incorporate modules on knowledge of
law and jurisprudence in the training curriculum stated as under:–
“In the initial years of IPS training in the 50s and 60s, a training was more or less divided
into two parts. One was law and the other was order. There was little else taught apart from
law. Even subjects like forensic science and all were very much related to investigation
aspect of law. But over the years, the training curriculum was broadened, the horizons were
broadened and various other subjects were brought in. As a result, the emphasis on law,
particularly the jurisprudential aspects ‘of law has come down considerably, and this is very
often evident even in the manner in which senior IPS officers react with the media on the
TV channels and elsewhere. They do not emphasize on the legal points of their case and
go into sort of side issues. That is the first thing that we need to do, particularly on the
jurisprudential aspects. If you need to appreciate evidence particularly, you should also
understand jurisprudential principles behind such evidence.”
3.1.1 Responding to the above views, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the emphasis on
law has since been enhanced with the introduction of a ‘composite code approach’ which in
nutshell means that the major laws are to be contextualized in the backdrop of constitutional and
human rights provisions. Further, re-visiting sessions have been planned in respect of important
legal aspects to re-enforce the learning.
3.1.2 The Committee agrees that an in-depth understanding of jurisprudential principles would
inject legal insight to the IPS officer which would certainly help them solve the legal issues
involved in the case. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is further scope for enhancing
the module on law and jurisprudence in the training curriculum of IPS officers. Therefore, the
entire module on law and jurisprudence may be revisited involving some legal experts.
Case Study
3.2 An expert observing that investigations, trial procedures are all taught in abstract in the
National Police Academy suggested that practical aspects of cases may be introduced in the training
modules by sort of doing a parallel exercise and some of the cases which are now actually real
time happening. He also felt that training should become more case based study. If it is not case
based study, and training is done or taught in abstract, the absorption at the end of the trainee is
not as good as based on case based studies.
3.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that in the National Police Academy training in
investigation procedures is imparted through simulated exercises on different types of crimes. In
addition, Case file scrutiny module has been introduced to enable the OTs to go through the real
case files and to assess the evidence. The Ministry further stated that it is under consideration to
set up a case study wing at NPA. It was also stated that all the present faculty members had
recently undergone a case writing module at ISB, Hyderabad and case studies are now an integral
part of learning at NPA.

29
3.2.2 The Committee agrees that case based study would enrich the knowledge of trainees.
An early decision may be taken to set up Case S tudy Wing in the Academy. All the training
modules may contain the case study so that it leaves a lasting impact in the minds of
trainees.
3.2.3 Highlighting the instances of rejoinder of crimes, particularly in economic offences like
cheating involving misappropriation of funds and thus breach of trust, an expert suggested that IPS
officers should be trained in a manner so that he could be conversant with various aspects of legal
issues while investigating a crime.
3.2.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that NPA has introduced from this
year the “Integrated Training format” to take care of the need of IPS officers having in-depth
understanding of rejoinder of crimes. The indoor subjects are being taught in a concentric applied
format as follow:
Indoor T opic Content Convergence Context Application Methodology Suggested Side/
Subjects (including (Related (Applied (Reading/ Secondary
case study/ aspects) skills) vie wing/ effects
case law etc.) visit etc.)
3.2.5 The Ministry further stated that the integrated outdoor format is as follows:
Policy Objective Environment Laws Str ategy T actics Manoeuvres Documentation
3.2.6 Another expert also stressed the need to give practical teachings of investigation at NPA
because when IPS officer goes to a State, he has to do investigation on his own. Responding to
the views of experts, the Ministry stated that the practical teaching of investigation is being done
at the Academy through simulation and police station modules. The officer trainees (OTs) spend
considerable time on investigation of case during these modules. Further, the OTs get opportunity
to investigate real cases while holding independent charge of police station during their district
practical training of 28 weeks in the allotted cadre.
3.2.7 The Committee hopes that the introduction of Integrated Training format would
enable the IPS officers to have in-depth understanding of rejoinder of crimes. The format
may be thoroughly assessed after one year.
ETHICAL AND MORAL V ALUES AND INTEGRATION
3.3 Some Members of the Committee sought to know about any special inputs given to the IPS
Probationers on ethical and moral values as there is a perceptible decrease in quality and standard
of public life particularly the police department. One expert felt that although there is emphasis on
ethical dimensions of policing in NPA but a greater emphasis should be given to it. Training of
probationers should not be confined to acquisition of skills only, rather equal emphasis on
inculcation of ethical values, sound judgment and discretion should be given.
3.3.1 The Director, in response thereto, apprised the Committee that integrity related issues are
getting maximum emphasis in the Academy. The topic of corruption is dealt head on by means of
brain-storming sessions, group discussions, case studies, address and interaction with the Police
and other leaders of impeccable integrity. The ill-effects of corruption in police are brought out
clearly to the Probationers. The malaise of corruption in lower ranks and also in senior level is
also taken up during these sessions. It was further stated that IPS officers with impeccable
reputation are invited to address and interact with the probationers and are presented as role models
to them. A special module on anti-corruption by officers from CBI is being conducted. The
importance of transparency and accountability in governance is further highlighted by giving inputs

30
on RTI Act. These topics are also made a part of debate/Elocution Competitions that are held at
the Academy every year. In the written reply it was further stated that ‘Ethics and Human Rights’
forms a full-fledged subject in IPS training curriculum. ‘Purity of Means’ is emphasized in all
aspects of practical policing. In addition, Sensitization modules, which include field visits also, have
been introduced on the themes which inter-alia  include Gender Sensitization, Juvenile Justice,
Marginal Communities, Communal Harmony and National Integration and Integrity.
3.3.2 The Committee is of the view that since policing does have a bearing on the lives
of individuals and, therefore, Police Personnel, particularly officers should possess high
moral and ethical values so as to arrest the declining trend in quality and standard of public
life. The Committee believes that when the pursuit of social commitment and integrity is
effectively imbibed into police personnel irrespective of rank and file, the malaise and
qualms of corruption could be eradicated from public life to a large extent. Transparency
and public accountability is a pre-requisite for good governance. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the training modules prepared for probationers and also for in-service
officers must cover the lessons on ethical traits and moral behaviour.
3.3.3 The Committee observes that Officer is generally vested with the power which
extends at times to taking life and liberty of the people but what matters is how he
exercises his power. Therefor e, emphasis should also be given as to how to use the power.
The Committee is also given to understand that in other countries like Japan training
curriculum contain the constant emphasis on ethical aspects in policing so that while doing
a particular job, a set of principles has to be adhered to. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that adequate emphasis should be laid in the training programme of Officers
Trainee and NPA should teach probationers good policing practice which is practicised
globally. Modules on ethical values and morality should also be included in the MCTP
programmes as it is equally required at that stage as well.
3.3.4 In regard to the training given by the Academy on ethical reorientation, sense of justice to
the weaker sections of the society and the role of IPS Officers during communal incidents, the
Director, NP A informed that the Academy lays great emphasis on policing without any bias of
religion, caste, creed, region or any other parochial factor. The inputs are given through case study
method and by calling police officers of impeccable reputation who have dealt with communal
violence and have been praised by public and judicial commissions. The loss of credibility which
police may face, if it displays any bias, and the resulting damage to the moral authority of the
police in the society is also discussed through case studies. The importance of Peace Committees
in maintaining communal harmony, particularly in communally sensitive areas, is brought by sharing
with the probationers the successful experiments carried out in different places like Bhiwandi,
Mumbai, Coimbatore, etc. He also apprised the Committee that the Academy removes regional
biases and promotes camaraderie by forming Squads of Probationers in which persons from
different regions are put together.
3.3.5 The Committee desires that the message of the Preamble to the Constitution of India,
being “Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic” should not only be read and
understood by the police personnel but should also be imprinted into their ‘hearts and minds’
to be reflected into their actions while dealing with actual incidents. Keeping in view the fact
that India is a vast country with complex social structure i.e. multi-lingual, multi-ethnic,
multi-religious, training modules must give emphasis to these aspects. A sense of justice and
sensitivity towards the people particularly of weaker sections should be initiated by them.
TRAINING MODULES ON LEFT-WING EXTREMISM AND TERRORISM
3.4 In regard to the training provided to deal with Left-Wing Extremism and in winning the

31
hearts of the people, the Committee was informed that the inputs on Left-Wing Extremism are
given to the Probationers in the subject, “Internal Security”. It is made very clear to all the officers
that simply by bullets, it would not be possible to control or check this problem or arrive at any
practical solution. So until and unless the police win over the population, expecting any significant
long term success for police would not be possible. It was also stated that for providing inputs
on ‘Winning Hearts and Minds’ the Academy invites the officers, particularly from Andhra Pradesh,
who have implemented successful strategies in the field. They share their techniques and
experience. There are many examples where the officers have tried to win over the people by
means of cultural activities like street dramas, street plays and even the screening of films which
shows true face of LWE violence and condition of population who are victims of this violence and
how their families have been affected.
3.4.1 Regarding the training modules on combating Left-Wing extremism, jungle warfare, just as
the Army is doing it in Mizoram, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee in a written
submission which is as under:–
“The Academy is giving extensive training in Jungle Warfare to the IPS Probationers. This
is done by the “Special Tactics Wing” of the Academy and also by the specialised
“Greyhounds” Force of AP Police. The IPS Probationers are exposed to the aspects of
jungle training through ‘Tac Modules’ or ganised by Academy’ s “Special Tactics Wing”.
Further, they undergo a one week attachment in jungles under the supervision of
“Greyhounds” where practical exercises of establishing jungle camp, carrying out operations
and long range patrol, etc., are conducted. In addition, expert police officers from Left-
Wing Extremist affected States are called to share their  experiences with the probationers.
NP A is soon going to acquire 400 acres of land to create its own jungle training platforms
and combat shooting ranges.”
3.4.2 The left wing extremism is spreading its tentacles across the country and a well
prepared module needs to be prepared for training on dealing with this. Greyhounds of
Andhra Pradesh Police has been successful in dealing with this and they can be a role model
in regard to this training. If possible, the probationers may be attached with greyhounds for
some period. NPA should become centre of excellence in giving training on dealing with left
wing extremism.
PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILING
3.5 Explaining about the psychological profiling of the police personnel to overcome the stress
factor because of compulsions and tensions to act more sensitively when it comes to people’s
issues, the Director, NPA informed the Committee that the Academy is making use of psychological
profiling. In addition to a Professor (Training Methodology) of NPA, outside psychologists are also
called for psychological profiling. It is, however, not used for formal assessment of probationers
because these tools are not very perfect but the psychological profiling to understand the person
and for counselling purposes is done and the counselling goes on continuously. This counselling
is done not only while they are here but also when they are on the field. They are constantly
counseled through their first and second year by the faculty members from the Academy at their
place of work. The Academy also has a big Yoga Centre which is used to teach them on how to
rein their minds and how to manage the stress.
3.5.1 The inputs on detection/deception techniques like Polygraph, Narco-Analysis, Brain
Fingerprinting, Brain Electronic Oscillation Signature (BEOS), etc., are given as part of Forensic
training.

32
3.5.2 The Committee desires that psychological profiling may be made use of for better
counselling and de-stressing. Yoga is a good tool for de-stressing and to rein in the mind
and this may be used to the maximum extent.
PEOPLE-FRIENDLY POLICING
3.6 The Members of the Committee, while pointing out that the people especially the poor are
reluctant to go to police station for any help due to lack of people-friendly policing and the
behavior of the Police, questioned about the kind of training the Academy is giving to police for
sensitizing them with gender, sex, etc.
3.6.1 The Director stated that the Academy gives a lot of emphasis on sensitivity of police to the
public especially the weaker sections of the society, women and children. Importance of friendly
and sympathetic behavior at the police station level, which is the cutting edge, is emphasized upon
in the curriculum. Probationers are sent to those Police Stations which have very friendly
appearance and they are told that police at the cutting edge needs to be very friendly to the people.
He also stated that probationers are exposed to the best practices available within India. The
necessity of walking extra mile for women, children and weaker sections of the society is
emphasized. Under special module on Crime against Women and Children, police officers,
specialists and NGOs are called for their presentation. An NGO namely Prayas was invited for
briefing trainers. The Juvenile Justice Act is also covered in a big way.
3.6.2 The Director further informed the Committee as under:–
“The Probationers go for visits to Old Age Homes and Orphanages and sometimes they
adopt certain orphanages and they give some money from their own pocket. This very batch
has gone out to old age homes and they have done a very wonderful job. The eyes of the
residents of Old Age Homes swell with the tears when they see the probationers over there.
So in a number of ways we are sensitizing them. Close monitoring of the complaints by
members of the weaker sections of the society is emphasized upon during the Supervision
Module. The free accessibility of the Supdt. of Police to the people stressed upon. The role
of technology, Mobile and Internet, is stressed upon in getting the complaints from these
sections. We encourage them to get complaints on Internet from them. Establishment of help
lines for women and children is also suggested. So these are some of the subjects that we
are dwelling upon.”
3.6.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs in the written reply also stated that people friendly policing
is possible by training a policeman in all three domains – personal, social and professional. NPA
has with effect from this year started imparting training in sensitization (personal domain),
orientation (social domain) and competencies (professional domain) in an integrated format.
However, to reach to the last policemen in India an effort comparable to ‘National Literacy Mission’
would be required. It may be set up as ‘National Police Sensitization Mission’ under the aegis of
NPA, in accordance with the philosophy that NPA has recently acquired, ‘Sensitized Police for
Empowered Society’.
3.6.4 The Ministry further informed that with effect from year 2012 the Model police station at
NPA has been upgraded as a full working (model) competency platform. IPS probationers stay
there turn by turn, and carry out all the routines of a police station in the manner in which it
should be done. The police station has four distinct and yet inter-connected segments -Reception,
Functional, Residential and Community. The experiment has given the IPS trainees a good grip over
police working and is also preparing them for an appropriate interface with various client segments
during their future professional life.

33
3.6.5 The image of Government depends more on the reaction of the rank and file of the
law enforcing agencies particularly police officers towards the common man, when the
common man approaches them in the hour of need. The Committee, therefore, feels that
police being at the cutting edge level needs to adopt courteous behavior and friendly
temperament so that people may approach them without fear and with faith to have
redressal of their grievances. The Committee, therefore, recommends that training modules
and practical training courses as imparted by NPA must include all behavioral and
attitudinal aspects and the Academy should work on this. The Ministry should oversee the
implementation of the Mission. An early decision may be taken in this regard.
ACCESS OF SUB-ORDINATES TO SENIOR POLICE OFFICER
3.7 The Committee pointed out that although there is a system in the police for constabulary
to meet the higher officers (SP and above) but it takes lot of time and courage for them to meet
the SP for expressing their views and redressal of grievances, and sought to know the kind of
training the Academy is giving to the probationers in this regard.
3.7.1 Responding to this, the Ministry stated that with regard to open access of senior officers
of police, particularly, Supdt. of Police to the Constabulary, the aspect of leadership and team
building are given tremendous emphasis in the Academy. It is emphasized that the majority of the
police force consists of constabulary and therefore, it is important to keep an open and vibrant
dialogue with them. This means that the constabulary should have the confidence and assurance
to approach to the SP at any time for narrating their grievance without any fear or hesitation. In
the weekly parades, orderly rooms at Police Lines and during the surprise visits of the Police
Stations, the SP must meet the constabulary and enquire about their welfare. This way the SP can
remove the communication gaps between him/her and the subordinates.
3.7.2 The Committee firmly believes that open access of constabulary to higher police
personnel and hassle-free communication among them would ensure higher degree of trust
and faith amongst each other which would not only lead to redressal of grievances of
constabulary but would also help in taking strategic decisions, formulation of pragmatic
plans based on the situation and experience at grass root level and execution thereof to
achieve set objectives. This will also improve the efficiency of the forces. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the training modules should invariably exphasise this. This
needs to be done both in the NPA as well as the training courses of States and District
Training Centres.
PREPARATION OF CHARGESHEETS ETC.
3.8 The Committee, referring to the lacunae and deficiencies in the preparation of the charge
sheet which leads to acquittal of the accused who otherwise would have to be convicted, sought
to know the training imparted to IPS probationers regarding investigation of cases, gathering of
scientific and forensic evidence and supervising the preparation of the charge-sheets, etc. The
Director NPA stated that the IPS Probationers are given extensive training in investigation of cases.
In simulation exercises, they are made to write FIR, investigate the case and prepare Chargesheet.
During their ‘supervision’ module also, supervision of crime is given a lot of importance which
involves supervision of entire case including chargesheet.
3.8.1 Despite the training being imparted to IPS probationers by NPA on the supervision of
preparation of the criminal charge sheets, the shortcomings continue to persist in making
the charge sheets at the initial stage which have been in many cases found faulty by the
various courts, resulting in acquittal of the accused and putting on sorry figure for the
police, as a whole. It is a known fact that in several cases, justice is either denied or yet

34
to see the light of the day due to lacunae in FIR and incomplete framing of the
chargesheet. In this background, the Committee recommends that IPS probationers as well
as the in-service officers must be imparted adequate training to enhance their supervising
skill so that FIRs and chargesheets must be prepared in a comprehensive manner. The
probationers should be made fully conversant with the procedure of preparation of
chargesheet and framing charges.
TRAINING ON COURT PROCEDURES
3.9 The Committee, while referring to the complex court procedures sought to know as how
the Academy is giving inputs on the court procedures. The Director, NPA informed that module
on moot courts is part of academy training during Phase-I. He agreed that the real life courts are
entirely different from the moot court simulations in the Academy. The probationers are given
actual court exposure during district practical training. They are exposed to the nitty-gritty of
detailed court procedures by attachment with District Judge and Asst. Public Prosecutor for a
period of seven days.
3.9.1 Though moot court Proceedings at the Academy are good and give theoretical aspect
but does not give the true picture of the courts. Dealing with court cases is an important
aspect of the policing. The actual procedure of the courts is not only complex but
cumbersome also, and the attachment of the probationers for a period of seven days does
not appear sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends that probationers should be
given sufficient actual court exposure so that inadequacies on the part of the agencies of
the Government do not become a stumbling bloc in the disposal of the case. NPA should,
therefore, consider to give sufficient emphasize on this.
COMMUNITY POLICING
3.10 On the point of community policing, the Committee was informed by the Director that
the Academy conducts module on this subject. The country has very good examples in
community policing, one in Kerala and the other in Tamil Nadu. NPA has invited the officers
from both the States who are spearheading the missions. He also stated that the Prime Minister
has set out the Police Missions, and one of the Mission is on community policing. The
Committee has already submitted its report to the MHA which is under consideration of the MHA
for implementation. Meanwhile, NPA is organising various seminars on community policing and
there is very good literature available on the subject and NPA is procuring more books on the
subject. NPA also invites experts who have dealt with community policing in real life situations.
The Academy has published a book on good practices in community policing being followed by
various States.
3.10.1 The Committee notes that one of the Police Mission set out by the Prime
Minister is on Community Policing and the Ministry is considering the report of the
Committee thereon. After it is decided to implement it, NPA may take a cue from this
and include it in the course. On the basis of experience of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, NPA
may prepare a manual on community policing which can be useful for probationers of
NPA and all other states Police Organisation. The Committee views that community
policing implies people’s participation in local security arrangement and, therefore, leads
to much interaction between the police and people. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the mission on Community Policing should be included in the State
and District Police Training Centres of various States and literature procured at the
centre must also be disseminated.

35
DEALING WITH THE CHALLENGES OF TERRORISM
3.11 With regard to inputs on dealing with the challenges of terrorism, the Director, NPA stated
that taking into account the increasing importance of the subject, a new paper, ‘Internal Security’
has been created to cover these topics in IPS Probationers’ syllabus from the year 2010. The
Academy is laying greater emphasis on anti-terror inputs than earlier. Inputs on origin, ideology,
counter measures and strategies to deal with terrorism, insurgency are given by expert police
officers from IE and also from State Intelligence Wings. Hands on exercises in collection of anti-
terror intelligence are conducted with the help of AP State Intelligence Branch. Practical
demonstration of various improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) is given in the Academy. The
probationers are also shown the sophisticated equipment used in anti-terror operations. Case Studies
on both successful and un-successful cases are also discussed.
3.11.1 It was also stated that on the tactics front, the probationers are trained in field craft and
tactics. room intervention drills, cordoning off an area, precautions in dealing with explosives,
raising of Quick Reaction Teams (QRT), modern equipments and the importance of preparedness
in countering the terrorism, case studies like Mumbai Terror Attack, Chintalnar (Dantewada)
Ambush, links of organized crime mafia with terrorism are also discussed in detail. Attachment with
NSG, Central School of Weapons & Tactics (CSWT), Indore, Training in Jungle Survival and
Reflex Firing by Tamil Nadu Special Task Force in Satyamangalam Forest is also done. The
Academy is in the process of acquiring Bomb Detection equipment and is also planning mock built
up area for carrying out realistic simulation exercises.
3.11.2 The Committee was further informed that post 26/11 (Mumbai Terrorist Attack), the
emphasis on anti-terrorist training has been increased in the Academy with establishment of the
“Special Tactics Wing”. The Wing imparts hands-on training to IPS Probationers in anti-terrorist
operations. The academic inputs are also reinforced by the Officers from IB and the senior police
officers from affected States. They are also addressed on various aspects of urban intervention by
the experienced practitioners drawn from all over the country. An urban intervention training
infrastructure is fast coming up at the NPA campus and is likely to be completed by early 2013.
It was further informed that there is a full core intelligence module run by IB and practical
exercises by State Intelligence Bureau, AP. In addition, there is a supplementary ‘Visible Intelligence
Module’ conducted at NPA for IPS Probationers.
3.11.3 Though after reviewing the police response to Mumbai attack and finding that there was
a big gap between the training imparted and the actual requirement of tactical skill to combat
the potential menace of terrorism, a separate wing called ‘Special Tactics Wing (STW)’ has been
set up in NPA with the objective of imparting training to State Police and Central Armed Police
Forces to enable them to conduct tactical operation against the terrorists in jungle and urban
environment, the efforts are not complete as yet. The urban intervention training infrastructure
is likely to be completed in 2013. This may be completed as per schedule.
3.11.4 NPA should think and act ahead of the terrorists on the possible techniques and
technologies likely to be used by terrorists and start training in advance. Government may
provide necessary infrastructure to NPA. Training on ‘preventive steps to prevent the
possible terrorist attack is required. Lesson from USA are required to be learnt where
9/11 incident has not been repeated. The Committee recommends that NPA has to
take initiative to make headway in training in this regard.
3.11.5 The Committee is of the view that since the country is facing terrorist threats
counter Intelligence techniques and anti-terrorism operations need to be included in the
curriculum so that the officers who come out are well-versed in the counter-terrorism
intelligence techniques.

36
INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
3.12 The Committee asked about the training imparted on intelligence collection and analysis at
the Academy.
3.12.1 The Committee was informed that with regard to intelligence collection, the Academy runs
one specific module called’ IB Module”, in which officers from IB come, and teach the
probationers in Trade Craft i.e., how to identify a potential source, develop and to run it by
keeping his identity protected in getting intelligence. They also share with them the things which
actually can not be published in the news papers; like many times the IB is doing a good job, but
naturally they have to remain in the background, so they can not say that this was an intelligence
provided by them but here they share with the probationers that how actually these things took
place. Secondly, when the probationers go to Delhi, there also they have got a three days module
with IB. In addition to that NPA also takes help from the Special Intelligence Branch of AP Police,
which has done a commendable job in collection of intelligence on LWE front. So, the probationers
go out actually in the field in the city itself and AP SIB gives them various practical tasks. Thus
with the help of intelligence bureau and AP State intelligence Branch, NPA is carrying out exclusive
training for probationers in this direction.
3.12.2 The Committee was further informed that inputs on collection of crime related intelligence
are imparted to the Probationers through conduct of simulation exercises as part of investigation
module—how to get clues, identifications, develop and engage a source in property offences,
murder, etc.
3.12.3 The Committee is surprised to find that although probationers are given elaborate
training on the intelligence collection and analysis but there is no dearth of intelligence
failures which led to massive incidents killing several innocent persons. Though, intelligence
success is rarely reported in the media its failure attracts immediate attention of the media
besides immensely affecting the lives of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the training modules on intelligence collection and analysis must be comprehensive and
the same may be replicated at the State and District Police Training Centre.
LAW & ORDER
3.13 One of the experts while emphasizing the need on imparting training on order part of the
policing suggested as under:–
“.....the training is more theoretical in terms of investigation, criminal law, etc., etc. But
today Police are increasingly facing order issues. It is not the law part, but order part of
the policing, like crowd control, religious congregations, etc. Almost every year, we have
huge religious congregations in India whether it is Kumbh Mela or Ardh Kumbh Mela, some
other Pushkaram or something like l that. We do not have enough exposure to these order
issues given to the IPS trainees now because, 1 think, the theoretical training pre-empts
most of the time and they do not get enough time. Probably, we will have to give some
attention to this.”
3.13.1 It was also felt that probationers must be exposed to crowd control where it is at its best
or at its worst.
3.13.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that there is an integrated module
now on the aspect of ‘Non-lethal management of crowds’. The OTs are also given practical
exposure of large scale crowd management e.g. Ganesh Visarjan, Moharrum, etc. The Bandobast
arrangements of Kumbh Mela are discussed with OTs by the guest faculty who themselves have
actual experience of handling it.

37
3.13.3 In regard to dealing with peaceful and volatile demonstrations, the Committee was informed
that the Academy trains the probationers exclusively and extensively on dealing with non-violent
agitations and on use of minimum force in any situation. The Academy trains them practically, and
the RAF Unit comes to the Academy and gives the demo on how to control a demonstration and
how to use minimum force. In simulation exercises, the probationers are to act as Police Officers.
While protecting themselves they are required to disperse the mob. The force they can use is tear
gas, water canons, lathi charge, etc. The doctrine of use of minimum force is emphasized at every
stage. This simulation is very useful for the trainees.
3.13.4 The Committee notes the doctrine of use of minimum force by the police personnel
to deal with the volatile and peaceful demonstration. However, the people in general have
police-phobia as the impression of colonial attitude of the police personnel persists in the
minds of the public. Some of the police outrage our incidents linger in the hearts of the
people. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that probationers and in-service
officers should emphasize on handling the peaceful and volatue demonstration with acute
care and sympathy towards the people because India is a democratic country and people of
the nation have every right to express their genuine demands through peaceful
demonstration within the parameters of the Constitution. The officers, when on duty are
required to take on the spot decision as there may not be time to consult seniors.
Therefore, emphasjs should be laid in the training on dealing with such situations.
TRAINING ON DISASTER MANAGEMENT
3.14 One expert underlined the need for IPS probationers to be put through principles of disaster
management.
3.14.1 Explaining about training modules on Disaster Management, the Director, NPA, replied that
police is the first responder in any major disaster. Police is the most visible and best organized
arm of the Government in such cases. Expert speakers from National Disaster Management
Authority and Police and Administrative Officers, who have handled major disasters like Tsunami,
Earthquake, major accidents, etc. are called to share their experiences and the lessons learnt. The
Director stated that the preparation of disaster management plan at district level is covered in the
training including aspects of preparedness and peace time rehearsals are emphasized.
Contingencies like break down of mobile/wireless communication, road approach and
establishment and working of Incident Command Centre near the place of disaster are
emphasized. Important role of dissemination of information to general public through media,
important role of NGOs in mitigation of the effects of disaster and establishment of Trauma and
Counselling Centres for victims is also emphasized. The use of Media for educating and
counselling the public is also stressed upon.
3.14.2 Within a period of twenty months, in Kolkata itself, forty-three people died when
fire gutted the fifth and sixth floors of the Stephen Court building and more than ninety
people lost their lives in Advanced Medicare and Research Institute (AMRI) Hospital. When
five major fire accidents occurred in large hospitals in London between January, 2008 and
February, 2009, nobody died; in fact, not a single case of “significant adverse health affect”
was reported. In Northwick Park Hospital, a large district-level health care facility, 123
patients, including the brain injured, were safely evacuated in 23 minutes, while it took
fifteen minutes to the rescuer to reach AMRI Hospital costing several lives. The Committee
feels that there needs more practical training including simulation. Whenever any disaster
takes place, they should be sent for real time experience and training. The Committee
recommends that NPA should keep in these things in mind and prepare the requisite
training modules on disaster management in the country.

38
NATIONAL SECURITY/INTERNAL SECURITY
3.15 One of the experts indicating that National security issues now-a-days are very important
and take a lot of attention at the national and the State levels, therefore, NPA should introduce a
course preferably, a few lectures on national security issues should be devoted.
3.15.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that NPA organizes lectures on the
issues of National Security and also runs a full training seminar on National Security which is
attended by officers from IAS, IPS, IFoS, Defence Services and Central Police Organizations.
3.15.2 India is a dominant player of the global economy and global politics and there are
a lot of geo-political and the national security issues which are of utmost concern, therefore
training modules covering National Security issues are indispensable. Therefore, training
modules should not only cover the course in terms of terrorism or left wing extremism but
also in terms of security of vital installations like Dams, Atomic Energy installations,
Refineries and various other security considerations with in the territory of the country.
3.15.3 An expert suggested that IPS probationers should have to be put through a training of
unarmed combat, close quarter combat. A greater proficiency in handling weapons is required.
Emphasising on the same issue another expert added that an IPS officer need to get exposure to
real problems like insurgency that prevail in India and training to conduct operations against
insurgents.
3.15.4 A member of the Committee was of the view that officers training should also include
exposure to modern and sophisticated arms and weapons and after the completion of their
curriculum they can be sent to the areas where criminal activities are going on where the jungle
warfare is going on. The Ministry of Home Affairs replied that Applied UAC is an integral part of
training. A separate Tactics Wing is there to impart training in operational combat, reflex shooting.
3.15.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that all IPS trainees undergo a one
week attachment with Greyhounds, AP to familiarize them with anti-naxal operations. Inputs on
tactical operations by the police are given by the Tactics Wing of NPA through demos, practical
exercises, case studies, jungle camp, urban intervention modules etc.
3.15.6 They are also addressed on various aspects of urban intervention by the experienced
practitioners drawn from all over the country. The States affected with Naxalism etc. have their
own protocols to address the needs of IPS officers allotted to those States in this regard. The
Ministry further added that NPA is soon going to acquire 400 acres of land to create its own jungle
training platforms and combat shooting ranges. An Urban Intervention training infrastructure is fast
coming up at the NPA campus and is likely to be completed by early 2013.
3.15.7 The Committee is of the view that Officers Trainee should be imparted training to
handle the latest and sophisticated weapons to ensure that the police are always ahead of
the criminals in terms of handling guns and weapons. Early action may be taken to have
the infrastructure for urban intervention training.
EMERGING AREAS OF CRIMES
3.16 One expert pointing out the emerging areas of crimes and the need for imparting requisite
and adequate training to police personnel, felt that times have changed and we have modernized
and crimes are becoming more and more sophisticated, more and more diabolical. Things like cyber
crimes, economic offences, white collar crimes of various kinds are taking place. We need to
device training modules to tackle these aspects of criminal law enforcement. Today, most of the
offences that we deal with are of this kind.

39
3.16.1 In response to above suggestions, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that at present in
NPA probationers are being exposed to various modules which inter-alia includes Tactics, Cyber-
crime, Simulated crime, Police Station, Documentation, Case file scrutiny, Interrogation, Core
Intelligence, Forensic, Visible crime, Visible intelligence, Empowered Society, Turn-around
strategy, Sensitization (Sectarian conflict, Marginalized section, Gender, Human Trafficking,
Visibly Lost Children, Integrity, Third degree), Non-lethal crowd management, Composite code,
Drug, Traffic, Media, Soft Skills, Budget-Financial Management, Disaster Management, Strategic
Leadership.
3.16.2 As regards the training imparted to officers on cyber crimes and cyber laws, the
Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the IPS officers are given adequate training in Cyber
Laws, detection and investigation of cyber crimes including e-mails and other messages, etc.
In addition to giving these inputs, during basic training, to IPS probationers, the Academy runs
courses on “Cyber Crimes” (Basic and Advanced levels) to train in-service officers in the
Cyber domain.
3.16.3 The Ministry further stated that the IPS probationers are given extensive inputs on Cyber
Crimes. This include provisions of IT Act, Cyber Forensic Tools for detection and collection of
evidence. This is reinforced with practical hands-on exercises in Cyber Forensic Lab at the
Academy. Cyber Crime Experts are called from outside for specialised inputs. It was also stated
that the Academy has developed a Module on Sensitization of the IPS Probationers towards
Communal Biases and Problems. This has helped in removing personal biases among the trainers
and in upholding the spirit of the Constitution.
3.16.4 In the modern world, police officers need training not only on cyber laws, but also
the nuances of hacking to decode encrypted e-mails and other messages. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that NPA should give thorough training to the police
officers to deal with computer hacking and related cyber crimes.
3.16.5 The Committee understands that a lot of sophistication is being brought into the
crime, and therefore, corresponding modification in training modules to cover changing
aspects of crime are but natural. The Committee desires that there is an urgent need to
reverse the general perception “that the police are always behind the criminals in terms of
training and knowledge as well as the use of arms and weapons”. NPA may take a lead in
this regard.
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF WORKING OF THE ACADEMY AND ORGANIZATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS (ODIS)
3.17 The Committee was apprised of the key concern areas of the academy which are
enumerated below:–
(i) Need to open up to have quality staff in key areas at senior level on contract basis
with appropriate remuneration/facilities.
(ii) Lack of quality training programmes for the faculty, their exposures in India and
abroad.
(iii) The Academy is not able to attract required instructional/support staff by way of
assured deputation quota from various central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs).
(iv) Inability to get quality field trainers during District Practical Training.
(v) There is no pool of quality field trainers during District Practical Training which
suffers on this count.

40
3.17.1 The Committee notes the key concern areas affecting the working of the academy
and is of the considered view that in order to overcome key concern areas of the working
of the academy, specific Organizational Development Interventions (ODI) are required to
enable the Academy to achieve its objectives and mission. Some of the issues such as staff/
faculty, research wing and foreign training have already been dealt, in detail, in the
preceding paragraphs. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry may
consider all the issues and find solution to them so as to strengthen the Academy. The
Ministry may help NPA management undertake concerted efforts to implement
organizational development interventions to strengthen organizational structure and to
enhance the functional proficiency of the Academy.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NPA
3.18 Explaining about audit and evaluation of the existing training imparted in the Academy, the
management apprised the Committee that on the impact Evaluation of Basic and in-service Training
Programmes for IPS officers at the National Police Academy, a Research S tudy was conducted
jointly by Shri P.V . Rajgopal, IPS (Retd.) and Dr. A.K. Saxena, Prof. (T.M.) in the year 2002. The
Administrative staff College of India, Hyderabad is presently conducting the Quality Audit of NPA.
It is under progress.
3.18.1 The ‘Impact of Training on the Performance of IPS officers’ is being done by Shri H.J.
Dora, IPS (Retd). The Research Project is currently under progress. To carry out the impact of
Mid Career Training Programmes (MCTP) on performance of in service IPS Officer who have
attended the programme, questionnaires have been prepared and the same are being sent to the
DGPs of various States and Chiefs of Central Police Organisations and the concerned IPS Officers
for their response and further analysis.
3.18.2 One expert suggested that NPA should have an outside expert for evaluation of the
performance standards of NPA.
3.18.3 The Committee hopes that the outcome of performance evaluation of NPA done by
Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad would be of immense use for
strengthening NPA and its programmes. The Committee also desires that BPR&D may
conduct an independent evaluation of the basic and MCTP Training imparted at NPA.
SWOT - ANALYSIS OF THE WORKING OF THE ACADEMY
3.19 The Committee sought to know the SWOT Analysis of the working of the Academy and
the strategy being chocked out to streamline its strength and opportunities to achieve its set
objectives and mission. The Academy management furnished the SWOT analysis of the Academy
which is enumerated below:-
Strength Weaknesses
12
(i) Good location and Climate having
excellent infrastructure with
outstanding learning facilities viz .
Computer Labs, Well stocked Library,
Physical Training, and Modern
Equipment and gadgets for Outdoor
and Tactics Training;
(ii) Committed Faculty and Trainees with
(i) Lack of sufficient incentives for
training staff to join the Academy;
(ii) The pay grades of the trainers and
staff are lower as compared to the
CPOs from where the Academy is
taking the trainers on deputation;
(iii) Lack of incentives to attract best
resources persons from abroad;

41
12
with good academic background;
(iii) Centre of Excellence III Police
Training in India with experiential
learning metholology;
(iv) Well established training of trainers
wings;
(v) Following sound evaluation of training
methodology;
(vi) Adoption of techniques for Training
Need Analysis and Course Designing;
(vii) Developed Research & Development
Wing Sponsors research;
(viii) Excellent Tactics Training Wing; and
(ix) Limited Academic linkages with just a
few institutions of excellence in India
and abroad.
Opportunities
(i) More Capacity Building in subjects
such as Forensics and Cyber Crime;
(ii) Institutional Tie-ups within the
country with reputed Management
institutions and universities for
research on issues of practical
policing.
(iii) Global outreach by NPA to meet the
training needs of the police officers of
other countries. This can be achieved
by organizing specialized courses for
police officers from different
countries.
(iv) Democratization of Police alongside
the required Regimentation;
(v) Community Outreach Interface;
(vi) Direct linkage with foreign police
training institutions of developed
democratic countries.
(vii) Adoption of a Police Station for
training in the applied aspects of
Police working.
(iv) No institutional tie-ups with the
foreign police training institutions;
(v) No faculty exchange programmes
with other foreign police training
institutes;
(vi) Limited administrative and financial
powers to Director, NPA;
(vii) Honorarium for expert faculty is not
adequate to attract top quality experts.
(viii) Honorarium for examiners and
adequate.
Threats
(i) Training not being given due priority
by States;
(ii) Methodology has not kept up with the
changing times;
(iii) Integrated training regimen not
followed;
(iv) Conflict between Rule of Law and
Field reality making the Academy
training appear less relevant;
(v) Lack of instructional Staff will
hamper the service delivery;
(vi) Lack of faculty development strategies
with the assistances of Institutions of
excellence available in India and
abroad may affect quality of training;
(vii) If training is not so much field
oriented, faith in training inputs is
bound to be reduced.
3.19.1 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should take note of the SWOT
(Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) analysis of the Academy and make
strategies to overcome its weaknesses and threats. The Government should also take
advantages of NPA’s strength and opportunities in making it the world class training centre.
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the management should also evolve new
training platforms and training methodologies and make continuous revaluation, self-
introspection and self-review, 3rd Party Audit, Seminars, Workshops, adaptations to change.

42
The management may further formalize institutional tie ups with the police training
academies of other countries with the purpose of learning the best practices in training of
other countries and catch up the standards achieved by the western countries.
3.20 The Committee has dealt most of the issues in preceding paras and gave its
recommendations. One area of concern for the Committee is lack of priority for training
for police in the states. This is a big challenge and needs to be addressed. The Ministry of
Home Affairs may start a new scheme for strengthening police training in the States. On
making Academy training more relevant and reducing gap between rule of law and field
reality, existing modules may be revisited with more field orientation.

43
CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATONS
OF THE COMMTTEE — AT A GLANCE
MISSION STATEMENT
The Committee notes with appreciation the purpose of the Academy and its vision.
The Committee hopes that the Academy would continue to endeavour to implement the
vision of Sardar Vallabbhai Patel and make it a world class police training institute.
(Para 1.2.4)
MANAGEMENT BY ACTIVITIES AND MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES
The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the academy is guided by
Management by Activities (MBA) as well as the Management by Objectives (MBO), is of the
view that the academy should always be open for continuous improvement and change in
achieving the set objectives. (Para 1.5.4)
DIRECTOR : POWER AND FUNCTIONS
The Committee understands that Director of NPA is of a significant position in the
Academy so far its functioning is concerned. The personality of the Director leaves a lasting
impression on the functioning of the Academy. His job profile requires him to be a good
leader, motivator and communicator. Therefore, there should be a well laid procedure for
selection of the Director, NPA. The Committee also feels that the fixed tenure of the
Director would give a certain period for him for planning and executing the set objectives.
Since, the Directors of IB, CBI and RAW are given a fixed tenure, the Director of NPA
should also be given a fixed tenure on the same analogy. Since the Ministry has agreed for
careful selection with a fixed tenure, the Committee recommends that Government may lay
down an appropriate selection procedure. The Committee agrees with the Ministry view
point that the Director should be a serving officer. (Para 1.6.5)
The Committee takes note of the comparative position of delegated powers to
Director, NPA and LBS NAA. The Committee is constrained to note that Director, NPA, is
comparatively at a disadvantageous position so far the exercise of delegated financial powers
are concerned even after the revision. The Ministry should have given similar powers to
Director, NPA at par with Director, LBS NAA. Now that the proposal is already under
consideration, the Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken in the
matter. (Para 1.6.9)
SELECTION OF FACULTY
The Committee feels that since the nature and style of crimes are changing due to
technological development, modernization and sophistication, faculty needs to be chosen with
great care. Stringent yardsticks have to be laid down for the selection of faculty not only
at the teaching staff level but also at the level of Assistant Directors and Deputy Directors.
The teaching staff from all fields viz . law, business management, human resource
43

44
management, police science, forensic sciences, criminology, sociology, Psychology, etc. must
be selected with due care keeping in view the requirement of the academy and also taking
into account its role and the responsibility. The Committee also understands that the post
of the Assistant Directors, is very important and their selection should be done through a
stringent selection procedure. High caliber, integrity and efficiency should be the criteria for
selection. (Para 1.7.6)
PAY-SCALES OF OFFICERS AND STAFF
Since the Ministry of Home Affairs has agreed for pay parity of Director, NPA with
the Chiefs of IB, CBI, BSF and CRPF, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may
finalize the proposal and send it to appropriate Ministry for approval at the earliest.
(Para 1.8.3)
The Committee agrees with the proposal of Ministry of Home Affairs that the pay
structure of the Academy should be brought at par with the CPMFs. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Finance may reconsider the case. The Ministry of Home
Affairs may, accordingly, pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission. (Para 1.8.5)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may explore other
incentives in addition to the above so that efficient staff is  attracted to the Academy.
(Para 1.8.7)
V ACANCIES IN NPA
The Committee feels that serious efforts are required to fill up the vacant posts. The
Ministry may make serious efforts for posting of IPS officers in NPA. In regard to filing
up of group B posts, advance action may be initiated and regularly pursued with UPSc. The
recruitment rules for the newly created posts may be got approved at the earliest so that
the new staff are in place soon. (Para 1.9.1)
INFRASTRUCTURE
The Committee, while taking note of the basic infrastructure of the academy and
future expansion, recommends that all projects pertaining to expanding the existing
infrastructure should be completed without time and cost over-run and to achieve that end,
Government should extend requisite fund in time. The process of acquiring additional land
for special tactics wing and other purposes may be completed soon so that other works
thereon may be taken up. (Para 1.10.3)
RESEARCH WING OF NPA
The Committee is given to understand that the National Institute of Administrative
Research (NIAR) was established by LBSNAA, Massorie established in 1995 as a Training
and Research Wing of the Academy. The Committee recommends that the NPA may set up
an ‘Institute for Applied Police Research’ instead of a Centre for Applied Research on the
line of NIAR. An early decision may be taken and sufficient infrastructure may be created
near the campus of the Academy for the purpose. (Para 1.11.6)
PUBLICATIONS DIVISION
The Committee understands that the Academy, being the nodal centre of Police

45
Training in India, has to playa leading role in capacity building of State Police Training
Institutions in the country by way of developing and publishing training literature. To this
end, it is necessary to strengthen the Publication Wing in the Academy to publish Research
Papers, books, journals, monographs and other training material from time to time. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Publication Division of the Academy
may be appropriately strengthened. The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the
sanctioned staff are not in place. Director, NPA may take immediate necessary action in this
regard. (Para 1.12.2)
COMPUTER AND IT
Since, in the contemporary electronic cyber age, success of crime investigation
and intelligence analysis is increasingly dependent upon well equipped computer lab, it
is very much pertinent that the academy management must ensure that NPA’s computer
section is equipped with latest technology and updated programming system. The
Committee is of the view that skilled, and well trained staff should be deployed to
discharge the duties and responsibilities of the computer cell. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that NPA management should take up the issue of constraints of the
manpower with MHA for early filling up of requisite staff. The Committee hopes that
the project in pipeline must be completed within the set time frame. The Committee
also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may take up the issue of setting up
Training Unit of NIC in NPA with NIC and Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology (CIT). (Para 1.13.6)
RECRUITMENT TO IPS
The Committee in its 161st Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) made a
recommendation for exploring the possibility of conducting a separate examination for IPS
where the attitude and aptitude of the candidate must be thoroughly tested besides their
mental makeup and inclination for policing. The Committee further recommended that the
Government may impress upon UPSC to conduct a separate examination for recruiting of
IPS officer and SVPNPA may also be consulted in this regard. The Committee, reiterating
the recommendation made in its 161
st Report, desires that the Ministry may hold
consultation with the DoPT and UPSC and take an early decision for holding separate
examination. (Para 1.14.2)
The Committee is of the view that age relaxation under different Government
services is a policy decision keeping in view various considerations. However, the
suggestions of the expert may be looked into. (Para 1.14.5)
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
The Committee, while taking note of budgetary provision to meet the plan and non-
plan expenditure and also of the trends of actual expenditure during last five years,
observes that budgetary provisions have been optimally spent. The Committee further
desires that earmarked allocation for on-going infrastructural projects would be released in
time for completion of projects without time and cost overruns. The Committee also
recommends that sufficient allocations may be made available to NPA to complete the
ongoing infrastructure projects, CNE works and other new projects and also for
strengthening publication division. Grants may also be provided for setting up the Research
Institute in case it is decided to set up the same. (Para 1.15.4)

46
AUDIT OBJECTION
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that out of 20 audit paras
on non-plan expenditure, only one para was dropped and response to the 19 paras were
further objected to. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that due care may be
taken in incurring expenditure, both plan and non-plan. (Para 1.16.2)
TRAINING PROGRAMMES: INDOOR VS. OUTDOOR TRAINING
Though the quantum of the indoor and outdoor training cannot be fixed in terms of
percentage, however, sufficient outdoor training must be imparted to have the physical
fitness of the police personnel while indoor training should be so adequately imparted to
ensure that the police personnel possess requisite understanding of law and jurisprudential
knowledge. The NPA may have a relook at the present curriculum and reviewed with
experts. (Para 2.3.4)
Field Visit
The Committee is of the view that the basic training modules of the Academy must
consist of the courses keeping in view stark reality of society and the aim of the training
programme should be to impart knowledge and skill to face the ground challenges of the
country. The Committee also feels that training on management and administration should
also be provided. When the officers grow higher up the ladder, they are also required to
handle administration and finance. Training needs to be given on these aspects as well and
some modules may be prepared for these aspects. (Para 2.4.1)
MID CAREER TRAINING PROGRAMME (MCTP)
The Committee notes that the Academy is collaborating with some of the foreign
universities of reputation viz Cambridge, Charles Sturt, London School of Business for
conducting its pioneer Mid-Career Training Programme for senior police-personnel.
However, the Committee feels that the Academy should also explore collaboration with
institution in other countries having expertise in Police Training and Development (T&D for
Police) with the purpose of not only improving capabilities and skill among serving police
officers to combat effectively the ever changing wide ranging challenges of terrorism,
naxalism, caste and communal conflict, drug trafficking, accidents, natural calamities and
other disasters, but also to evolve different training modules concerning standard policing
practices to make the Academy a centre of excellence. The Committee, in this regard,
recommends that NPA management should prepare a comprehensive strategy in this
direction for further foreign collaboration and seek the requisite approval from the
Government for implementation. Besides different phases of MCTP programmes, need based
refresher courses may also be organized for a week at regular intervals. (Para 2.5.8)
The Committee is of the opinion that exposure to best policing practices should also
be imparted at training stage, if feasible, preferably in countries with similar democratic
political set up. The Committee believes that training modules consisting of foreign
collaborations having police agencies of the country having similar political and economic
condition as that of India would have immense impact so far as their policing skill is
concerned. The Academy may consider this aspect. (Para 2.5.10)
SPECIAL TACTICS WING
The Committee notes the initiatives and activities taken by NPA in imparting special

47
tactical training to police officers. The Committee, however, also takes note of the fact that
STW is having its man power on ad-hoc basis. This will not help in better functioning of
the work. Efforts may be made to put in place dedicated manpower at the earliest.
Directional level tactics course for senior officers of the rank of DIG and above be started
at the earliest. Fund requirements of NPA for developing allotted land for tactical training,
separate STW Building, procurement of equipments and weapons may be looked into
promptly so as to make the Special Tactics Wing par excellence. This level of excellence
may further be used for revenue generation by imparting such training to the police officers
of other countries. (Para 2.6.7)
FOREIGN TRAINING
The Committee recommends that the proposal to send IPS probationers to Japan and
Singapore for training during phase-II may be positively considered by Ministry of Home
Affairs. The Committee feels that community policing can play a major role in curbing
crimes in India keeping in mind the low police population ratio and a big democratic set-
up in the country. (Para 2.7.2)
Foreign visit of the probationers in phase II of the training schedule is the
appropriate time when the probationers, after having an understanding of the system within
the country, can have a comparative study of the system of obtaining abroad. The
Committee recommends that the proposal under consideration of MHA may be examined
soon and an early decision may be taken. (Para 2.7.9)
Faculty and Linkages
The Committee is of the view that if the Academy feels that linkages with training
institutions of developed countries such as USA, UK, etc. would be useful the Academy may
prepare a blueprint of the proposal and take up the matter with the Ministry of Home
Affairs. But the linkages should be productive, and result oriented instead of just
ornamental. (Para 2.8.1)
The Committee notes that the Academy does not invite faculty or resource persons
from abroad and the main reason is lack of incentives and remunerations. However under
institutional tie up for MCTP, for eign resource persons are also involved. The Committee
is of the view that whenever any foreign experts comes to India, such visits may be made
use of by organizing their sessions for both basic training and MCTP. (Para 2.8.5)
Tie up with foreign police agencies would definitely give an opportunity to the trainee
officers to understand the nuances of working of police agencies in other countries. The
Committee is of the considered view that the faculty exchange programmes with other
foreign police agencies and training institutes would give an opportunity for exchange of
views among the faculty and to refresh their knowledge. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that tie-ups with foreign institutes for both trainees and faculty may be
organized for better exposure. (Para 2.8.7)
The Committee feels that the training module introduced in 2012 may be assessed
and complete literature and manuals may be prepared. (Para 2.8.11)
LACK OF QUALITY TRAINING PROGRAMME
The Committee, however, feels that there is a lack of quality training programmes
for the faculty. For better training of the police officers, the faculty should have better

48
exposure to latest methodologies, technologies available within the country and abroad. NPA
may have a relook into this. (Para 2.9.1)
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF POLICE STRUCTURES AND POLICE SYSTEMS
The Committee feels that teaching of a comparative study of police structures and
police systems over the world at NPA at the induction stage also would enable the
probationer to have a much wider horizon and a much larger perspective, and would further
enable them to introduce small improvements in police working on the basis of their
knowledge of the overall police systems and police structures. There should be a course on
comparative police systems. NPA may look into this. (Para 2.10.1)
Training on Administrative, Financial and Social issues
The Committee desires that NPA may have a relook at the present modules and
incorporate specific aspects on administrative and financial management if they are not
sufficiently covered. (Para 2.11.2)
TRAINING SCHEDULE
The Committee is not satisfied with the cryptic reply of the Ministry. The Committee is,
therefore, of the view that there needs to be some institutional safeguards to the syllabi and
curriculum. Attempt to derail the training schedule should not be allowed. (Para 2.12.1)
COORDINATION WITH OTHER POLICE ACADEMIES
The Committee feels that internal security is a major concern across the Country and
supervision and surveillance by the Police Personnel around the country is of utmost
significance. With the sophistication and changing nature of crimes, a well equipped and
professional police personnel are required all over the country. Integrated police training is,
therefore the natural corollary. The Committee recommends that NPA should act like what
the NCERT does for other training schools of states and the experience gained at the NPA
must percolate to the state and the district training schools for the benefit of the police
training at the grass root level. The Committee agrees with the suggestion of the Ministry
for setting up of a common forum for all State Police Training academies with the NPA at
Apex and under its Aegis. A serious thought may be given to this suggestion. (Para 2.13.2)
LAW AND JURISPRUDENCE IN TRAINING MODULES
The Committee agrees that an in-depth understanding of jurisprudential principles
would inject legal insight to the IPS officer which would certainly help them solve the legal
issues involved in the case. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is further scope for
enhancing the module on law and jurisprudence in the training curriculum of IPS officers.
Therefore, the entire module on law and jurisprudence may be revisited involving some
legal experts. (Para 3.1.2)
Case Study
The Committee agrees that case based study would enrich the knowledge of trainees.
An early decision may be taken to set up Case S tudy Wing in the Academy. All the training
modules may contain the case study so that it leaves a lasting impact in the minds of
trainees. (Para 3.2.2)

49
The Committee hopes that the introduction of Integrated Training format would
enable the IPS officers to have in depth understanding of rejoinder of crimes. The format
may be thoroughly assessed after one year. (Para 3.2.7)
ETHICAL AND MORAL V ALUES AND INTEGRATION
The Committee is of the view that since policing does have a bearing on the lives
of individuals and, therefore, Police Personnel, particularly officers should possess high
moral and ethical values so as to arrest the declining trend in quality and standard of
public life. The Committee believes that when the pursuit of social commitment and
integrity is effectively imbibed into police personnel irrespective of rank and file, the
malaise and qualms of corruption could be eradicated from public life to a large extent.
Transparency and public accountability is a pre-requisite for good governance. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the training modules prepared for probationers
and also for in-service officers must cover the lessons on ethical traits and moral
behaviour. (Para 3.3.2)
The Committee observes that Officer is generally vested with the power which
extends at times to taking life and liberty of the people but what matters is how he
exercises his power. Therefor e, emphasis should also be given as to how to use the power.
The Committee is also given to understand that in other countries like Japan training
curriculum contain the constant emphasis on ethical aspects in policing so that while doing
a particular job, a set of principles has to be adhered to. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that adequate emphasis should be laid in the training programme of Officers
Trainee and NPA should teach probationers good policing practice which is practicised
globally. Modules on ethical values and morality should also be included in the MCTP
programmes as it is equally required at that stage as well. (Para 3.3.3)
The Committee desires that the message of the Preamble to the constitution of
India, being “Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic” should not only be read
and understood by the police personnel but should also be imprinted into their ‘hearts and
minds’ to be reflected into their actions while dealing with actual incidents. Keeping in view
the fact that India is a vast country with complex social structure i.e. multi-lingual, multi-
ethnic, multi-religious, training modules must give emphasis to these aspects. A sense of
justice and sensitivity towards the people particularly of weaker sections should be initiated
by them. (Para 3.3.5)
TRAINING MODULES ON LEFT-WING EXTREMISM AND TERRORISM
The left wing extremism is spreading its tentacles across the country and a well
prepared module needs to be prepared for training on dealing with this. Greyhounds of
Andhra Pradesh Police has been successful in dealing with this and they can be a role model
in regard to this training. If possible, the probationers may be attached with greyhounds for
some period. NPA should become centre of excellence in giving training on dealing with left
wing extremism. (Para 3.4.2)
PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILING
The Committee desires that psychological profiling may be made use of for better
counselling and de-stressing. Yoga is a good tool for de-stressing and to rein in the mind
and this may be used to the maximum extent. (Para 3.5.2)

50
PEOPLE-FRIENDLY POLICING
The image of Government depends more on the reaction of the rank and file of the
law enforcing agencies particularly police officers towards the common man, when the
common man approaches them in the hour of need. The Committee, therefore, feels that
police being at the cutting edge level needs to adopt courteous behavior and friendly
temperament so that people may approach them without fear and with faith to have redressal
of their grievances. The Committee, therefore, recommends that training modules and
practical training courses as imparted by NPA must include all behavioral and attitudinal
aspects and the Academy should work on this. The Ministry should oversee the
implementation of the Mission. An early decision may be taken in this regard. (Para 3.6.5)
ACCESS OF SUB-ORDINATES TO SENIOR POLICE OFFICER
The Committee firmly believes that open access of constabulary to higher police
personnel and hassle-free communication among them would ensure higher degree of trust
and faith amongst each other which would not only lead to redressal of grievances of
constabulary but would also help in taking strategic decisions, formulation of pragmatic
plans based on the situation and experience at grass root level and execution thereof to
achieve set objectives. This will also improve the efficiency of the forces. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the training modules should invariably exphasise this. This
needs to be done both in the NPA as well as the training courses of States and District
Training Centres. (Para 3.7.2)
PREPARATION OF CHARGE SHEETS ETC.
Despite the training being imparted to IPS probationers by NPA on the supervision
of preparation of the criminal charge sheets, the shortcomings continue to persist in
making the charge sheets at the initial stage which have been in many cases found faulty
by the various courts, resulting in acquittal of the accused and putting on sorry figure for
the police, as a whole. It is a known fact that in several cases, justice is either denied or
yet to see the light of the day due to lacunae in FIR and incomplete framing of the charge
sheet. In this background, the Committee recommends that IPS probationers as well as the
in-service officers must be imparted adequate training to enhance their supervising skill so
that FIRs and charge sheets must be prepared in a comprehensive manner. The
probationers should be made fully conversant with the procedure of preparation of charge
sheet and framing charges. (Para 3.8.1)
TRAINING ON COURT PROCEDURES
Though moot court Proceedings at the Academy are good and give theoretical aspect
but does not give the true picture of the courts. Dealing with court cases is an important
aspect of the policing. The actual procedure of the courts is not only complex but
cumbersome also, and the attachment of the probationers for a period of seven days does
not appear sufficient. The Committee therefore, recommends that probationers should be
given sufficient actual court exposure so that inadequacies on the part of the agencies of
the Government do not become a stumbling bloc in the disposal of the case. NPA should,
therefore, consider to give sufficient emphasize on this. (Para 3.9.1)
COMMUNITY POLICING
The Committee notes that one of the Police Mission set out by the Prime Minister is

51
on Community Policing and the Ministry is considering the report of the Committee thereon.
After it is decided to implement it, NPA may take a cue from this and include it in the
course. On the basis of experience of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, NPA may prepare a manual on
community policing which can be useful for probationers of NPA and all other States Police
Organisation. The Committee views that community policing implies people’s participation in
local security arrangement and, therefore, leads to much interaction between the police and
people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the mission on Community Policing
should be included in the State and District Police Training Centres of various States and
literature procured at the centre must also be disseminated. (Para 3.10.1)
DEALING WITH THE CHALLENGES OF TERRORISM
Though after reviewing the police response to Mumbai attack and finding that there
was a big gap between the training imparted and the actual requirement of tactical skill to
combat the potential menace of terrorism, a separate wing called ‘Special Tactics Wing
(STW)’ has been set up in NPA with the objective of imparting training to State Police and
Central Armed Police Forces to enable them to conduct tactical operation against the
terrorists in jungle and urban environment, the efforts are not complete as yet. The urban
intervention training infrastructure is likely to be completed in 2013. This may be
completed as per schedule. (Para 3.11.3)
NPA should think and act ahead of the terrorists on the possible techniques and
technologies likely to be used by terrorists and start training in advance. Government may
provide necessary infrastructure to NPA. Training on ‘preventive steps to prevent the
possible terrorist attack is required. Lesson from USA are required to be learnt where
9/11 incident has not been repeated. The Committee recommends that NPA has to take
initiative to make headway in training in this regard. (Para 3.11.4)
The Committee is of the view that since the country is facing terrorist threats
counter Intelligence techniques and anti-terrorism operations need to be included in the
curriculum so that the officers who come out are well-versed in the counter-terrorism
intelligence techniques. (Para 3.11.5)
INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
The Committee is surprised to find that although probationers are given elaborate
training on the intelligence collection and analysis but there is no dearth of intelligence
failures which led to massive incidents killing several innocent persons. Though, intelligence
success is rarely reported in the media its failure attracts immediate attention of the media
besides immensely affecting the lives of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the training modules on intelligence collection and analysis must be comprehensive and
the same may be replicated at the State and District Police Training Centre. (Para 3.12.3)
LAW AND ORDER
The Committee notes the doctrine of use of minimum force by the police personnel
to deal with the volatile and peaceful demonstration. However, the people in general have
police-phobia as the impression of colonial attitude of the police personnel persists in the
minds of the public. Some of the police outrage our incidents linger in the hearts of the
people. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that probationers and in-service
officers should emphasize on handling the peaceful and volatile demonstration with acute
care and sympathy towards the people because India is a democratic country and people of

52
the nation have every right to express their genuine demands through peaceful
demonstration within the parameters of the Constitution. The officers, when on duty are
required to take on the spot decision as there may not be time to consult seniors.
Therefore, emphasis should be laid in the training on dealing with such situations.
(Para 3.13.4)
TRAINING ON DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Within a period of twenty months, in Kolkata itself, forty-three people died when
fire gutted the fifth and sixth floors of the Stephen Court building and more than ninety
people lost their lives in Advanced Medicare and Research Institute (AMRI) Hospital.
When five major fire accidents occurred in large hospitals in London between January,
2008 and February, 2009, nobody died; in fact, not a single case of “significant adverse
health affect” was reported. In Northwick Park Hospital, a large district-level health
care facility, 123 patients, including the brain injured, were safely evacuated in 23
minutes, while it took fifteen minutes to the rescuer to reach AMRI Hospital costing
several lives. The Committee feels that there needs more practical training including
simulation. Whenever any disaster takes place, they should be sent for real time
experience and training. The Committee recommends that NPA should keep in these
things in mind and prepare the requisite training modules on disaster management in
the country. (Para 3.14.2)
NATIONAL SECURITY/INTERNAL SECURITY
India is a dominant player of the global economy and global politics and there are
a lot of geo-political and the national security issues which are of utmost concern, therefore
training modules covering National Security issues are indispensable. Therefore, training
modules should not only cover the course in terms of terrorism or left wing extremism but
also in terms of security of vital installations like Dams, Atomic Energy installations,
Refineries and various other security considerations with in the territory of the country.
(Para 3.15.2)
The Committee is of the view that Officers Trainee should be imparted training to
handle the latest and sophisticated weapons to ensure that the police are always ahead of
the criminals in terms of handling guns and weapons. Early action may be taken to have
the infrastructure for urban intervention training. (Para 3.15.7)
EMERGING AREAS OF CRIMES
In the modern world, police officers need training not only on cyber laws, but also
the nuances of hacking to decode encrypted e-mails and other messages. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that NPA should give thorough training to the police
officers to deal with computer hacking and related cyber crimes. (Para 3.16.4)
The Committee understands that a lot of sophistication is being brought into the
crime, and therefore, corresponding modification in training modules to cover changing
aspects of crime are but natural. The Committee desires that there is an urgent need to
reverse the general perception “that the police are always behind the criminals in terms of
training and knowledge as well as the use of arms and weapons”. NPA may take a lead in
this regard. (Para 3.16.5)

53
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF WORKING OF THE ACADEMY AND ORGANIZATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS (ODIS)
The Committee notes the key concern areas affecting the working of the academy
and is of the considered view that in order to overcome key concern areas of the working
of the academy, specific Organizational Development Interventions (ODI) are required to
enable the Academy to achieve its objectives and mission. Some of the issues such as staff/
faculty, research wing and foreign training have already been dealt, in detail, in the
preceding paragraphs. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry may
consider all the issues and find solution to them so as to strengthen the Academy. The
Ministry may help NPA management undertake concerted efforts to implement
organizational development interventions to strengthen organizational structure and to
enhance the functional proficiency of the Academy. (Para 3.17.1)
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NPA
The Committee hopes that the outcome of performance evaluation of NPA done by
Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad would be of immense use for
strengthening NPA and its programmes. The Committee also desires that BPR&D may
conduct an independent evaluation of the basic and MCTP Training imparted at NPA.
(Para 3.18.3)
SWOT - ANALYSIS OF THE WORKING OF THE ACADEMY
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should take note of the SWOT
(Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) analysis of the Academy and make
strategies to overcome its weaknesses and threats. The Government should also take
advantages of NPA’s strength and opportunities in making it the world class training centre.
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the management should also evolve new
training platforms and training methodologies and make continuous revaluation, self-
introspection and self-review, 3rd Party Audit, Seminars, Workshops, adaptations to change.
The management may further formalize institutional tie ups with the police training
academies of other countries with the purpose of learning the best practices in training of
other countries and catch up the standards achieved by the western countries.
(Para 3.19.1)
The Committee has dealt most of the issues in preceding paras and gave its
recommendations. One area of concern for the Committee is lack of priority for training
for police in the States. This is a big challenge and needs to be addressed. The Ministry of
Home Affairs may start a new scheme for strengthening police training in the States. On
making Academy training more relevant and reducing gap between rule of law and field
reality, existing modules may be revisited with more field orientation. (Para 3.20)

MINUTES

56

57
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 7 th June, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Baijayant Panda
12. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
13. Shri Adhi Sankar
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(i) Shri P.S. Rama Mohan Rao, Former DGP & Former Governor of Tamil Nadu;
(ii) Shri Shanker Sen, Ex-Director, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy and
Senior Fellow, Institute of Social Sciences; and
(iii) Shri Prakash Singh, Ex-DG, BSF.
2.0 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members and apprised them about the agenda of
the day which was to hear the views of senior IPS retired officers, namely, (i) Shri P.S. Rama
Mohan Rao, Former DGP & Former Governor of Tamil Nadu; (ii) Shri Shanker Sen, Ex-Director,
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy and Senior Fellow, Institute of Social Sciences;
57

58
and (iii) Shri Prakash Singh, Ex-DG, BSF on the “Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy”. He reminded the Members that the Committee had taken up the working of
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy for detailed examination and, in this connection,
visited the Academy in Hyderabad on 4 July, 2011 to have first-hand information and to discuss
its working with the Director of Academy and representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
[On arrival of the retired IPS officers]
3.0 The Chairman then welcomed the witnesses and requested them to share their valuable
insights and give suggestions to further improve the functioning of the National Police Academy.
He also informed that the proceedings of the Committee shall be treated as confidential and it shall
not be permissible for a Member of the Committee or anyone who has access to its proceedings,
to communicate, directly or indirectly, to the media any information regarding its proceedings
including its report or any conclusions arrived at, finally or tentatively. He then asked them to
introduce themselves and make presentations thereafter.
4.0 Thereafter, the witnesses deliberated on the subject before the Committee one-by-one. The
highlights of suggestions made by them are as under:
(A) Shri P.S. Rama Mohan Rao, Former DGP & Former Governor of Tamil Nadu
• Training methodology, emphasis on knowledge of law and jurisprudence should be
restored.
• In order to appreciate evidence, particularly, one should understand jurisprudential
principles behind such evidence.
• Need to device training modules to tackle cyber crimes, economic offences, white
collar crimes, etc.
• Training should become more case based study. If it is not case based study, and
training is done or taught in abstract, the absorption at the end of the trainee is not
as good as if it were to be based on case based studies. It has been done to some
extent, but not to the extent that is necessary and desirable.
• In the National Police Academy, the training is more theoretical in terms of
investigation, criminal law, etc. It is not the law part, but order part of the policing,
like crowd control in religious congregations like Kumbh Mela or Ardh Kumbh Meta
where more exposure to the trainees is required.
• National security issues have become very important. India is a part of the global
economy and global politics, and there are lots of geopolitical and other considerations.
A course on national security issues could be introduced. National security is not
merely in terms of terrorism or imported terrorism and things like that, but even in
terms of vital installations like the atomic energy installations etc.
• More important aspects of intelligence craft, both in terms of human intelligence and
in terms of technical intelligence should be introduced at the induction stage.
• A comparative study of police structures and police systems over the world should be
introduced. This will enable the trainees to have a much wider horizon and a much
larger perspective, and enable them to introduce small improvements in police working
on the basis of their knowledge of the overall police systems and police structures.
• Policing is an important aspect of the district administration. Other then the national
security issues and the larger intelligence responsibilities, it is largely an aspect of
district administration. The IPS probationers need to be taught how the district

59
administration functions and how the police interact with other departments and wings
of administration in the district, like medical, revenue, and others.
• The probationers need to be taught elements of personnel management and human
resource development.
• IPS probationers should also be imparted budget management and financial code and
about the political and social environment in which they function.
• IPS probationers should be put through a training of unarmed combat, closed quarter
combat. They should be put through a greater degree of arms training particularly the
small arms and also the unarmed and close quarter combat.
• There is a model police station in the NPA but there is no model court, some kind of
a mock court. Investigations, trial procedures, they are all taught in abstract ways.
There is a need to introduce practical aspects also by doing a parallel exercise and
some of the cases which are actually happening in real time.
• Need to introduce some kind of specialization at the earliest stage depending on the
probationers aptitude, probably, in the National Police Academy itself, to determine
whether a particular police officer is more inclined towards criminal investigation side
or more inclined towards law and order, outdoor duties etc. Based on that he can be
given a special programme which he will do outside the general training on his own,
as a probationer for 11-12 months in the NPA and develop those skills and there could
be a mentor who could guide him through the process in the sense that he can suggest
literature on the subject and the important cases that have been handled on the subject
and things like that. There is need to attach to the specialized police agencies, for
example, Intelligence Bureau or the Nanonal Investigation Agency or the Enforcement
Directorate or the CBI particularly depending on their aptitude etc.
• There is need to put IPS probationers through principles of disaster management. The
disaster management has become a major area of concern. There should be officers
like DSP etc. from the districts, at the cutting edge, coming and interacting with
probationers instead of senior IPS officers like DG and IG .
• National Police Academy can prepare a number of important case studies as training
material, not only for the NPA but also for the State police academies. They could also
develop monographs on practical aspects of investigation.
• Training suffers because of repeated attempts by IPS probationers till they are able to
qualify for the Indian Administrative Service. So, as a result, for the first four-five
years, the probationer does not pay any attention to the training either in the National
Police Academy or in the district or in the State. Even after he becomes an Assistant
Superintendent of Police, in-charge of a division or whatever, his attention is focused
for the next Civil Service Examination. This should be discouraged.
• The recruitment age for Civil Services is now on the higher side. A lot of probationers
are thirty plus and married. Quite a few of them had worked earlier in different other
departments with totally different work cultures and therefore conditioned to mindsets
and cultures which prevent them from imbibing ethical and other principles of training.
(B) Shri Prakash Singh, Ex-DG. BSF
• The selection of the Director of Police Academy is of utmost importance. His
personality, his bearing, his values leave a lasting impression on the Academy. The

60
present selection process is not as stringent and does not examine the suitability of an
officer of the NPA on the basis of certain yardsticks. Officers who retire at the age
of 60 can be taken on a contract of two years.
• The staff and the faculty has to be very carefully chosen depending their flair for
training. Stringent yardsticks have to be laid down for the selection of faculty at the
level of Assistant Directors and Deputy Directors. At the level of the Assistant
Directors, it is more important because it is the A.D. who interacts maximum with the
probationers. The higher you go, the lesser is the interaction but, of course, their
impression is there. So, at the level of the Assistant Director, it has to be chosen
carefully. Considerable augmentation in the strength of the NPA is also required
because the number of courses have increased and so is the number of probationers.
• Directors and trainers should desist from injecting their own likes, dislikes,
preferences, biases into the curriculum as that disorients the mandated training of the
probationers. The training schedule should be insulated from the personal biases and
personal preferences of trainers. There needs to be some institutional safeguards in the
syllabus, which has been drawn up so that the Director of the National Police
Academy, even if his intentions are laudable and transparent, is not able to derail the
training schedule.
• Phases of training in the National Police Academy is very complicated. There is too
much of hotchpotch in all this, and, this needs a fresh look. There should be a good
Phase I, followed by attachment with the Central Police Organizations, the Army etc.,
and, after that, they should go to the States. this needs to be simplified with just one
phase of training.
• The syllabus of the IPS officers has become top heavy. It should be made manageable.
The emphasis, of course, has to be on a law and investigations.
• The indoor as well as the outdoor training is very important for the police officers.
It is difficult to quantify it in terms of percentage but even then, roughly, it should
be 60 per cent indoor and 40 per cent outdoor.
• Speakers or the lecturers who come to the National Police Academy have to be
carefully chosen and the facility of distant learning should also be there.
• Foreign trainers and foreign visits is complete waste of money. A police officer from
Australia has no clue of the ground conditions in India. In fact, he would need one
year to understand the ground conditions of India or the kind of problems which the
Indian officers have to deal with. It may be fashionable but it would be dispensed
with. It would mean a saving of foreign exchange also. In fact, the probationer may,
if the finances permit, go to the neighbouring countries or countries where the
conditions of work would be somewhat similar to those in India.
• The research facilities in the National Police Academy are very inadequate. The faculty
members should be encouraged to undertake research work in training-related subjects.
• Integrating training in the National Police Academy and the States Police Academies is
very essential. What has been covered in the National Police Academy, the practical
aspects of that have to be gone into in great detail in the State Police Training Colleges
or Academies.
• Probationers should be exposed to crowd control like Kumbh Mela duty, for example,
which could be a great education for any probationer. Same is the case when it comes

61
to operations against insurgents. Even when posted to a peaceful state, the probationer
should be sent for a stint in Jharkhand or Chhattisgarh or Andhra Pradesh or in the
North-East and see how they conduct operations against insurgents.
(C) Shri Shanker Sen, Ex-Director, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy and
Senior Fellow, Institute of Social Sciences
• Regarding police training, the Gore Committee in the 70s gave a wonderful and
illuminating report on what should be done and how much emphasis on physical
training should be given. It should be implemented.
• Success ofthe National Police Academy depends on a good Director. His selection has
to be done very, very carefully.
• Fixed tenure to the Directors of CBI, IB, and RAW are given. Similarly, fixed tenure
to the Director of NPA should be given.
• The DG’s pay-scale, at present, is Rs.75,000-Rs. 80,000. The Directors of IB, CBI,
BSF, and CRP get a higher pay-scale, whereas the Director, National Police Academy,
gets a lower pay-scale. This is a great disincentive. He should be given due importance
and recognition, and a fixed tenure and a pay-scale which is on a par with other heads
of the CPOs.
• The Government has to be very, very careful while choosing trainers. Today, the
training curriculum includes psychology, law, business management, etc. Training by
IPS officers alone is not sufficient. Good professionals from outside should be hired.
• The Director should be given power to get good lawyers and good management
experts on contractual basis in the Academy. This will strengthen the faculty of the
Academy. This will give proper prestige and recognition to it.
• The probationers need to be trained in jungle warfare.
• Emphasis on ethical dimensions of policing is there, but a greater emphasis should be
given to it. Training of probationers should not be confined to acquisition of skills.
Equal emphasis on inculcation of ethical values, sound judgment and discretion should
be there. Officers are vested with the power of taking life and liberty of the people.
How he exercises his power is important. If a particular job has to be done, a set of
principles has to be adhered to. That emphasis should be there in our training
programme.
• Probationers should be given good policing practice, which is practised globally. For
that, during the programme, for the last phase they should be sent abroad for one or
two weeks.
• The emphasis should be on applied research. On police, research work is done by the
Bureau of Police Research and Development. But applied research on police training
should be given emphasis by the National Police Academy. National Police Academy
should have a powerful publication division. What kind of police training, drill, police
procedure should be there will have to be looked by the National Police Academy . It
should be able to issue books, and circulate them all over the country.
• National Police Academy has a mission statement which says that it would give
guidance/consultancy to the State police training institutions. Unfortunately, we are not
able to live up to that. Today, the National Police Academy is one of the finest police

62
training institutions not only in this country but also in this part of the world. The
facilities, staff and all are excellent. But, the State police training institutions are in
absolute doldrums. Most of them have become dumping grounds of inefficient,
demotivated elements. No training is done there. There National Police Academy has
to play an important role, of course with the consent of the State Government.
5.0 Thereafter, some queries were made by members which were replied to by the experts. The
Chairman then thanked the witnesses for their suggestions.
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.

63
RECORD NOTE OF DISCUSSION
XXIV (A)
TWENTY FOURTH (A) MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 29 th June, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri L.K. Advani
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Ravneet Singh
9. Shri Harsh Vardhan
10. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan,  Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri Ajay Chadha, Special Secretary
Shri K.K. Mittal, JS (Police-I)
Shri V .N. Rai, Director , National Police Academy
Shri Prashant Nikam, Director (Police)
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee. He
then apprised them about the agenda of the day which was to hear the views of the Secretary on
the working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy in the light of the suggestions/
63

64
views/issues made by three senior retired IPS officers in the meeting of the Committee held on
7th June, 2012.
2.1 He further informed the members that the Home Secretary had sought exemption from
attending the meeting as he had a meeting with a delegation and requested for permission to send
the Special Secretary to which he has acceded to.
[On arrival of Special Secretary and other Officers}
3. The Chairman then welcomed Special Secretary and other official to the sitting of the
Committee and asked the Special Secretary to make a presentation on the Academy and give their
comments on the suggestions made by the former IPS officers namely (i) Shri P.S. Rama Mohan
Rao, former DGP and former Governor of Tamil Nadu; (ii) Shri Shanker Sen, Ex-Director, Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy and Senior Fellow, Institute of Social Sciences; and (iii)
Shri Prakash Singh, Ex-DG, BSF on the “Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy”.
4. The special Secretary then gave a brief presentation on the functioning and objective of the
Academy. He also informed that a number of recommendations made by the former IPS officers
were already being implemented in one form or the other.
5. Thereafter, the Director, NPA made a PowerPoint presentation on the working of NPA. The
following issues were highlighted during the presentation:
• Yoga is compulsory part of training. There is a Dhyan Kendra which has been
upgraded. Every trainee officer is required to clear the yoga exam.
• The tenure of the Director should be ‘fixed two years’ and the pay-scale should be
fixd at Rs. 80,000.
• As a result of restructuring of the Academy, two scales are operating in the same rank.
Some of the posts are in the old scale, which are slightly lower, and some are in a
new scale. So, in the same rank, there are two scales operating. There are 215 such
posts. This is because some posts were sanctioned after the Sixth Pay Commission
and some were sanctioned earlier. Such anomaly is there in NPA as well as in BPR&D.
Proposals to remove amounts have been sent to the Finance Ministry but have not
been acceded to. The Ministry is surrendering some parts to maintain parity.
• Some of the powers of the Director of the Academy are required to be brought at par
with the powers of the other Academies and other CPOs. The Director, Mussoorie
Academy has the financial power to spend Rs. 3 crores on works and repairs whereas,
the delegated power to Director, NPA, is Rs. 1.5 crore.
• The Director of LBSNAA, Mussoorie, has a power to appoint a Consultant up to
Rs. 1 lakh. The National Police Academy feels constrained because that power is not
with the Director, NPA.
6. After the presentation Members raised the following issues:
• Research is the weakest link in the chain of activities of the Academy;
• Sensitization of trainees towards the problems of Dalits, Adivasis, women and other
marginalized sections of the society;
• Effect of the proposal to recruit IPS officers through a separate exam;

65
• Need for training to deal cyber crime and hacking of computers; and
• Issues related to training for combating Left-Wing extremism and issues related to deal
protests and crowd management.
7. The Chairman then asked the Special Secretary to send written replies to the queries
immediately.
8. The Committee then decided to meet on the 18 th July, 2012.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.

66
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27 th August, 2012 in Room No. 62,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Tariq Anwar
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Ramen Deka
6. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
7. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Baijayant Panda
10. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and
apprised them the agenda which was to consider and adopt the Draft l63rd Report on the Working
of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad.
3. The Chairman then recapitualated that the Committee visited the Academy in Hyderabad on
4
th July, 2011 to discuss its working with the representatives of the Academy and the Ministry of
Home Affairs. The Committee, in its meeting held on 7 th June 2012, heard three retired senior IPS
officers on the “Working of the Academy”. They had made very valuable insights/suggestions
during their oral evidence before the Committee. The Committee, in its sitting held on 29
th June,
66

67
2012, further heard the presentation made by the Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs on
the subject in the light of the visit undertaken by it and views and suggestions expressed by the
retired senior police officers. He added that based on the inputs received, the draft Report on the
Academy was prepared.
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft report for consideration. The Chairman stated
that he had again gone through the report and made some minor corrections in the draft Report
relating to factual inaccuracies, repetition and fine-tuning without changing its content. The
Chairman, then, read out the modifications made in the Report. After a brief discussion, the report
was adopted by the Committee as modified.
5. The Committee then decided to present/lay the report to both the Houses of Parliament on
Thursday, the 30
th August 2012. For the purpose, the Committee authorized the Chairman, in his
absence Shri D. Raja, MP, Rajya Sabha and in their absence Shri Tariq Anwar, MP, Rajya Sabha,
to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Baijayant Panda, MP,
Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Hamdullah Sayeed, MP, Lok Sabha to lay the Report on the
Table of Lok Sabha.
6. * * *
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.