PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 104
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-SEVENTH 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2003)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-SEVENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5 TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5 TH DECEMBER, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
CS (H.A.)-199

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—11
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE C OMMITTEE —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 12—15
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. 17—33
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 35 —43
I. Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003 ....................................... 37—38
II. Size of Council of Ministers at the Centre and States ................................... 39—40
III. Bill as reported by the Committee ....................................................................... 41—43

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Motilal V ora
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
+9. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
10. Shri Lalu Prasad
11. Shri Drupad Borgohain
12. Shri Ram Jethmalani
*13. Shri Pramod Mahajan
Ψ14. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
♠15. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Adhi Sankar
17. Begum Noor Bano
18. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
19. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
20. Shri M.O.H. Farook
21. Shri Rajen Gohain
22. Shri Vinay Katiyar
23. Shri K. Karunakaran
24. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
25. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
26. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
27. Shri P.H. Pandian
28. Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
29. Shri Subodh Roy
30. Shri Anadi Sahu
(i)
+ Ceased to be a Member on expiry of term as Member of Parliament w.e.f.  6 October 2003.
* Nominated w.e.f.  27 February, 2003.
Ψ Nominated w.e.f.  5 May, 2003.
♠ Nominated w.e.f.  27 July, 2003.

(ii)
31. Shri P.A. Sangma
32. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
33. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
34. Shri Manabendra Shah
35. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
36. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
37. Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
38. Sardar Buta Singh
39. Shri Ramjilal Suman
40. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
41. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
42. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
43. Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
#44. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
α45. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
# Nominated w.e.f.  26 February, 2003.
α Nominated w.e.f.  7 April, 2003.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred-Fourth Report of the Committee on the Constitution (Ninety-Seventh
Amendment) Bill, 2003.*
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the
Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 5 May, 2003 and pending therein, to the Committee for
examination and report.
3.0 The Committee considered the Bill in its sittings held on 24 June, 14 July, 15 September
and 16 October, 2003.
3.1 The Committee took oral evidence of Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice in its sitting held on 24 June, 2003. In the same sitting, the Committee held in-house
discussion on the general principles of the Bill.
3.2 On 14 July, 2003, the Committee held further in-house discussion on the Bill.
3.3 In its meeting held on 15 September, 2003, the Committee took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill and considered the draft Report thereon and adopted the same in its
meeting held on 16 October, 2003.
4. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following papers/
documents pertaining to the subject matter of the Bill:
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) Replies of the Legislative Department to the queries raised by Members of the
Committee in its meetings; and
(iii) Amendments given by some Members of the Committee and comments of Legislative
Department thereon.
4.1 In the preparation of its Report, the Committee has inter alia  consulted the following
books/documents:
(i) Report of Committee on Defections under the Chairmanship of Shri Y . B. Chavan
(Ministry of Home Affairs, 1969);
(ii) Report of the Committee on Electoral Reforms (Dinesh Goswami Committee)
(Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, 1990);
(iii) 170th Report on ‘Reform of Electoral Laws’ of the Law Commission (1999);
(iv) Report of the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution
(NCRWC) (Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs, 2002);
* Bills Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 9 May, 2003.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 40675 dated 9 May, 2002.

(v) The Supreme Court Judgement in Kihota Hollohon vs. Zachilhu and others (AIR
1993 SC 415);
(vi) Practice and Procedure of Parliament by M.N. Kaul and S.L. Shakdher (New
Delhi, 2001);
(vii) Constitutional Law of India by Dr. J.N. Pandey;
(viii) Parliamentary Procedure, V ol-I by Subhash C. Kashyap (New Delhi, 2000);
(ix) Our Parliament by Subhash C. Kashyap;
(x) Anti-Defection Law and Parliamentary Privileges by Subhash C. Kashyap
(Bombay, 1995);
(xi) Anti-Defection Law Premises, Provisions and Problems (Monograph Series) by
Subhash C. Kashyap;
(xii) Role of the Leader of the House, Leader of the Opposition and Whips, published
by Rajya Sabha Secretariat; and
(xiii) Rajya Sabha Debates, Hundred and Thirty-second Session (1985).
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
16 October, 2003 Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003 ( Annexure-I) seeks to amend two
Articles (75 and 164) and insert a new Article (361B) after Article 361A and also amend the Tenth
Schedule of the Constitution for the purpose of strengthening the Anti-Defection Law.
1.1 Articles 75 and 164 of the Constitution is proposed to be amended for the following two
purposes:—
(i) Putting a ceiling on the size of Council of Ministers (including the Prime Minister/
Chief Minister) of the Union/States to the extent of ten percent of the lower Houses
where the legislature is unicameral and ten percent of both the Houses where the
legislature is bicameral, including Parliament of India by inserting Clauses (1A) to
Articles 75 and 164, respectively
1. For the smaller States the minimum strength of
the Council of Ministers has been proposed at seven; and
(ii) Making provision for debarring a legislator to become Minister, if he/she is
disqualified on the ground of defection 2 enumerated under Paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule for the duration of the remaining term of his/her office or until the next
election, whichever is earlier, from the date of his/her disqualification, by adding
Clauses (1B) to Articles 75 and 164 of the Constitution, respectively.
1.2 The Bill inserts Article 361B after Article 361A of the Constitution for adding another
disqualification for a member of a House belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the
ground of defection enumerated under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, by
debarring him/her to hold any remunerative political post for the duration of period commencing
from the date of his/her disqualification till the date on which the term of his/her office would
expire or till the date on which he/she contests an election to any House of Parliament or
Legislature of a State, whichever is earlier.
1.3 The Bill also proposes to delete Paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule which protects
legislators from disqualification on ground of defection due to split in the political party and amends
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Schedule as a consequence to the deletion of Paragraph 3.
2.0 The Anti-defection Law is otherwise known as the Constitution (Fifty-Second Amendment)
Act, 1985, which amended Articles 101, 102, 190 and 191 of the Constitution regarding vacation
of seats and disqualification from membership of Parliament and State legislatures and inserted a
new Schedule (Tenth Schedule) to the Constitution setting out certain provisions regarding
disqualification from membership of Parliament and the State Legislatures on the ground of
defection, from the political party to which the Member belongs.
2.1.0 Anti-Defection Law details is the grounds of defection and also prescribes disqualification
for the defectors for being Members of the House. The grounds of defection as given in Clause
2 of the Tenth Schedule are as under:—
1 Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill.
2 Defection means change of political affiliation by legislator by crossing the floor. The phenomenon of defection is
inevitable concomitant of the party system and rampant in multi-party system like in India. Floor crossing has its
origin in the British House of Commons. History of defection in India is traced back to the days of Montford
Reforms when Shri ShyamLal Nehru, a Member of Central Legislature changed his allegiance from Congress Party to
British side. (R & C Brochure No. 55 on V arious Aspects of Defections, Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, 1985).

2
(a) If a member of the House belonging to a political party voluntarily gives up his/her
membership of that political party.
(b) If he/she abstains from the voting or votes contrary to the direction issued by the
political party to which, he/she belongs in the House.
(c) If he/she defects from his/her party to any party after elections.
(d) If the nominated member joins any political party after six months after taking his seat.
(e) An independent Member who joins a political party after his/her election.
2.1.1 The same law protects bulk defections in the nature of split (one-third of original political
party) and merger (two-thirds of original political party) for incurring disqualification.
2.2.0 W ith the addition of Tenth Schedule to the Constitution by the Anti-Defection Law, the
political party received Constitutional recognition
3. The said Law also mentioned about the
disqualification for the dissenting Member who acts in defiance of party direction (Party Whip) 4.
2.2.1 The Members of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha (Disqualification on Grounds of Defection) Rules,
19855 which are otherwise known as Anti-Defection Rules along with Anti-Defection Law regulate
defections. The Anti-defection Rules enumerates elaborate procedure 6 for checking defections in
Parliament. The Law leaves the matter of defection to the decision of the Chairman /Speaker, who
can declare so when the matter is reported to him/her by any Member or Leader of the Party in
the House, which is provided in the said Rules. Thus the Anti-Defection Law and the Rules
thereunder are complimentary and supplementary to each other. The Law itself mentions that any
wilful contravention of the Rules is considered as a breach of privileges of the House. {Para 8(3)
of Tenth Schedule}
2.2.2 However, the Anti-defection Law and Anti-defection Rules allow bulk defection in the nature
of split and merger to preserve the right of dissent. But it is seen, over the years that these
provisions have been circumvented by the legislators to avert disqualification. The provision of split
has been grossly misused to engineer multiple divisions in the party, as a result of which the evil
of defection has not been checked in the right earnest. Further it is also observed that the lure
of office of profit plays dominant part in the political horse-trading resulting in spate of defections
and counter defections.
3 Although the political party is recognized by the Election Commission for registration purpose under the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, (Section-29A). Recognition of the parliamentary party/group is done by the
Speaker for the purpose of functioning in the House (Direction No. 120, Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha).
4 Party Whip is an important adjunct to the political party for securing the presence of its members and their votes
in the business of the House. Party Whip plays the role in making and keeping the House by using Whip. The term
Whip denotes both the organization/person as well as the instruction. The term Whip was first used in the British
House of Commons way back in 1769 by Sir Edmund Burke. Whip is issued by the party through a person called
Whip to secure presence and voting of their Members to its stand on an issue on the floor of the House. Party
issues Whip to its Members in the form of periodic notice, directives which are of three types:- one-line, two-line,
three-line to indicate the degree of importance and urgency of the Whip. One-line Whip is simplest in nature where
there is no expectation of division in the House. The two-line Whip is fairly important and there is an expectation
of division in the House. The three-line Whip indicates most important business and a division.
5 Rules framed under the provisions of paragraph 8 of Tenth Schedule to the Constitution by the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha,and Speaker, Lok Sabha, which were laid on the Table of both the Houses on 16 December 1985 and came
into force w.e.f 18 March 1986.
6 The Rules enjoin the leaders of legislature parties to intimate the Chairman/Speaker through a statement which
inter alia mentions about names of Members of their parties in the House. The individual Member is also
responsible to intimate his party affiliation to the Chairman/Speaker through a statement. It also empowers the
party to intimate the Chairman/Speaker the name of Members of their parties who have defected/dissented.

3
3.0 The need for the proposed legislation has been felt to curb defection by strengthening the
existing law. Basically the legislation under examination focuses on the following key issues to
check the evil of defection in Indian polity:—
(a) Ceiling on the size of the Council of Ministers; and
(b) Disallowing defection on account of split.
(a) Size of the Council of Ministers
3.1 The proposed legislation limits the size of Council of Ministers to the maximum of ten
per cent of Lower House (in the case of unicameral legislature) and ten per cent of both the
Houses (in case of bicameral legislature) including Parliament. For the smaller States having lesser
number of Members in their Legislative Assemblies (Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Sikkim, Nagaland and Tripura) the minimum number of Council of Ministers is proposed
to be fixed at seven.
3.2 The idea of limiting the size of Council of Ministers has been floated since pre-independent
era. The Government of India Act, 1935 had limited the size of the Council of Ministers to ten
but the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly did not carry over this particular idea
while formulating Articles 74 and 163.
3.3 The Committee on Defections (1969)
7 in its Report expressed the view that in view of the
significant part played by the lure of ministerships in political defections, limiting the size of the
Council of Ministers might not only act as a dampener on political defectors, but might offer the
Prime Minister/Chief Minister himself a convenient escape-latch when faced with pressures which
he/she might otherwise be unable to withstand.
3.4 The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (2002) had also
deliberated on the size of Council of Ministers and made the following recommendations in this
regard:
(i) The practice of having oversized Council of Ministers must be prohibited by law. A
ceiling on the number of Ministers in any State or the Union Government be fixed
at the maximum of ten per cent of the total strength of the popular House of the
Legislature.
(ii) Also, the practice of creating a number of political offices with the position, perks
and privileges of a Minister should be discouraged and at all events their number
should be limited to two per cent of the total strength of the Lower House.
3.5 The Legislative Department, in its background note on the Constitution (Ninety-seventh
Amendment) Bill, 2003 submitted that, in the light of the experience of minority and coalition
Governments resulting in the practice of abnormally large or what is sometimes called as jumbo
size Council of Ministers probably in order to accommodate the coalition partners in the
Government thus leading to tremendous drain on the Government exchequer associated with
inefficiency, delays and slackness because of the inflated Governmental machinery breeding
malpractices and corruption.
3.6 The size of Council of Ministers at the Centre as well as in the States as reflected in their
respective web sites are given at Annexure-II. A perusal of the data given in the said Annexure
reveals that at the Centre and 27 out of 30 States/Union Territories, the size of the Council of
7 A 19 member Committee headed by Shri Y .B. Chavan, the then Union Home Minister was set up by a Resolution of
Lok Sabha dated 8 December 1967 which presented its Report to Parliament on 18 February 1969.

4
Ministers is more than ten per cent of the total strength of their respective Lower Houses. The
position in this regard in the smaller States like Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,. Nagaland
and Sikkim is quite alarming where the size of the Council of Ministers has crossed fifty per cent
of the strength of their Assemblies.
3.7 The Secretary, Legislative Department in his deposition before the Committee had inter alia
stated with respect to restricting the size of the Council of Ministers including the Prime Minister/
Chief Minister, that, in one of the States in Australia, it is provided that the number of persons
who may hold office as Ministers of the Crown shall not exceed twenty at anyone time. Also that
for some other States (like South Australia and Victoria), provision has been made in law for the
minimum representation in the Ministry from each House. The Indian Constitution provides that a
person has to become a Member of either House of Parliament or State Legislature, as the case
may be, within six months of becoming a Minister. Thus, a Minister can be appointed from any
of the House.
3.8 The Secretary (Legislative Department) further made a mention that Clause (4) of Article
239AA of the Constitution which makes special provisions with respect to Delhi specifically
provides that the Council of Ministers for the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT) shall not
exceed more than ten per cent of the total number of members of the Legislative Assembly. It is
based on the recommendation of the Committee on Reorganisation of Delhi Set-up (Part-I,
December, 1989, pp. 61-62). This Report specifically refers to the Pattabhi Sitaramiah Committee
of 1947 envisaging a ceiling on the number of Ministers for Delhi. The Reorganisation Committee
in its report stated that the Delhi Administration should set high standards for the rest of the
country and that there would be an advantage in restricting the number of Ministers to be included
in the Council of Ministers in Delhi. Accordingly, while making a special provision for Delhi in the
Constitution, this recommendation was accepted. Further, that the Committee on Defections (1969)
had also recommended for the country as a whole that the size of the Cabinet should have some
relation to the size of the Legislature.
3.9.0 During the discussions in the Committee on this aspect of the proposed legislation, the
following viewpoints were expressed:—
(i) Ratio for Upper House and Lower House for Ministership should be fixed within the
ten per cent limit prescribed in the proposed legislation.
(ii) The Provision of the Bill relating to limiting the size of the Council of Ministers
to ten per cent of the membership of the two Houses of the Parliament/Legislative
Assembly (in case of unicameral legislature) is likely to put the States at disadvantage
which have single chamber legislatures. Such States with unicameral legislature may
demand for the creation of Upper House-the Legislative Council, to be at par with
the bicameral States w.r.t. the size of the Council of Ministers.
(iii) Considering many new subjects and areas of activities which come up like
WTO, etc. limit of ten per cent should not be fixed for the size of the Council of
Ministers.
(iv) Limiting the size of Council of Minister to fifteen per cent of Lower House.
3.9.1 The Committee deliberated on all the points and collectively agreed to the point at Sl. No.
(iv) above in view of the following reasons:
(a) attempts to bring uniformity in the law w.r. t. the size of the Council of Ministers
in the country;

5
(b) since only a few States (Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Karnataka) 8 have
bicameral Legislatures and the Council of Ministers is accountable to the Lower
House only, considering the strength of Lower House for the purpose of size of
Council of Ministers, therefore, seems logical; and
(c) it will not develop propensity amongst the States to go for second chamber to
accommodate more Ministers.
3.9.2 The Committee wishes to clarify that the existing practice of including Ministers in the
Union Council of Ministers from both the Houses of Parliament, as recognised by Article 75(5) of
the Constitution, may continue but for the purpose of limiting the size of Council, the strength of
Lower House would be reckoned.
3.9.3 The Committee further clarifies that the variance in the size of Council of Ministers in
accordance with the provisions of the Bill (10% of 245 (RS)+545 (LS)=79) and new formula
proposed by it (15% of 545=82) would be minimal.
3.9.4 For smaller States, the Bill prescribes the size of Council of Ministers to be seven and the
Committee recommends the size to be twelve keeping in view the fact that all the States, big or
small, have relatively equal workload, gamut of functions and structure and that the Departments
existing in all the States are, more or less, similar. Moreover, tribal dominated States in the North
Eastern Region expect representation of at least all the important tribes in their Council of
Ministers.
3.9.5 The Comm ittee in relation to Union Territories with Legislatures, is of the view, that,
suitable legislation or amendments to the relevant statutes may be brought by the Government in
order to limit the size of Council of Ministers in such Union Territories similar to that of smaller
States.
3.9.6 The Anti-Defection Law could not check the defector to become Minister at least for the
minimum period of six months which is permissible under Articles 75 (5) and 163 (4) of
Constitution. The present legislation would not allow the defector to become Minister for even a
single day from the date of his/her disqualification till the expiry of the term of his/her office or
contesting an election, whichever is earlier. This disqualification has also been proposed to be
extended to the remunerative political post. The term has not been defined in the Bill and the
Secretary (Legislative Department) submitted in his deposition that the matter could be left to be
developed by convention.
3.9.7 The Committee welcomed the proposal for disallowing the defectors to hold any
remunerative political post from the date of his disqualification and desired that the term
‘remunerative political posts’ should be clearly defined.
3.9.8 The Legislative Department has proposed to define ‘remunerative political post’ as
the one for which the salary is paid out of public revenue, which is acceptable to the
Committee.
3.9.9 As per the provisions of the Bill a legislator disqualified on account of defection would not
be eligible to be appointed to the post of Minister or hold any remunerative political post until he/
she contests an election (fresh/bye/biennial) to Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha/Legislative Assembly/Council
of a State or on expiry of his/her term of office, whichever is earlier. It implies that a defector
who contests either a fresh or bye or biennial election to Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha and State
Legislative Assembly/Council and loses the same is also eligible to be appointed as a Minister or
to any remunerative political post. Moreover in view of the amendment to the Representation of
8 Apart from these four States, the State of Jammu and Kashmir also has a Legislative Council.

6
the People Act, 1951, w.e.f. 28 August, 2003, a candidate can contest election to the Rajya Sabha
from any State in India as the requirement of residential qualification for the election to the Rajya
Sabha has been done away with. Thus a defector can become eligible to be appointed as a Minister
or to any remunerative political post even before the expiration of term of his/her office or General
Election by contesting bye elections or biennial elections to the Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha/Legislative
Assembly/Council, as the case may be.
3.9.10 The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution in its Report has
recommended debarring the defector until the next fresh elections or the duration of the remaining
term of the legislature.
3.9.11 The Committee notes that the present Bill suffers from an infirmity to the extent
that a loser in any election to Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha/Legislature of a State, becomes
eligible to be appointed as a Minister or to a remunerative political post even though the
stigma of defection has not been condoned by the electorate. Therefore, the Committee
feels that the objective of the Bill to strengthen the Anti-defection law would be defeated
if the lacuna is not removed.
3.9.12 The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of merely contesting the
election, it should be explicitly provided in the Bill that the defector should be declared
elected in order to become eligible to be appointed as a Minister or to a remunerative
political post.
3.9.13. In the light of the above recommendations of the Committee which introduces the
element of winning instead of merely contesting election to Parliament/State Legislature,
the Committee is of the view that winning an election may be confined to Union Parliament
in case of clause 2 and State Legislature in case of clause 3 of the Bill, since articles 75
and 164, respectively, pertain to the Council of Ministers of the Union and States.
3.9.14. Accordingly, the Committee recommends appropriate amendments in clauses 2, 3 and
4 of the Bill to remove the said infirmity.
(b) Disallowance of Defection on Account of Split
3.10.0 The term split has not been defined in the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution, as a result
of which split of political party may mean both split inside the House (legislative wing of the party)
as well as split outside the House (political wing of the party). Further taking the advantage of the
protection guaranteed by the Constitution in the name of split of requisite number, attempts have
been made to engineer multiple splits in the political party to topple the Government of the day.
3.10.1 The Law Commission of India in its 170th Report on “Reform of Electoral Laws” submitted
in May, 1999 also deliberated on the issue of amendments to the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution
and made the following recommendations:—
“The concept of split and merger may be done away with. Notwithstanding the prevalent
view that existing provision of splits cannot be barred in light of the fact that there is no
internal democracy in the political parties today and also because the internal structures of
political parties had not been satisfactorily established banning the splits will not arrest the
ongoing political process or pluralism in the society as after dissolution of the Parliament
political realignment of forces by means of splits/mergers/formation of new parties and so
on is not barred The paragraph 4 regarding merger should also be deleted in the interest
of maintenance of proper political standards in the Houses and also to minimize the
complications arising on that account. The other allied provisions which become
unnecessary as a result of deletion of paragraph 3 (split) and 4 (merger) have necessarily
got to be deleted.”

7
3.10.2 The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) in its report
submitted on 31 March, 2002 has made the following recommendations in respect of amendments
to the Tenth Schedule:—
“The provisions of the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution should be amended specifically
to provide that all persons defecting—whether individually or in groups—from the party
or the alliance of parties, on whose ticket they had been elected, must resign from their
Parliamentary or Assembly seats and must contest fresh elections. In other words such
persons should lose their membership and the protection under the provision of split etc.
should be scrapped. The defectors should also be debarred from holding any public office
as Ministers or any other remunerative political post for at least the duration of the
remaining term of the existing Legislature or until, the next fresh elections whichever is
earlier. The vote cast by a defector to topple a Government should be treated as invalid.
Further, the power to decide questions regarding disqualification on ground of defection
should vest in the Election Commission instead of the Chairman or Speaker of the House
concerned”
3.10.3 The proposed legislation, however, aims to do away with the split in the political party from
the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution to check its misuse.
3.10.4 The Committee endorses the attempt of the Government in this regard and feels
that split in the party for a cause other than ideological such as situational, motivational,
etc. will be stopped resulting in check of proliferation of political parties.
3.10.5 In that context, the Committee has deliberated at length on the issue of party whip vis-a-
vis defection due to split. Some of the Members felt that with the abolition of Paragraph 3 of Tenth
Schedule, the party whip would be a potent tool in the hands of political parties to stifle freedom
of its Members as violating party whip would now straightaway incur disqualification since the
escape route of split would be closed. They were of the view, that, in order to maintain judicious
balance between individual conscience of the legislator and party discipline, whip should be
scrupulously used on matters of great importance, such as, confidence/no-confidence motion,
financial business, motion of thanks and legislations replacing ordinances, etc.
3.10.6 In this context the observation of Shri M.C. Chagla while participating in the debate on the
Report of the Committee on Defections in the Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 1969 appears to be
relevant and is reproduced below:
“On every subject, a whip is issued thereby testing the loyalty of the member and
compelling him to vote with the party whether he believes in the particular matter which
is before the House or not. I think whip should be issued very rarely, and party should not
look upon a defeat in the House necessarily as a vote of no confidence. Now take the
United States—You have the Senate and the House of Representatives—where the parties are
perhaps not so strong as they are here or in the UK. but no body minds if the President
is a Republican and the Democrats carry a particular measure or pass a particular
resolution. Therefore, parties should look upon every topic that comes before Parliament as
something that involves a vote of confidence.
It is only in matters of policy, in matters of grave importance, in matters of national
emergency that a whip should be issued, the matter being looked upon as a vote of no
confidence. And even you should permit if they say it is a matter of conscience to vote
against you or at least abstain. You know it is the usual practice. Take the Labour Party
a member says I do not agree with the policy. Serious attention might be taken if he votes
against the party but he is permitted to abstain if he says it is a matter of conscience.
Therefore, we should not be in a hurry  to take disciplinary action against members of the

8
party because as a matter of conscience they do not see eye to eye with the party and they
abstain or do not vote for the party.” (Rajya Sabha Debate, 12 August, 1969, Columns
3774-3779).
3.10.7 In the same context, observations of Shri Justice M. N. Venkatachaliah (on behalf of
majority) in the judgement of Supreme Court in Kihoto Hollohan Vs. Zachillhu and others (AIR
1993 SC 415) is also reproduced below:
“While Construing Paragraph 2(1)(b) (Tenth Schedule) it cannot be ignored that under the
Constitution members of Parliament as well as of the State Legislature enjoy freedom of
speech in the House though this freedom is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and
the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the House [Art. 105 (1) and
Art. 194 (I)]. The disqualification imposed by Paragraph 2(1)(b) must be so construed as
not to unduly impinge on the said freedom of speech of a member. This would be possible
if Paragraph 2(1)(b) is confined in its scope by keeping in view the object underlying the
amendments contained in the Tenth Schedule, namely, to curb the evil or mischief of
political defections motivated by the lure of office or other similar considerations. The said
object would be achieved if the disqualification incurred on the ground of voting or
abstaining from voting by a member is confined to cases where a change of Government
is likely to be brought about or is prevented as the case may be as a result of such voting
or abstinence or when such voting or abstinence is on a matter which was a major policy
and programme on which the political party to which the member belongs went to the polls.
For this purpose the direction given by the political party to a member belonging to it, the
violation of which may entail disqualification under Paragraph 2(1)(b), would have to be
limited to a vote on motion of confidence or no-confidence in the Government or where
the motion under consideration relates to a matter which was an integral policy and
programme of the political party on the basis of which it approached the electorate. The
voting or abstinence from voting by a member against the direction by the political party
on such a motion would amount to disapproval of the programme on the basis of which
he went before the electorate and got himself elected and such voting or abstinence would
amount to a breach of the trust reposed in him by the electorate.
Keeping in view the consequences of the disqualification i.e. termination of the
membership of a House; it would be appropriate that the direction or whip which results
in such disqualification under Paragraph 2(1)(b) is so worded as to clearly indicate that
voting or abstaining from voting contrary to the said direction would result in incurring the
disqualification under Paragraph 2(1)(b) of the Tenth Schedule so that the member
concerned has fore-knowledge of the consequences flowing from his conduct in voting or
abstaining from voting contrary to such a direction.”
3.10.8 Coming back to the theme of para 3.10.5 supra, according to that section of Members of
the Committee, the Members of a party in the legislature should be given freedom of speech as
well as vote on ordinary legislation and the Parliament may work like its Standing Committees on
those issues.
3.10.9 Another section of Members were of the view that party discipline was required in all
matters coming up before the House and even while a Member speaks/votes on an item being
considered by the House, since he/she wins the elections subscribing to the ideology, programmes
and policies of the party enumerated in its manifesto.
3.11 The Committee deliberated on the issue at length. The Whip is issued to check
instability in the Government. If the Whip is not issued on ordinary/innocuous legislations,
the Government may not be physically destabilised but the instability would follow when the

9
Government fails to ensure safe passage of its legislative business in the House. Thus, the
Committee feels that legislators may have freedom of speech in the House on a legislation
but it would not be desirable to give freedom of vote on the floor of the House to ensure
stability of the Government. Thus the Committee, after due deliberation, feels that the
status quo in regard to issue of Whip may be maintained.
4. The Committee also desired that the following views expressed by its Members may
be considered by Government to make the Anti-Defection Law more effective:
(i) There is possibility for defection even after this amendment as the defectors can
be accommodated in the Council of Ministers through the other route i.e., by
offering a seat in Rajya Sabha/Upper House in the States. Stringent law, which
debars defectors who later become Members of the Rajya Sabha to get the post
of Ministership, is required.
(ii) Presiding Officers sometimes take long time to arrive at a decision regarding
disqualification of a member and at times take such decisions very expeditiously.
Therefore, the decision of Presiding Officer relating to disqualification should be
time-bound.
5.0 In its meeting held on 15 September, 2003, the Committee took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
5.1.0 Clause 2 amends Article 75 of the Constitution with a view to prescribing the size of
Council of Ministers including Prime Minister to the maximum of ten per cent of total numbers
of Members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and disqualification of a Member disqualified on ground
of defection to be appointed as Minister from the date of his/her being disqualified till the date of
expiration of his/her term of office or till the date of his/her contesting an election to Lok Sabha/
Rajya Sabha or Legislature of State, whichever is earlier.
5.1.1 The Committee unanimously agreed to limit the size of Council of Ministers to
fifteen percent of the total number of Members of the Lower House of Parliament/State
Legislature to ensure uniformity of law in the country.
5.1.2 The Committee recommends that the words ‘ten percent’ and ‘both Houses of
Parliament’ in the seventh and eighth lines of page 1 of the Bill be substituted by the words
‘fifteen percent’ and ‘House of the People’, respectively.
5.1.3 The Committee recommends that in lines 13 to 15 of page 1 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “where he
contests any election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the
date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier”, so that the disqualification in
view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when he/she wins an
election to any House of Parliament.
5.1.4 The Clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 3
5.2.0 Clause 3 amends Article 164 of the Constitution with a view to prescribing the size of
Council of Ministers, including Chief Minister to the maximum of ten per cent of total number of
Members of the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council of that State if it is bicameral
legislature or ten percent of total number of Members of the Legislative Assembly only if it is a
unicameral legislature and disqualification of a Member to be appointed as Minister from the date
of expiration of his/her being disqualified till the date of his term of his office or till the date of

10
his/her contesting an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State, whichever is
earlier if he/she is disqualified on ground of defection.
5.2.1 The Committee unanimously agreed that the size of Council of Ministers, including
Chief Minister should be fifteen percent of the total number of Members of the Legislative
Assembly of that State and the minimum number of Ministers in smaller States should be
twelve instead of seven as provided in the Bill.
5.2.2 The Committee recommends that the words ‘ten per cent’ in the third line and ‘seven’
in the eighth line of page 2 of the Bill be substituted by the words ‘fifteen per cent’ and
‘twelve’ respectively. The Committee also recommends, deletion of the words beginning with
‘or in case of a State’ and ending with ‘both Houses of the Legislature of that State’ in lines
5 and 6 of page 2.
5.2.3 The Committee recommends that in lines 14 to 16 of page 2 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “or where he
contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiry of
such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier” so that the
disqualification in view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when
he/she wins an election to the Legislature of a State.
5.2.4 The clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 4
5.3.0 Clause 4 inserts new Article 361B after Article 361A of the Constitution extending
disqualification of defector for being appointed to remunerative political post for duration of the
period commencing from the date of his/her disqualification till the date on which the term of his/
her office would expire or till the date on which he/she contests an election to any House of
Parliament or Legislature of a State, whichever is earlier.
5.3.1 The Committee recommends that in line 24 of page 2 of the Bill, the words “and is
declared elected” be inserted after the words “contests an election to a House” so that the
disqualification in view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when
he/she wins an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State.
5.3.2 The Committee endorsed the definition of ‘remunerative political post’  proposed by
Legislative Department by way of addition to the ‘Explanation’ to the Clause, in the
following manner, namely:—
Explanation: — For the purposes of this article,—
(a) * * *
(b) The expression “remunerative political post” means any office-
(i) under the Central Government or the State Government where the
salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue
of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be; or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially
owned by the  Central Government or the State Government and the
salary or remuneration for such office is paid by such body.
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.
*** Relates to other matters.

11
5.3.3 The clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 5
5.4.0 Clause 5 deletes paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule regarding ‘split’ of political parties.
5.4.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 1
5. Clause 1, Enacting formula and the title are adopted without any change.
5.6.0 A Bill as amended by the Committee is appended to the Report (Annexure-III). The
Committee recommends that the Bill as reported by it be passed.

12
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—
AT A GLANCE
The Committee deliberated on all the points and collectively agreed to the point at
Sl. No. (iv) above in view of the following reasons:
(d) attempts to bring uniformity in the law w.r.t. the size of the Council of
Ministers in the country;
(e) since only a few States (Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Karnataka)
have bicameral Legislatures and the Council of Ministers is accountable to the
Lower House only, considering the strength of Lower House for the purpose of
size of Council of Ministers, therefore, seems logical; and
(f) it will not develop propensity amongst the States to go for second chamber to
accommodate more Ministers.
(Para 3.9.1)
The Committee wishes to clarify that the existing practice of including Ministers in
the Union Council of Ministers from both the Houses of Parliament, as recognised by Article
75(5) of the Constitution, may continue but for the purpose of limiting the size of Council,
the strength of Lower House would be reckoned. (Para 3.9.2)
The Committee further clarifies that the variance in the size of Council of Ministers
in accordance with the provisions of the Bill (10% of 245 (RS)+545 (LS)=79) and new
formula proposed by it (15% of 545=82) would be minimal. (Para 3.9.3)
For smaller States, the Bill prescribes the size of Council of Ministers to be seven
and the Committee recommends the size to be twelve keeping in view the fact that all the
States, big or small, have relatively equal workload, gamut of functions and structure and
that the Departments existing in all the States are, more or less, similar. Moreover, tribal
dominated States in the North Eastern Region expect representation of at least all the
important tribes in their Council of Ministers. (Para 3.9.4)
The Committee in relation to Union Territories with Legislatures, is of the view, that,
suitable legislation or amendments to the relevant statutes may be brought by the
Government in order to limit the size of Council of Ministers in such Union Territories
similar to that of smaller States. (Para 3.9.5)
The Committee welcomed the proposal for disallowing the defectors to hold any
remunerative political post from the date of his disqualification and desired that the term
‘remunerative political posts’ should be clearly defined. (Para 3.9.7)
The Legislative Department has proposed to define ‘remunerative political post’ as
the one for which the salary is paid out of public revenue, which is acceptable to the
Committee. (Para 3.9.8)
The Committee notes that the present Bill suffers from an infirmity to the extent
that a loser in any election to Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha/Legislature of a State, becomes
eligible to be appointed as a Minister or to a remunerative political post even though the
stigma of defection has not been condoned by the electorate. Therefore, the Committee
12

13
feels that the objective of the Bill to strengthen the Anti-defection law would be defeated
if the lacuna is not removed. (Para 3.9.11)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of merely contesting the
election, it should be explicitly provided in the Bill that the defector should be declared
elected in order to become eligible to be appointed as a Minister or to a remunerative
political post. (Para 3.9.12)
In the light of the above recommendations of the Committee which introduces the
element of winning instead of merely contesting election to Parliament/State Legislature,
the Committee is of the view that winning an election may be confined to Union Parliament
in case of clause 2 and State Legislature in case of clause 3 of the Bill, since articles 75
and 164, respectively, pertain to the Council of Ministers of the Union and States.
(Para 3.9.13)
Accordingly, the Committee recommends appropriate amendments in clauses 2, 3 and
4 of the Bill to remove the said infirmity. (Para 3.9.14)
The Committee endorses the attempt of the Government in this regard and feels
that split in the party for a cause other than ideological such as situational, motivational,
etc., will be stopped resulting in check of proliferation of political parties. (Para 3.10.4)
The Committee deliberated on the issue at length. The Whip is issued to check
instability in the Government. If the Whip is not issued on ordinary/innocuous legislations,
the Government may not be physically destabilised but the instability would follow when the
Government fails to ensure safe passage of its legislative business in the House. Thus, the
Committee feels that legislators may have freedom of speech in the House on a legislation
but it would not be desirable to give freedom of vote on the floor of the House to ensure
stability of the Government. Thus the Committee, after due deliberation, feels that the
status quo in regard to issue of Whip may be maintained. (Para 3.11)
The Committee also desired that the following views expressed by its Members may
be considered by Government to make the Anti-Defection Law more effective:
(iii) There is possibility for defection even after this amendment as the defectors
can be accommodated in the Council of Ministers through the other route i.e.,
by offering a seat in Rajya Sabha/Upper House in the States. Stringent law,
which debars defectors who later become Members of the Rajya Sabha to get
the post of Ministership, is required.
(iv) Presiding Officers sometimes take long time to arrive at a decision regarding
disqualification of a member and at times take such decisions very
expeditiously. Therefore, the decision of Presiding Officer relating to
disqualification should be time-bound.
(Para 4)
The Committee unanimously agreed to limit the size of Council of Ministers to
fifteen percent of the total number of Members of the Lower House of Parliament/State
Legislature to ensure uniformity of law in the country. (Para 5.1.1)
The Committee recommends that the words ‘ten percent’ and ‘both Houses of
Parliament’ in the seventh and eighth lines of page 1 of the Bill be substituted by the words
‘fifteen percent’ and ‘House of the People’, respectively. (Para 5.1.2)
The Committee recommends that in lines 13 to 15 of page 1 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “where he

14
contests any election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the
date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier”, so that the disqualification in
view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when he/she wins an
election to any House of Parliament. (Para 5.1.3)
The Clause is adopted as amended.
(Para 5.1.4)
Clause 3
The Committee unanimously agreed that the size of Council of Ministers, including
Chief Minister should be fifteen percent of the total number of Members of the Legislative
Assembly of that State and the minimum number of Ministers in smaller States should be
twelve instead of seven as provided in the Bill. (Para 5.2.1)
The Committee recommends that the  words ‘ten percent’ in the third line and ‘seven’
in the eighth line of page 2 of the Bill be substituted by the words ‘fifteen percent’ and
‘twelve’ respectively. The Committee also recommends, deletion of the words beginning with
‘or in case of a State’ and ending with ‘both Houses of the Legislature of that State’ in lines
5 and 6 of page 2. (Para 5.2.2)
The Committee recommends that in lines 14 to 16 of page 2 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “or where he
contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiry of
such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier” so that the
disqualification in view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when
he/she wins an election to the Legislature of a State. (Para 5.2.3)
The clause is adopted as amended.
(Para 5.2.4)
Clause 4
The Committee recommends that in line 24 of page 2 of the Bill, the words “and
is declared elected” be inserted after the words “contests an election to a House” so that
the disqualification in view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed
only when he/she wins an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State.
(Para 5.3.1)
The Committee endorsed the definition of ‘remunerative political post’ proposed by
Legislative Department by way of addition to the ‘Explanation’ to the Clause, in the
following manner, namely:—
Explanation:—  For the purposes of this article,—
(a) * * *
(b) The expression “remunerative political post” means any office-
(iii) under the Central Government or the State Government where the
salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public
revenue of the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be; or
*** Relates to other matters.

15
(iv) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or
partially owned by the Central Government or the State
Government and the salary or remuneration for such office is paid
by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in
nature.
(Para 5.3.2)
The clause is adopted as amended.
(Para 5.3.3)
Clause 1
Clause 1, Enacting formula and the title are adopted without any change.
(Para 5.5)
A Bill as amended by the Committee is appended to the Report (Annexure-III). The
Committee recommends that the Bill as reported by it be passed. (Para 5.6.0)

MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 24 June, 2003, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Pramod Mahajan
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
8. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook
10. Shri Rajen Gohain
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri Brahma Nand MandaI
13. Shri Subodh Roy
14. Shri Anadi Sahu
15. Shri P.A. Sangma
16. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
17. Shri Manabendra Shah
18. Shri Ramjilal Suman
19. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
20. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
21. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
19

20
WITNESSES
Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Sharma, Special Secretary (FFR)
3. Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary (BM)
4. Shri K. S. Ramasubban, Joint Secretary (BM)
5. Shri Pravin Srivastava, Joint Secretary (F)
6. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Joint Secretary (NE)
7. Shri J. K. Banthia, RGI
Border Security Force
Shri Ajai Raj Sharma, Director-General
Delhi Police
Shri R.S. Gupta, Commissioner of Police, Delhi
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri B.A. Agarwal, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, JS & LC
3. Dr. S.D. Singh, DLC
2. The Chairman welcomed a new Member to the Committee and hoped that the Committee
would be immensely benefited by his presence. He then apprised the Members about the agenda
of the series of meetings for considering legislative business and that the Committee was taking
up to transact the Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2003 on that day. He briefly
mentioned the circumstances in which the IMDT act, 1983 was enacted and the reason which led
to the proposal of the Government to repeal it. He then welcome the Home Secretary along with
his colleagues to make a presentation on the Bill and apprised them about the procedures followed
by the Committee.
3. * * *
3.1 * * *
3.2 * * *
3.3 * * *
3.4 * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
5.1 * * *
5.2 * * *
*** Relates to other matters.

21
6. * * *
(The Committee adjourned for the lunch and reassembled at 3.00 P.M.)
7. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the witnesses and made general observations. He gave
a brief outline of the subject matter of the Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003 and
then invited the witnesses to give a presentation on the Bill.
8. Thereafter, Secretary (Legislative Department) apprised the Committee that the proposed
legislation seeks to amend Articles 75 and 164 of the Constitution in respect of the Prime Minister
and his Council of Ministers as well as the Chief Minister and his Council of Ministers to restrict
the number of Ministers to be not more than 10 per cent of the total number of Members of both
the Houses of Parliament and that of State Legislature where they are in existence. For
accommodating smaller States like Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim
and Tripura, the minimum number of Ministers has been prescribed at seven.
8.1 The Secretary further informed the Committee that, with a view to strengthen the
democracy in the country, the Bill also provides for disqualification for being a Minister if a person
is disqualified on the ground of defection. This qualification has also been proposed to extend to
holding of a remunerative political post. He then invited the Committee to deliberate on the
definition of ‘remunerative political post’ and to decide whether written rule in this matter would
be more appropriate.
8.2 The Committee was also apprised that the Bill further proposes to delete paragraph 3 of the
Tenth Schedule with a view to preventing the abuse of the right of dissent relating to splits.
9. At this point, Chairman and Members raised queries and sought clarifIcations on points
arising out of the presentation.
9.1 A Member sought to know if it would be possible to increase the size of the Ministry from
seven to 10 or 12 in the North-eastern States so as to accommodate the aspirations of the different
tribes.
10. Most of the Members present expressed their support for the legislation.
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 3.52 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 25th June, 2003.
*** Relates to other matters.

22
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 14th July, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shrimati Ambika Soni
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Adhi Sankar
8. Begum Noor Bano
9. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
11. Shri Rajen Gohain
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15. Shri P.H. Pandian
16. Shri Anadi Sahu
17. Shri P.A. Sangma
18. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
19. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
20. Shri Manabendra Shah
21. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
22. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
23. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
24. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
25. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
22

23
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legislative)
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2.0 * * *
2.1 * * *
2.2 * * *
3. Chairman then welcomed Joint Secretary (Legislative Department) and made general
observations on the subject matter of the Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003 and
thereafter, left floor to other Members to express their views on the Bill.
3.1 Majority of the Members present participated in the debate in the Committee. All of them
supported the Bill and some of them even went to the extent of suggesting amendments to make
the law more stringent.
3.2 Chairman and some other Members opined that the decision of the Presiding Officer (the
Speaker or the Chairman) in regard to disqualification of Members cannot be challenged in any
Court as enumerated in para 7 of Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. Some of the Members opined
that adjudication of issues within the House cannot be entrusted to an authority outside the House
and appeal against the decision of the Speaker can be made to the President and not to the
judiciary.
3.3 A Member viewed that political parties, with reference to split, should mean both the
political wing as well as the legislative wing of the party. He was of the view that in order to make
the anti-defection law effective, it is imperative to cure the malady. He was of the view that in
the political system by strengthening of inner party democracy by maintaining judicious balance
between individual conscience of the legislator and party discipline. The whip should be issued only
on matters of great importance such as when there is no-confidence motion, financial business,
etc. He further expressed that Members are under-paid as compared to their counterparts in other
countries like the UK. He stressed that Members of Parliament should be adequately paid which
would check their eagerness to become Minister.
3.4 Some Members also opined that if the vote of an MP/MLA is against party manifesto and
causes fall of the Government, then he/she should be disqualified and also that the ratio for Upper
House and Lower House for Ministership should be fixed within the 10% limit prescribed in the
proposed legislation. Freedom of action of any Member may be confined to the areas which do
not violate party’s ideology/manifesto/activity/symbol.
3.5 There were other Members who felt that the strength of size of Council of Ministers should
be 5-7% and not 10% of the total strength of the Legislature. Also that the Constitution should be
amended to provide that the Member who defects and joins another party, should stand
automatically disqualified from membership of the House and debarred from holding any post. With
regard to the provision of the Bill relating to limiting the size of the Council of Ministers to 10%
of the membership of the two Houses of the Parliament/Legislative Assembly, such as provision is
likely to put the unicameral States at disadvantage. Such States with unicameral legislature may
demand for the Upper House—the Legislative Council, to be at par with the bicameral States w.r.t.
*** Relates to other matters.

24
the size of the Council of Ministers. On the other hand, a Member expressed the view, that
considering many new subjects and areas of activities which come up like WTO, etc. limit of 10%
should not be fixed for the size of the Council of Ministers.
3.6 Another Member added that Presiding Officers sometimes take long time to arrive at a
decision regarding disqualification of a member and at times take such decisions very expeditiously.
Therefore, the decision of Presiding Officer relating to disqualification should be time-bound.
3.7 One Member, while expressing concern, that of late, defection is causing instability in
bigger States like U.P. and Bihar which was earlier confined to smaller States and the possibility
for defection even after this amendment as the defectors can be accommodated in the Council of
Ministers through the other route i.e., by offering a seat in Rajya Sabha/Upper House in the States
suggests that stringent law, which debars defectors who later become Members of the Rajya Sabha
to get the post of Ministership, is required.
4. Chairman, then thanked Members for the animated discussion. He suggested that another
round of discussion may be held to enable the other Members to participate in the discussion.
5. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 5.44 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 15th July, 2003.

25
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 15th September, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain
7. Shri Promod Mahajan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Adhi Sankar
9. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook
11. Shri Rajen Gohain
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15. Shri Subodh Roy
16. Shri P.A. Sangma
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
18. Shri Manabendra Shah
19. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
20. Shri Ramjilal Suman
21. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
22. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
23. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
25

26
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Justice
Shri Devdas Chhotray, Additional Secretary
Shri Taborn Bam, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
Shri B.P. Mishra, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Sushma Nath, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Legislative Department
Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Representative of Legal Affairs
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman apprised Members of the Committee of the reference of three more
Bills to the Committee for examination and report namely, the State of Delhi Bill, 2003, the
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution (One Hundred and Second
Amendment) Bill, 2003. He, then welcomed Additional Secretaries of Department of Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Finance and their colleagues.
3. Thereafter, he gave a brief resume of the provisions of the Salaries and Allowances of
Judicial Officers of Union Territories (Amendment) Bill, 2003. He referred to the amendments
moved by a Member on the said Bill.
3.1 At this point, while expressing support to the legislation, a Member viewed that allowing
Supreme Court to handle matters of financial nature would be ultra vires of the Constitution.
Therefore, the Government should defend this legislation even after it is passed in Parliament. The
Committee endorsed the view of the Member.
4. The Committee, then, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
4.1.0 Clause 2 provides for the definition of Judicial Officers, Schedule and Union Territories
used in the Bill.
4.1.1 The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 3
4.2.0 Clause 3 provides for the Salaries and Special Judicial Allowance (SJA) for the Judicial
Officers in the Union Territories. The details of pay scales are given in the Schedule to the Bill.
4.2.1 An amendment was moved to the proviso to sub-clause (2) for lowering SJA to the extent
that the SJA together with basic pay shall not exceed Rs. 400/- per mensem of the highest scale
of that post.
4.2.2 The Government’s view was that the proposed amendment might lead to a situation where
a person reaching the maximum of the pay scale in a particular grade may draw less than which
he was drawing before.

27
4.2.3 The Committee agreed with the explanation of the Government. The clause is adopted
without any change.
Clause 4
4.3.0 Clause 4 provides that subject to the provisions of clause 3, the rules and orders applicable
to judicial officers, immediately before the commencement of this legislation, shall continue to
regulate the condition of service of the judicial officers (other than SJA) unless otherwise provided
by rules made under this law.
4.3.1 An amendment was moved for deleting the bracketed words “other than special judicial
allowance” appearing in the clause.
4.3.2 The Government accepted the amendment with modifications proposed in the marginal
heading as follows “Rules and orders relating to conditions of service of judicial officers to
continue to apply”.
4.3.3 The clause was adopted subject to the marginal heading being suitably modified.
Clause 5
4.4.0 Clause 5 provides for empowering the Union Government to make rules and orders
regulating the conditions of service and allowances (other than SJA), leave and pension of the
Judicial Officers in the UTs.
4.4.1 Clause was adopted without any change.
The Schedule
4.5.0 The Schedule provides for revised pay scales of judicial officers.
4.5.1 An amendment was moved in the Schedule that the scales at serials 2 and 3 be clubbed
together and it should be a running scale for Civil Judge and Senior Civil Judges and that there should
be no separate pay scale for Senior Civil Judge. The running scale should be Rs.10650-16500/-
4.5.2 The Ministry had opined that clubbing the pay scales of Civil Judge (STS) and Senior Civil
Judge would disturb the existing hierarchy, as Senior Civil Judge is the promotion post of Civil
Judge (STS). Clubbing of these two pay scales will not only curtail the promotion avenues for Civil
Judges (STS) but also diminish the status of Senior Civil Judges, who are senior most judges in
the Lower Judicial Service. The Department has stated that the proposed amendment may not be
accepted.
4.5.3 The Committee noted the reply of the Government and agreed to the reasons adduced.
4.5.4 The Schedule was adopted without any change.
Financial Memorandum
4.6.0 Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill states that the recurring expenditure of about
Rs.76.56 lakhs per annum and non-recurring expenditure of Rs. 5.l6 crores towards payment of
arrears from the first day of July, 1996 would be charged from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4.6.1 It was pointed out to the Committee that under the scheme of the Constitution such type
of expenditure, except in respect of Supreme Court, should not be put under the category
‘charged’ and instead should be under the category ‘voted’.

28
4.6.2 The Department of Justice conceded to the point raised and submitted that necessary
amendment in the Financial Memorandum would be carried out.
4.6.3 The Committee recommended that the Government might carry out necessary amendment in
the Financial Memorandum to rectify the mistake.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title
4.7 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change.
5. The Committee recommended that the Bill as amended may be passed.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. Chairman welcomed the representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and
Justice and made general observations on the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003.
A Member sought clarification as to whether the concept of ‘smaller State’ in the legislation
includes Union Territories. He further expressed that the words ‘Union Territories with legislatures’
should specifically be mentioned in the Bill.
7. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Constitution
(Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003.
Clause 2
8.0 Clause 2 amends Article 75 of the Constitution with a view to prescribing the size of
Council of Ministers including Prime Minister to the maximum of ten per cent of total numbers
of Members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and disqualification of a Member disqualified on ground
of defection to be appointed as Minister from the date of his/her being disqualified till the date of
expiration of his/her term of office or till the date of his/her contesting an election to Lok Sabha/
Rajya Sabha or Legislature of State, whichever is earlier.
8.1 The Committee unanimously agreed to limit the size of Council of Ministers to fifteen
per cent of the total number of Members of the Lower House of Parliament/State Legislature to
ensure uniformity of law in the country.
8.2 The Committee recommended that the words ‘ten percent’ and ‘both Houses of Parliament’
in the seventh and eighth lines of page 1 of the Bill be substituted by the words ‘fifteen per cent’
and ‘House of the People’, respectively.
8.3 The Committee also recommended that in lines 13 to 15 of page 1 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “where he contests any
election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he
is declared elected, whichever is earlier”, so that the disqualification in view of defection under para
2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when he/she wins an election to any House of Parliament.
8.4 The Clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 3
9.0 Clause 3 amends Article 164 of the Constitution with a view to prescribing the size of
Council of Ministers, including Chief Minister to the maximum of ten per cent of total number of
Members of the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council of that State if it is bicameral
legislature or ten per cent of total number of Members of the Legislative Assembly only if it is a
unicameral legislature and disqualification of a Member to be appointed as Minister from the date
of expiration of his/her being disqualified till the date of his term of his office or till the date of

29
his/her contesting an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State, whichever is
earlier if he/she is disqualified on ground of defection.
9.1 The Committee unanimously agreed that the size of Council of Ministers, including Chief
Minister should be fifteen per cent of the total number of Members of the Legislative Assembly
of that State and the minimum number of Ministers in smaller States should be twelve instead of
seven as provided in the Bill.
9.2 The Committee recommended that the  words ‘ten per cent’ in the third line and ‘seven’ in
the eighth line of page 2 of the Bill be substituted by the words ‘fifteen per cent’ and ‘twelve’,
respectively. The Committee also recommended, deletion of the words beginning with ‘or in case
of a State’ and ending with ‘both Houses of the Legislature of that State’ in lines 5 and 6 of
page 2.
9.3 The Committee also recommended that in lines 14 to 16 of page 2 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “or where he contests
any election to the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the Legislature of a State
having Legislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiry of such period, till the date on
which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier” so that the disqualification in view of defection
under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when he/she wins an election to the Legislature
of a State.
9.4 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 4
10.0 Clause 4 inserts new Article 361B after Article 361A of the Constitution extending
disqualification of defector for being appointed to remunerative political post for duration of the
period commencing from the date of his/her disqualification till the date on which the term of his/
her office would expire or till the date on which he/she contests an election to any House of
Parliament or Legislature of a State, whichever is earlier.
10.1 The Committee recommended that in line 24 of page 2 of the Bill, the words “and is
declared elected” be inserted after the words “contests an election to a House” so that the
disqualification in view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule is removed only when he/she
wins an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State.
10.2 The Committee endorsed the definition of ‘remunerative political post’ proposed by
Legislative Department by way of addition to the ‘Explanation’ to the Clause, in the following
manner, namely:—
Explanation:— For the purposes of this article,—
(a) * * *
(b) The expression “remunerative political post” means any office-
(i) under the Central Government or the State Government where the salary
or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be; or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially
owned by the Central Government or the State Government and the salary
or remuneration for such office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.
*** Relates to other matters.

30
10.3 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 5
11.0 Clause 5 deletes paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule regarding ‘split’ of political parties.
11.1 Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 1
12. Clause 1, Enacting formula and the title are adopted without any change.
13. The Committee recommended that the Bill as reported by it be passed.
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
15. The Committee adjourned at 5.14 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 16th September, 2003.

31
XXXI
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 16 October, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
7. Shri Drupad Borgohain
LOK SABHA
8. Begum Noor Bano
9. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
11. Shri M.O.H. Farook
12. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
13. Shri P.H. Pandian
14. Shri Subodh Roy
15. Shri Anadi Sahu
16. Shri P.A. Sangma
17. Shri Manabendra Shah
18. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
19. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
20. Shri Ramjilal Suman
21. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
22. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
23. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
24. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
31

32
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Rita Acharya, Deputy Secretary
1. * * *
2* * *
2.1 * * *
2.2 * * *
(The Committee, adjourned at 11.26 
A.M. and re-assembled at 11.50 A.M.)
3. * * *
3.1 * * *
4. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the draft Report on the Constitution
(Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003.
4.1 The Chairman while giving a broad outline of the draft Report stated that the Government
had proposed to keep the size of the Council of Ministers at ten per cent of the strength of the
Lower House in case of unicameral legislatures and ten per cent of the combined strength of the
two Houses in case of bicameral legislatures. However, the Committee had decided to recommend
that it should be kept at fifteen per cent of the total strength of the Lower House only in case
of both unicameral as well as bicameral legislatures.
4.2 He also highlighted another recommendation contained in the draft Report which provided
that a person disqualified under the Anti-Defection law should not hold any remunerative political
post including the post of a Minister. He also pointed out the amendments proposed by the
Committee, that instead of merely contesting the election, it should be explicitly provided in the Bill
that the defector should be declared elected in order to become eligible to be appointed as a
Minister or to a remunerative political post. Accordingly, appropriate amendments in clauses 2, 3
and 4 of the Bill should be carried out to remove the infirmity.
*** Relates to other matters.

33
5. The Committee, then, briefly deliberated on the definition of "remunerative political post" as
defined in the draft Report.
6. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Report without any modification.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.55 
P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on 28 October, 2003.

ANNEXURE

37
ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
5 MAY , 2003
Bill No. 92 of 2003
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-seventh
Amendment) Act, 2003.
2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the
Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed of
the total number of members of both Houses of Parliament.
(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging
to any political party who is disqualified for being a member
of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall
also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under
clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the
date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of
his office as such member would expire or till the date on
which he contests an election to any House of Parliament or
Legislature of a State, whichever is earlier.”
Short title.
Amendment of
article 75.

38
3. In article 164 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the
Chief Minister, in the Council of Ministers in a State shall not
exceed fifteen per cent of the total number of members of the
Legislative Assembly of that State:
Provided that the number of Ministers, including Chief
Minister in a State shall not be less than seven.
(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State
or either House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative
Council belonging to any political party who is disqualified for
being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a
Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period
commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date
on which the term of his office as such member would expire
or till the date on which he contests an election to any House
of Parliament or Legislature of a State, whichever is earlier.”.
4. After article 361A of the Constitution, the following article
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘361B. A member of a House belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a member of the House
under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be
disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for duration
of the period commencing from the date of his
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as
such member would expire or till the date on which he
contests an election to a House, whichever is earlier.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this article, the
expression “House” has the meaning assigned to it in
clause ( a) of paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule.’.
5. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) in paragraph 1, in clause ( b), the words and figure
“paragraph 3 or, as the case may be,” shall be omitted;
(b) in paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph ( 1), for the words
and figures “paragraphs 3, 4 and 5”, the words and figures
“paragraphs 4 and 5” shall be substituted;
(c) paragraph 3 shall be omitted.
Amendment of
article 164.
Insertion of
new article
361B.
Disqualification
for
appointment
on
remunerative
political post.
Amedment of
the Tenth
Schedule.

39
39
ANNEXURE-II
SIZE OF COUNCIL OF MINISTERS AT THE CENTRE AND STATES
Sl. No.  Centre/States/UTs No. of seats No. of seats Size of Percentage
in Lok in Rajya Co uncil of of Strength
Sabha/ Sabha/ Ministers  of Houses of
Legislative Legislative Legislature
Assembly Council
12 3 4 5 6
1. Central Government 543+2(N) 233+12(N) 80 10.1
2. Andhra Pradesh 294 – 39 13.3
3. Arunachal Pradesh 60 – 40 66.6
4. Assam 126 – 36 28.6
5. Bihar 243 96 63 18.6
6. Chhattisgarh 90 – 29 32.2
7. Goa 40 – 13 32.5
8. Gujarat 182 – 16 08.7
9. Haryana 90 – 11 12.2
10. Himachal Pradesh 68 – *17 25.0
11. Jammu and Kashmir @111 36 29 19.7
12. Jharkhand 81 – 25 30.9
13. Karnataka 224 75 48 16.0
14. Kerala 140 – *20 14.3
15. Madhya Pradesh 230 – *50 21.7
16. Maharashtra 288 78 69 18.9
17. Manipur 60 – *35 58.3
18. Meghalaya 60 – 38 63.3
19. Mizoram 40 – 15 37.5
20. Nagaland 60 – *34 56.6
21. Orissa 147 – *24 16.3
22. Punjab 117 – 26 22.2
@ The strength of 111 provided by Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir (T wentieth Amendment) Act, 1987.
* Written responses received from the State Governments.

40
12 3 4 5 6
23. Rajasthan 200 – 40 20.0
24. Sikkim 32 – 17 53.1
25. Tamil Nadu 234 – 27 11.5
26. Tripura 60 – 18 30.0
27. Uttar Pradesh 403 99 72 14.3
28. Uttaranchal 70 – 17 24.3
29. West Bengal 294 – 50 17.0
30. Pondicherry 30 – 6 20.0
31. Delhi 70 – 7 10.0
Information regarding size of Council of Ministers in respect of other States gathered from the respective
websites of State/UT Governments.

41
41
ANNEXURE-IIII
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
5 MAY , 2003
Bill No. 92 of 2003
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2003
(AS REPORTED BY THE D EPARTMENT RELATED S TANDING C OMMITTEE
ON H OME A FFAIRS)
[Words underlined or side-lined indicate the amendments
suggested by the Committee, asterisks indicate omission]
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-seventh
Amendment) Act, 2003.
Short title.

42
2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(lA) The total number of Ministers, including the
Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed
fifteen per cent  of the total number of members of
the House of the People.
(IB) A member of either House of Parliament
belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being
a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a
Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period
commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date
on which the term of his office as such member would
expire or where he contests any election to either House
of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the
date on which he is declared elected,  whichever is earlier.”.
3. In article 164 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(lA) The total number of Ministers, including the
Chief Minister, in the Council of Ministers in a State shall not
exceed fifteen per cent  of the total number of members of
the Legislative Assembly of that State * * * :
Provided that the number of Ministers, including Chief
Minister in a State shall not be less than twelve.
(lB) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State
or either House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative
Council belonging to any political party who is disqualified for
being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a
Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period
commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date
on which the term of his office as such member would
expire or where he contests any election to the
Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council as the
case may be, before the expiry of such period, till the
date on which he is declared elected, whichever is
earlier”.
4. After article 36lA of the Constitution, the following article
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘361B. A member of a House belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a member of the House
under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be
disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for
duration of the period commencing from the date of his
Amendment of
article 75.
Disqualification
for
appointment
on
remunerative
political post.
Amendment of
article 164.
Insertion of
new article
361B.

43
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as
such member would expire or till the date on which he
contests an election to a House and is declared elected
whichever is earlier.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this article,—
(a) the expression “House” has the meaning
assigned to it in clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the Tenth
Schedule;
(b) the expression “remunerative political post”
means any office-
(i) under the Central Government or the
State Government where the salary or remuneration
for such office is paid out of the public revenue of
the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be; or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or
not, which is wholly or partially owned by the
Central Government or the State Government and
the salary or remuneration for such office is paid by
such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is
compensatory in nature.’.
5. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) in paragraph 1, in clause ( b), the words and figure
“paragraph 3 or, as the case may be,” shall be omitted;
(b) in paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words
and figures “paragraphs 3, 4 and 5”, the words and figures
“paragraphs 4 and 5” shall be substituted;
(c) paragraph 3 shall be omitted.
Amendment of
the Tenth
Schedule.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.