PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 135
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
BORDER FENCING AND FLOODLIGHTING PROJECTS
OF INDO-PAK BORDER

29
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
BORDER FENCING AND FLOODLIGHTING PROJECTS
OF INDO-PAK BORDER
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-261

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)
2. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE S UB-COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (ii)
3. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—13
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................. 14—18
6. R ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 19—28

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
∝ 2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
Δ 3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
@7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
∉ 8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
•18. Shri Raghunath Jha
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(i)
∝ Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 consequent upon induction in Union Council of Ministers.
Δ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  9th April, 2008 consequent upon expiration of term of membership of the Rajya Sabha.
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  2nd April, 2008 consequent upon expiration of term of membership of the Rajya Sabha.
∉ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  27th March, 2008 consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from the membership of
the Rajya Sabha from that date.
• Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 consequent upon induction in Union Council of Ministers.
* Nominated w.e.f.  12th December, 2007 vice  Shri T.K. Hamza who is nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.

SUB-COMMITTEE ON
BORDER FENCING AND FLOODLIGHTING PROJECTS
(Constituted on 13 April, 2007)
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
3. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
(Re-constituted on 9 August, 2007)
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
3. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti
@5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
@ Ceased to be Member of Main Committee and consequently of the sub-Committee also, w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 on assumption
of office of MOS in the Union Council of Ministers.
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of
Indo-Pak Border pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The Sub-Committee on Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs was constituted on 13th April, 2007 for in-
depth examination of the Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects. The Sub-Committee was
reconstituted on 9th August, 2007.
3. The Sub-Committee heard the presentation of the representatives of Ministry of Home
Affairs on 1st June, 2007. The Secretary, Border Management gave a detailed account of various
activities being undertaken by the Government under the border fencing and floodlighting projects.
4. The Sub-Committee held five sittings and undertook study visits to border areas of
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab. As decided by the Sub-Committee in its
meeting held on 1st June, 2007, it has restricted itself to the Indo-Pak border in the current study.
5. During the on-the-spot study visit to border areas of Rajasthan and Gujarat, certain issues
concerning the implementation of the project were brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee.
The Sub-Committee heard the views of the representatives of BSF and CPWD in its meeting held
on 22nd October, 2007. The Sub-Committee was informed that the Gujarat Sector of Indo-Pak
Border suffered from geo-climatic disadvantages for border fencing and floodlighting. This sector
had faced disastrous earthquake in Bhuj area in 2001 followed by flood in 2003. The area had also
received unprecedented downpour in 2006-07 which led to the cost and time overrun of the
project. The marshy land with high degree of salinity derailed the project of Border Fencing.
Moreover, ban on mining of stones and sand by the State Government further delayed the projects
in the Sector as the material had to be carted from Rajasthan. The Sub-Committee was also
informed that due to non-release of funds in time, the construction work had come to a standstill.
6. The Sub-Committee was further informed that the final anticipated revised cost of the
project stood of Rs. 1210 crore. Sanction for the upgradation works and approval of the revised
estimates were awaited since August, 2007. The project required CCS approval for the revised cost
of Rs. 1210 crore for border works in the Gujarat Sector. The Convenor of the Sub-Committee
in his letter dated 25 October, 2007 brought all these facts to the notice of the Home Minister and
requested him that appropriate funds, as per the revised estimate, be released for completion of the
project in time.
7. In its meetings held on 30th November, 2007 and 6th May, 2008 the Sub-Committee held
internal discussions on the subject. The Convenor of the Sub-Committee submitted the report to
the main Committee for consideration and adoption.
8. The Committee in its sitting held on 3rd October, 2008 considered and adopted the report.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
3 October, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
OVERVIEW OF BORDER AREAS
1.1 The Sub-Committee was apprised by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the necessity for
border fencing and floodlighting arose primarily because of the fact that the border areas of the
country specially Indo Bangladesh and Indo-Pak borders were vulnerable to infiltration and various
type of illegal activities from across the border which were prejudicial to the interest of the nation.
As the physical patrolling of the areas had not proved adequate to stop such activities along the
long stretch of the border, border fencing and floodlighting projects had been chalked out as a
mechanism to control such infiltration and cross border illegal activities.
1.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Sub-Committee that Punjab Action Plan (PAP)
was chalked out to counter the insurgency activities in the State, including measures for more
effective policing of the border, better intelligence gathering, concerted action to check smuggling,
better policing of the villages and an integrated approach for development of border districts.
Punjab Action Plan included fencing and floodlighting of the border, electronic surveillance and
laying of jeepable tracks etc. Subsequently, the Government also approved proposals for fencing
and floodlighting the Rajasthan, Gujarat and the Jammu international borders.
1.3 The details of the fencing and floodlighting projects including other aspects, as furnished
by the Ministry of Home Affairs in their background note and during the meetings of the sub-
Committee, are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
Punjab Action Plan
1.4.1 The Ministry has stated that in 1988, a Punjab Action Plan was prepared to counter the
insurgent activities in Punjab. Various working groups were constituted to deal with manpower,
technology, cost, time-schedule and all other aspects required to implement PAP. Subsequently on
20th April, 1988 High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) was constituted, under the
chairmanship of Home Secretary, to take various measures, including fencing and floodlighting on
Indo-Pak border.
1.4.2 In Punjab, fencing/floodlighting works were started in May, 1988 and completed in
November, 1993. A total length of 461 km had been fenced and floodlit in the entire Punjab sector,
at a total cost of Rs. 147.65 crore. It was stated that as a result of fencing/floodlighting of the
Punjab sector, terrorism and other anti-national activities from across the border have been checked
to a large extent. Fencing/floodlighting in this sector is maintained by BSF.
Rajasthan Border
1.5.1 A total length of 1048 kms. of fencing and 1023 km floodlighting in the Rajasthan sector
was completed in the year 1999 at a cost of Rs. 401.64 crore. 275 Kms. of border roads have
also been constructed on Rajasthan border to facilitate patrolling by BSF. It was stated that as a
result of fencing/floodlighting of the Rajasthan sector, terrorism and other anti-national activities
from across the border had been checked to a large extent. The fencing and floodlighting in this
sector is also maintained by BSF.

2
Gujarat Border
1.6.1 The Indo-Pak border in Gujarat extends from the mouth of Sir Creek to the tri-junction of
the Mavasari in Banaskantha District (Gujarat) and Bakasur in Barmer District (Rajasthan) (a length
of 508 km); and is known as Rann of Kutch, comprising Great Rann and Little Rann. It is bounded
in the South by the Gulf of Kutch, in the West by Indian Ocean and in the North-East and South-
East by the Districts of Banaskantha, Mehsana and Kutch.
1.6.2 The border areas of Gujarat and Rann are sparsely inhabited and the harsh climate poses
many problems to the troops in manning it effectively. BSF Border Out Posts are situated 20 to
50 kms. inward from the International Border. The terrain is non-negotiable during the monsoon
and post-monsoon seasons. As a result, proper border vigil is not possible and the area is
increasingly exploited by the smugglers/ISI agents for their nefarious activities. The Ministry stated
that to prevent the exploitation of the Gujarat border by anti-national elements, BSF had proposed
construction of fencing, floodlighting and border roads in the feasible stretches in the Gujarat
sector of Indo-Pak border to facilitate forward shift of the BSF Posts towards the International
Border. This proposal was approved, in principle, by High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC)
in its meeting held on 8th January, 1997 and it was decided that a suitable design, taking into
consideration the physical conditions (on account of the area becoming marshy during rainy
season), should jointly be evolved by BSF and CPWD.
1.6.3 It was further stated that in order to check illegal activities, Government approved a
comprehensive proposal for construction of fencing/floodlighting on raised embankment,
construction of link roads, BOPs and border roads at an estimated cost of Rs. 380 crore on the
Gujarat border. A total length of 310 km. of fencing and floodlighting was approved. Out of this,
215 Km. of fencing was allocated to CPWD and 95 km to NBCC. Out of this, fencing on a stretch
of 217 km. and floodlighting on 178 km. had been completed as on 31st March, 2007. The
fencing is done by CPWD and NBCC and floodlighting by CPWD. The remaining work is under
progress. The fencing and floodlighting work in Gujarat was earlier targeted to be completed by
31st March, 2007. It was stated that the targets could not be achieved due to unprecedented rains
in Gujarat during the year 2006.
1.6.4 The sub-Committee was informed that as a result of fencing/floodlighting of the Gujarat
sector, terrorism and other anti-national activities from across the border had been checked to a
large extent. The fencing and floodlighting work in this sector is maintained by CPWD.
Jammu International Border
1.7.1 The Ministry stated that the fencing of 180 Km and floodlighting of 195.8 km of
International Border in Jammu sector were approved by the Cabinet in March, 1995 at an estimated
cost of Rs. 71.76 crore. The fencing work in this sector had been completed, whereas out of
195.80 km of floodlighting, only 174.36 Km. could be completed. It was stated that the remaining
work would be completed soon. The sub-Committee was informed that as a result of fencing/
floodlighting of the Jammu sector, terrorism and other anti-national activities from across the
border had been checked to a large extent. The fencing and floodlighting work in this sector is
maintained by BSF.
Progress of Fencing in Indo Pak Border
1.8.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its presentation before the sub-Committee on 1st June, 2007
furnished the following information in regard to the progress of fencing as well as floodlighting on
Indo-Pak Border:—

3
(Length in Kms.)
Name of the Border Sanctioned Completed Remaining
State length for fencing length
Punjab 553 461 462.45 Fencing
Completed
Rajasthan 1037 1056.63* 1048.27 Fencing
Completed
Jammu 210 180 184.59 –
International
Border
Gujarat 508 310 217 93
T
OTAL: 2308 2007.63 1912.31 93
* Length is more due to topographical factors/alignment of fencing.
Progress of Floodlighting in Indo Pak Border
(Length in Kms.)
Name of the Border Sanctioned Completed Remaining
State length Floodlighting length
Punjab 553 460.72 460.74 –
Rajasthan 1037 1022.80 1022.80 –
Jammu 210 195.80 174.36 21.44
International
Border
Gujarat 508 310 178 132
T
OTAL: 2308 1989.32 1831.54 157.80
Proposal for shifting of fencing close to the border
1.9.1 The sub-Committee was apprised that due to heavy exchange of fire from across the
border, in the stretch of 38.015 km of International Border (IB) fence was erected at a distance,
varying from 400 m to 1.5 km away from the IB in the Jammu sector . After the ceasefire, there
were representations from the border inhabitants, political parties and others to shift the fence
closer to the IB.
1.9.2 The matter was accordingly examined in the Ministry of Home Affairs and it was decided
to shift 38.015 km of fencing erected on Jammu IB closer to the border to facilitate the border
inhabitants to cultivate their lands without problem.
1.9.3 Re-alignment and construction of 38.013 km fencing closer to IB in Jammu sector was
approved by the HLEC in its 15th meeting held on 9th February, 2007 at an estimated cost of
Rs. 28.34 crore.

4
CHAPTER-II
ON-THE-SPOT STUDY OF BORDER AREAS OF RAJASTHAN AND GUJARAT
2.1 The Sub-Committee visited Jaisalmer and Barmer sectors on 29th and 30th June, 2007.
During its visit, the following issues came up for special mention:—
• SHQ BSF Jaisalmer is one of the largest sectors having an area of responsibility of
470 kms., with some Battalions for taking care of 122 BOPs and 187 gates.
• The areas in Pakistan opposite to the Jaisalmer sector are Bahawalpur, Rahimyar Khan,
Ghotki, Sukkur and Khairpur Mir. The areas opposite to Barmer Sector are Khairpur,
Sanghar, Umarkot and Mithi Distts. of Sindh province.
• The terrain is generally sandy with permanent and shifting sand dunes of varying
height of 10 to 50 metres.
• There was scarcity of water and water support system extends from 45 to 150 Kms.
• The personnel posted there are vulnerable to some of the health hazards like sunstroke,
dehydration, death due to snake-bite, water prone diseases, vision problem and
breathing problems due to duststorm.
• Length of double fencing with Border Fencing Light (BFL) is 437.5 Kms. and Length
of experimental single fencing (with BFL) in shifting sand area is 6.5 Kms. A length
of 26 Kms. in 5 stretches for construction of single fencing (with BFL) is underway.
• Single Fence was not successful and was mostly damaged/buried/uprooted/tilted due to
shifting sand dunes. However, experimental fencing done in 6.5 kms. has been
successful even after three summers and based on this success, fencing work of 26
kms. is being undertaken. Proposal for lighting of 26 Kms. border area is under
submission.
• Crime, smuggling of drugs, gold, silver were rampant. However, with the erection of
fencing, floodlighting and forward shifting of BOPs in 1996, the smuggling had come
down to zero level.
• Besides routine patrolling, zero line patrolling is also done by each BOP once a week.
• Four types of tracks namely (i) Zero line track, (ii) Fencing track, (iii) Gypsy track,
(vi) Adm track are maintained meticulously as there is no metal/gravel road.
• The sector is organizing events which are aimed to promote a sense of mutual
cooperation, trust, goodwill and coordination with local community and thereby
enhancing the image of BSF among local population. Various civic action programmes
like medical camps, blood donation camp, pulse polio camp and distribution of
educational material in border villages were also undertaken.
2.2 The following issues were placed before the sub-Committee for immediate consideration:
• Lateral and Axial Roads upto the BOPs may be constructed to enhance the operational
efficiency.
4

5
• One tractor may be provided to each company for maintenance of border tracks.
• There is scarcity of water for use of BSF Personnel, tree-plantation and wildlife along
BOP line. A water pipe line needs to be provided.
• Opening of Kendriya Vidyalaya may be expedited.
• Desert/remote areas allowance and ration money may be granted.
• Leave of BSF personnel maybe granted sympathetically.
• Operational problems, as one Battalion is entrusted on an average with the task of
manning 60-62 kms., which proves not only arduous but sometimes unmanageable.
Observations/Recommendations
2.3.1 The Committee hails the stellar role of BSF in guarding the country’s frontiers
under tremendous adverse circumstances due to geographical, climatic and other conditions.
Our borders are secure due to their diligence, loyalty and commitment to their arduous
duty. The Committee duly acknowledges their patriotism. In this context, the Committee
strongly recommends that the Government should provide better conditions of living and
better conditions of service to BSF personnel. The Committee also recommends to the
Government to grant desert/remote areas allowance and ration money. The Government
should also expedite the opening of Kendriya Vidyalaya in the border areas so that the
education of the children of the BSF Jawans is not neglected on account of posting in
frontier areas.
2.3.2 The Committee also came across incidents of death of BSF personnel due to snake
bite coupled with the time taken to move the victims to hospital located far off from the
border. One of the solution that was suggested to the sub-Committee was that the BSF
personnel be provided with knee-high boots. The Committee, agreeing to the suggestion,
strongly, recommends that the Government should make a provision for supplying knee-
high boots to the BSF personnel.
2.3.3 The Committee is of the view that that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
into account the geographical and topographical location of Jaisalmer and Barmer sectors
for chalking out logistic strategy for border surveillance and management. This sector is
one of the largest having an area of 470 kms. where BSF has been entrusted with the task
of taking care of 122 BOPs and 187 gates. Since the terrain of these sectors is sandy,
marred with permanent and shifting sand dunes of varying height of 10 to 50 metres, a well
chalked out strategy is the need of the hour. Regular maintenance and repairing of roads
would ensure continued surveillance of the border areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should provide a tractor to each company for
regular repairing and maintenance of roads along the border areas. The BSF should get the
required basic infrastructure for monitoring the border, for example, lateral and axial roads
upto the BOPs to enhance the operational efficiency. The task of surveillance should be
carefully examined so that effective monitoring mechanism is put in place. At present, one
Battalion is entrusted on an average with the task of manning 60-62 kms. which inhibits
operational efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should look into the matter at the earliest.
2.3.4 The Committee was given to understand that about Rs. 3 crore was spent on water
supply for the BSF personnel. It was suggested that a water pipeline along the BOP line may
be provided for use of BSF personnel as well as for the wildlife and tree plantations. The

6
Committee agrees that laying of pipelines along the border would be economical as
compared to the supply of water by the water tankers and accordingly recommends the
same for early implementation.
2.3.5 The Committee notes that the place of worship in the border areas are closely
intertwined with daily life of BSF Jawans. It is of the considered view of the Committee that
if water tank/reservoirs/lakes could be constructed near such places of worship, it would to
a great extend solve the daily necessity of the Jawans as well as the cattle of the farmers.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should come out
with suitable scheme for providing water tanks/reservoirs/lakes near the places of worship
located near the frontier areas.
2.4 The Sub-Committee visited Bhuj Sector on 1st July, 2007. The following issues came up
for special mention in the sector:
• The Gujarat sector of Bhuj has been entrusted to SHQ Bhuj to look after the border
along the Great Rann of Kutch and Creek areas. The international border between
Kutch on Indian side and Sind Province on the Pakistan side, has a total length of 301
kms. This border can be divided into three prominent segments (i) Land border in
Great Rann of Kutch (197 kms.); (ii) Creek Areas (36 kms.); (iii) Sir Creek (68 kms.).
• The terrain is salty waste land with no vegetation in the entire area-except on bets
(raised ground) where small bushes are available. The area gets inunadated with the
onset of monsoon as well as the underground configuration of land which restricts
absorption of water contents in it. Most of the area remains cut off from normal
activities due to inundation and difficulties of movement due to marshy and boggy
land.
• Scorching heat waves mixed with saline effect makes living conditions extremely
inhospitable.
• Creek areas are extremely difficult operational proposition where operations are
completely dependent upon the natural factors of tide timing which are related to lunar
activities. The area is totally marshy and swampy.
• The area of Sir Creek is disputed due to different perceptions of India and Pakistan.
It is navigable only during high tide by medium/mechanized crafts and Fast Patrol
Boats (FPBs). The IB runs along the mid-stream of Sir Creek. On the Pakistan side,
mainland is comparatively closer to Sir Creek, hence its vigil is much easier for Pak
forces.
• Pakistan has started showing added interest in this area and has got a good built up
of its forces opposite creek area. Due to dispute in the Sir Creek sector, a rogue
action by Pak cannot be ruled out. However, any major intrusion will be extremely
difficult due to marshy land and presence of mangroves.
• The most likely threat is of infiltration and smuggling through creeks. As the creeks
are inter-connected, once the enemy makes an entry to one of the major creeks from
the IB, he can move into any of the creeks in small craft.
• Under domination plan, patrolling by two FPBs supported by medium/mechanized
crafts deployed at Mal Creek/Nar Creek is done. Air Recce is carried out every
fortnight over the creek area. Unmanned Aerial vehicle (UAV) missions are also planned
and executed. Three Floating BOPs are also deployed at a time during fair weather at
certain locations.

7
• Emergency evacuation is done by IAF on requisition from BSF. No helicopters are
stationed at Bhuj/Naliya. Helicopter has to come from Jamnagar which will be reaching
at the place of incident after approx 2 1 to 3 hours after refuelling.
• A total of 28 BOPs were sanctioned, out of which 16 and 12 were required to be
constructed by CPWD and NBCC, respectively. Construction work of 3 BOPs had
been completed by the CPWD and remaining BOPs are under construction. However,
in regard to construction of 12 BOPs by NBCC, 11 are under construction and one
BOP is yet to be started.
• Regarding construction of border road, a total length of 134 kms. is required to be
constructed. Construction of 73.5 kms. and 60.5 kms. road has been allotted to
CPWD and NBCC, respectively. Out of 73.5 kms., CPWD had constructed 49 Kms.
of road. However, NBCC has not completed any work and construction of road by it
was underway.
• Link roads are also in bad shape. 90 kms. of link roads was required to be completed.
From Dharamshala to BOP Vigokot, 60 kms. of road was completed. However, it was
badly damaged due to heavy vehicular traffic of NBCC/CPWD and some portion of it
was repaired by CPWD. From Dharamshala to BOP Bediabet, construction of 19 kms.
has been completed. However, road was damaged due to the above mentioned reasons
and required immediate repair. Construction of remaining link roads is under progress
and there was need to expedite the work.
• Fencing work of 134 kms. had been sanctioned, out of which work on 73.5 Kms. and
60.5 kms. was to be done by the CPWD and NBCC, respectively. CPWD and NBCC
had completed fencing work on 37 kms. and 23 kms., respectively and work was in
progress on 68.55 kms. Work on the remaining 5.54 kms. has not started. The same
length of 134 kms. has been sanctioned for floodlighting work to be executed by
CPWD. Work on 47 Kms. was completed but the same was not functional. Work on
76 kms. was in progress and while work on 11 kms. was to be started.
2.4.1 The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 22nd October, 2007 reviewed the progress made
in regard to border fencing works on Indo Pak border in Gujarat Sector.
2.4.2 As stated elsewhere in this report, the sub-Committee was informed that the Gujarat Sector
of Indo-Pak Border has got geo-climatic disadvantages for border fencing and floodlighting
projects. This sector faced disastrous earthquake in Bhuj area in 2001 followed by flood in 2003.
The area received unprecedented downpour in 2006-07 which led to the cost and time overrun of
the project. Besides, the devastating earthquake in 2001 had led to dislocation of entire logistics and
infrastructure and the 50 years’ record breaking flood has led to site inundation for more than a
year. The marshy land has got high degree of salinity which derailed the project of border fencing.
Moreover, ban on mining of stones and sand by the State Government delayed the projects in the
Tharad Sector as the material was to be carted from Rajasthan. All these conditions have led to
time and cost overrun of the projects. The sub-Committee was informed that due to non-release
of funds in time, the construction work had come to a standstill. Only a meager budget allocation
i.e., to the tune of Rs. 14 crore against total current demand of Rs. 101 crore upto the second
quarter of the last financial year, had been released.
2.4.3 As already stated in this report, the Sub-Committee was also informed that the final
anticipated revised cost stood to the tune of Rs. 1210 crore. The increase in the project was also
due to increase in the scope of work and escalation in the cost of construction material. Sanction
of the upgradation works and approval of the revised estimates were awaited since August 2007.
The project requires CCS approval for the revised cost of Rs. 1210 crore for border works in the
Gujarat Sector.

8
Observations/Recommendations
2.5.1 The Committee understands that the geographical and topographical location of the
region as well as remoteness and tough terrain conditions of Rann have greatly hampered
the border fencing and floodlighting projects. The final anticipated revised cost to the tune
of Rs. 1210 crore was under the consideration of CCS. The Committee recommends that the
revised cost may be expeditiously approved by CCS for early completion of the works.
2.5.2 The Committee observes that the existing system of emergency evacuation in the
Bhuj/Naliya sector by IAF on requisition from BSF is not a proper arrangement as the
helicopter has to fly to the place of incident from Jamnagar after refuelling. The term
‘emergency’ evacuation’ has no meaning as disaster will not wait for hours before it strikes.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that an alternative arrangement may be put in
place.
2.5.3 The Committee is constrained to observe that the work of construction of border
roads has not been taken up seriously. Out of total length of 134 kms. which was required
to be constructed, 73.5 Kms. road has been allotted to CPWD and 60.5 kms. to the NBCC.
Out of 73.5 kms, CPWD has constructed only 49 Kms. road. NBCC too has not completed
its work. The Committee strongly recommends that Government must make an inquiry into
the matter and direct the agencies concerned to complete the construction of border roads
without further delay, for effective patrolling of the border areas by BSF personnel.
2.5.4 The Committee further recommends that the construction of the remaining link
roads (to the extent of 21 kms.) be expedited. The reported wearing and tearing of the link
roads from Dharamshala to BOP Vigokot and Dharamshala to BOP Bediabet, due to heavy
vehicular traffic of NBCC/CPWD  need immediate attention for repair.
2.5.5 The Committee has been given to understand that Creek Sector is a porous border.
A number of small infiltration in collusion with anti-national elements and terrorists, enter
the country through this border. Smuggling of fake currency notes, narcotics, arms and
ammunition, explosives and trafficking of illegal immigrants, are some of the common anti-
national activities that are carried out through this area. Creek area is reportedly used as
a launch pad for terrorist activities and gathering information on patrolling pattern of the
country. All these activities indicate the nefarious design of the forces inimical to the
country’s interests, to widen the scope of terrorism to coastal areas. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home affairs should immediately pay
attention towards strengthening of the monitoring mechanism in the Bhuj Sector, and plug
the porous points in the border. Sooner it is done better it would be in the national interest.

9
9
CHAPTER-III
ON THE SPOT STUDY OF BORDER AREAS OF JAMMU AND PUNJAB
3.1 The Sub-Committee visited border areas of Jammu and Punjab from 25th to 28th May, 2008.
During its visit to Jammu, the following issues came up for special mention:—
• The Government decided to fence the Jammu International Border in 1994 and
sanctioned the project in March, 1995. The construction work was started by the
CPWD in July, 1995.
• Pakistan opposed erecting the fence as it considered the entire territory of J&K as
disputed and started heavy firing and shelling. Due to inability of CPWD to further
carry on with the project, the work was stopped just after 5 days.
• The project was finally entrusted to BSF in July, 2000, which started the work in
January, 2001. Pakistan again tried to stop the work by resorting to heavy firing and
shelling.
• To provide cover to the persons engaged in fencing work, the BSF first raised a
protective bund all along the border. Despite fierce opposition from Pakistan, the BSF
continued with the task and completed the project in November, 2005. 6 BSF personnel
were killed and 32 injured due to the Pakistani firing.
• The sanctioned cost of the project including floodlighting was Rs. 75.24 crore for a
length of 186 Kms. whereas the BSF managed to construct the same in Rs. 64.69
crore only.
• The fencing was done on emergent basis to check infiltration of militants. Due to firing
and shelling at some places, the fence had to be erected about 0.5 to 1.5 Kms. inside
Indian territory from the border. Therefore, a sizable chunk of agricultural land
remained ahead of the fence.
• After declaration of ceasefire in November, 2003, it was decided to realign 38 Kms.
of fence and shift it closure to the border to obviate the problems of farmers and bring
about 4300 acres of land inside the fencing. The work on the same was underway and
likely to be completed soon.
• Some farmers have represented that they have not been paid compensation for a long
time.
Observation/Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee was apprised that the bund which was constructed in order to provide
security cover to the persons engaged in fencing work, had now become counterproductive
and was helping militants. It has been reported that Pakistan has made a lot of construction
after ceasefire. It had constructed 97 OP Towers and 162 barracks. The Committee,
therefore, strongly feels that Government of India should upgrade India’s border
surveillance and military preparedness.

10
3.3 The Sub-Committee visited border areas of Punjab on 26th and 27th May, 2008. It visited
Amritsar Sector on 26th and Ferozpur Sector on 27th May, 2008. The main issues that came up
for special mention are:—
• During the year 1989-93, 475 Kms. long fence and 468 Kms. long floodlighting along
the international border in Punjab Frontier was completed and handed over to BSF. The
border is maintained by battalions of BSF.
• Border belt of Punjab has two prominent rivers namely, Ravi and Sutlej which flows
to Pakistan alongwith several nallahs and its tributaries. The rivers, nallahs and
tributaries have created some gaps during the floods in past.
• Fence in these stretches has been washed away and there are 27 such gaps. There
are 373 gates out of which 240 gates were being opened and remaining 125 gates
were closed as there was Government land ahead of the fencing.
• Opening timings of the gates are 7.00 A.M. to 5.30 P.M. in summer and 8.00 A.M.
to 4.30 P.M. in winter. Average number of farmers crossing the gates per day is 1550.
Opening times are increased during sowing and harvesting seasons.
• Out of 475 Kms. of fencing in Punjab, 171 Kms. fencing has been done with concrete
base.
• In the Abohar and Ferozpur Sectors, the project of shifting about 22.5 Kms. of
fencing close to border with concrete base has been sanctioned and land acquisition
is under process. 32.3 Kms. long fencing is, also proposed to be shifted in Gurudaspur
Sector and the proposal is under consideration.
• There is need for upgradation of border floodlights. Most of the equipments have
outlived their life and cables have also been damaged due to various reasons. It has
been recommended to completely replace the existing Border Flood Light (BFL)
system. It has also been decided to execute a sample job on some stretch. The matter
is in progress.
• Recruitment of 685 women constables is under process and expected to be completed
shortly. These women constables are proposed to be deployed at the fencing gates for
frisking of women farmers.
Observation/Recommendation
3.4.1 Keeping in view the fact that the floodlight equipments have outlived their life and
cables have also become obsolete and damaged, the Committee recommends that it is
necessary to replace the existing Border Flood Light (BFL) system with utmost expedition.
3.5 The sub-Committee sought to know from the Ministry of Home Affairs the status of
realignment of Indo-Pak border fence towards the zero line.
3.5.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its communication dated 4th February, 2008 stated as
under:—
“Government of India has sanctioned the fencing of 186 kms. India-Pakistan Border
in Jammu sector. The construction of fencing on the India-Pakistan Border in Jammu was
executed by BSF within 150 yards from the International Border (IB) except in 38.015 kms.
stretch of International Border (IB), where fence was constructed at varied distances, from
400 mtrs. to 1.5 kms., due to heavy firing by Pakistan at the time of construction. However,

11
in view of the difficulties experienced by the farmers and for enhancing surveillance, the
proposal for forward shifting of this 38.015 kms. border fence, towards the IB, in Jammu
has since been approved by the Government and at present earth levelling work is in
progress. With the forward shifting of this stretch of fence, the problem faced by fanners
is expected to be minimized.”
Observations/Recommendations
3.6.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the
issue of realigning the fence towards the zero line on top priority as large tracks of
cultivable lands lie beyond the present fencing area. The Committee also recommends that
shifting of fencing in Abohar and Ferozpur Sectors be completed in a scheduled time frame
and the proposal of shifting of fencing in Gurudaspur sector be finalized and approved at
the earliest.
3.6.2 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Indian farmers sow the crops
in the large land located between the fencing line and international border areas which is very
fertile, unfortunately, during the harvest time the crops are taken away by the people from the
other side of the border with the connivance and support of the border guarding forces of the
neighboring country. The Committee is of the view that the problem being faced by our farmers
is expected to be minimized with the forward shifting of this stretch offence.
3.6.3 T he Committee further recommends that the recruitment of 685 women constables
to be deployed at the fencing gates for frisking of women farmers, should be completed at
the earliest so that no inconvenience is caused to the women farmers while being frisked.
3.6.4 The Committee has been officially informed that painting of fence is being done
regularly as per specifications and budget and for this purpose funds have been allocated
to the battalions. However, the sub-Committee has been given to understand that there are
some funds constraints in this regard. Considering the condition of weather in the area and
to avoid recurring cost, the Committee recommends that the composition of metal used in
the fence should be changed and fencing may be done by using good quality galvanized iron
or steel.
3.7 The farmers brought to the notice of the sub-Committee, the following problems being
faced by them, for redressal:—
• Farmers of BOP Chakri have requested for construction of pontoon bridge. One
pontoon bridge in the area of 109 Bn is required to be constructed over river Tarna.
• The border belt width has been increased from 5 to 16 Kms. from the IB. The Central
Government funds under BADP are spent in this enlarged border area, thus leaving
very little for actual border belt. The benefits of reservation have also been stretched
due to the above mentioned reasons at the cost of the actual residents of the border
belts.
• Bridge over Ravi river is urgently required at Kakkar village for farmers so that they
can cultivate their land trapped in Tota Enclave.
• Farmers are facing hardships in cultivating their land across the Sutlej river due to non
availability of bridges in some locations.
Observation/Recommendation
3.8.1 The Committee appreciates the hardship being faced by farmers in cultivating their

12
land beyond the rivers Tarna, Sutlej and Ravi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should explore the possibility of construction of a pontoon bridge at Chakri
over river Tarna, bridge over Ravi at Kakkar village and a bridge over Sutlej river.
3.9 The sub-Committee also visited Ferozpur Sector. The following issues came up for special
mention:—
• Like other sectors of Punjab region, cultivation is done upto zero line and there were
some undulating and broken ground at some places with bushy terrain and high growth
of Sarkanda.
• In this sector Sutlej and Kasur are the main water channels. However, there are no
washed away gaps. There are 114 gates and movement of farmers is regulated through
these gates.
• Total land ahead of fencing in the sector is about 15000 acre, out of which 12500 acre
private land and the remaining 2500 acre is Government land with about 150 Kms.
total length of signal fencing except double fencing of 6.6 Kms. at some BOPs. Only
64.5 Kms. fencing is with concrete base.
• There are some proposals for construction of Forward Command Posts which were
under consideration and there was compelling need for early decision.
• There is no Black Top (Pucca) road along the entire stretch of fencing of Punjab
Frontier which is restricting movement, hampering operations as well as adversely
affecting health of personnel.
• Pontoon bridges/belley bridges at some locations are required to facilitate movement of
BSF troops as well as farmers. Axial and lateral roads connecting border fence ‘“gates
at several places need to be constructed.
• One more battalion is required as the Ferozpur Sector is considered as hyper sensitive area.
Observation/Recommendation
3.10.1 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the absence of Black Top (pucca)
road along the entire stretch of fencing of Punjab Frontier. The sub-Committee would like
the Ministry of Home Affairs to look into this grey area and examine the possibility of
construction of pucca roads along the entire stretch of Punjab Frontier. The Committee
strongly. recommends that axial and lateral roads connecting border fence gates, are
required to be constructed for effective patrolling of the border areas.  The Committee is of
the strong view that pontoon bridges/belley bridges are also required to be constructed at
strategic locations to facilitate movement of BSF troops as well as farmers. The Committee
further recommends that the construction of pucca roads and their timely repairing would
improve better surveillance of border areas by the BSF and curbing of infiltration from other
side of the border area.
3.10.2 The Committee desires that the issue of raising one more battalion at the Ferozpur
Sector, may be examined in the Ministry of Home Affairs as this is a hyper sensitive area.
3.10.3 The Committee also urges upon the Ministry for an early decision on construction
of Forward Command post.
General Observations/recommendations
3.11.1 During the course of its study visit, the Committee had occasion to witness the

13
retreat ceremony at the  Wagha Border at Amritsar. The Committee observed that although
a large number of tourists flock this area for w itnessing the r etreat cer emony, the
infrastructure and amenities were inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
there is a need for upgrading amenities for the tourists. The Committee also had an
opportunity to visit JCP Hussainiwala. This place is also home to the Samadhis of Shaheed
Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev. However, this spot is less popular amongst the visitors.
Therefore, there is a need to popularize this place amongst the public. The Committee also
recommends that there is an urgent need for a longer gallery to accommodate more persons
to witness the retreat ceremony as the existing one can accommodate small number of
persons, at JCP Hussainiwala.
3.11.2 It is the understanding of the Sub-Committee that proper management of the Border
spells out many challenges viz.  co-ordination and concerted action by administrative,
diplomatic, security, intelligence, legal, regulatory and financial agencies of the country to
secure the frontiers and subserve its interests. Keeping in view these facts, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should chalk out a strategic Action Plan
which may include construction of effective and quality fencing, floodlighting and concrete
roads along the border areas; deployment of high-tech surveillance equipments on the
border; strengthening of security of coastal borders of the country etc.

14
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
STELLAR ROLE OF BSF IN GUARDING THE COUNTRY’S FRONTIERS
The Committee hails the stellar role of BSF in guarding the country’s frontiers under
tremendous adverse circumstances due to geographical, climatic and other conditions. Our
borders are secure due to their diligence, loyalty and commitment to their arduous duty. The
Committee duly acknowledges their patriotism. In this context, the Committee strongly
recommends that the Government should provide better conditions of living and better conditions
of service to BSF personnel. The Committee also recommends to the Government to grant
desert/remote areas allowance and ration money. The Government should also expedite the
opening of Kendriya Vidyalaya in the border areas so that the education of the children of the
BSF Jawans is not neglected on account of posting in frontier areas. (Para 2.3.1)
INCIDENTS OF DEATH OF BSF PERSONNEL DUE TO SNAKE BITE
The Committee also came across incidents of death of BSF personnel due to snake
bite coupled with the time taken to move the victims to hospital located far off from the
border. One of the solution that was suggested to the sub-Committee was that the BSF
personnel be provided with knee-high boots. The Committee, agreeing to the suggestion,
strongly, recommends that the Government should make a provision for supplying knee-
high boots to the BSF personnel. (Para 2.3.2)
LOGISTIC STRATEGY FOR BORDER SURVEILLANCE AND MANAGEMENT
The Committee is of the view that that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
into account the geographical and topographical location of Jaisalmer and Barmer sectors
for chalking out logistic strategy for border surveillance and management. This sector is
one of the largest having an area of 470 kms. where BSF has been entrusted with the task
of taking care of 122 BOPs and 187 gates. Since the terrain of these sectors is sandy,
marred with permanent and shifting sand dunes of varying height of 10 to 50 metres, a well
chalked out strategy is the need of the hour. Regular maintenance and repairing of roads
would ensure continued surveillance of the border areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should provide a tractor to each company for
regular repairing and maintenance of roads along the border areas. The BSF should get the
required basic infrastructure for monitoring the border, for example, lateral and axial roads
upto the BOFs to enhance the operational efficiency. The task of surveillance should be
carefully examined so that effective monitoring mechanism is put in place. At present, one
Battalion is entrusted on an average with the task of manning 60-62 kms. which inhibits
operational efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should look into the matter at the earliest. (Para 2.3.3)
WATER SUPPLY FOR THE BSF PERSONNEL
The Committee was given to understand that about Rs. 3 crore was spent on water
supply for the BSF personnel. It was suggested that a water pipeline along the BOP line may
be provided for use of BSF personnel as well as for the wildlife and tree plantations. The
Committee agrees that laying of pipelines along the border would be economical as
14

15
compared to the supply of water by the water tankers and accordingly recommends the
same for early implementation. (Para 2.3.4)
The Committee notes that the place of worship in the border areas are closely
intertwined with daily life of BSF Jawans. It is of the considered view of the Committee that
if water tank/reservoirs/lakes could be constructed near such places of worship, it would to
a great extend solve the daily necessity of the Jawans as well as the cattle of the farmers.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should come out
with suitable scheme for providing water tanks/reservoirs/lakes near the places of worship
located near the frontier areas. (Para 2.3.5)
EXPEDITIOUS APPROVAL OF REVISED COST
The Committee understands that the geographical and topographical location of the
region as well as remoteness and tough terrain conditions of Rann have greatly hampered
the border fencing and floodlighting projects. The final anticipated revised cost to the
tune of Rs. 1210 crore was under the consideration of CCS. The Committee recommends
that the revised cost may be expeditiously approved by CCS for early completion of the
works. (Para 2.5.1)
EMERGENCY EVACUATION IN THE BHUJ/NALIYA SECTOR
The Committee observes that the existing system of emergency evacuation in the
Bhuj/Naliya sector by IAF on requisition from BSF is not a proper arrangement as the
helicopter has to fly to the place of incident from Jamnagar after refuelling. The term
‘emergency evacuation’ has no meaning as disaster will not wait for hours before it strikes.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that an alternative arrangement may be put in
place. (Para 2.5.2)
COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF BORDER ROADS WITHOUT FURTHER DELAY
The Committee is constrained to observe that the work of construction of border
roads has not been taken up seriously. Out of total length of 134 Kms. which was required
to be constructed, 73.5 Kms. road has been allotted to CPWD and 60.5 Kms. to the NBCC.
Out of 73.5 Kms., CPWD has constructed only 49 Kms. road. NBCC too has not completed
its work. The Committee strongly recommends that Government must make an inquiry
into the matter and direct the agencies concerned to complete the construction of border
roads without further delay, for effective patrolling of the border areas by BSF personnel.
(Para 2.5.3)
EXPEDITIOUS CONSTRUCTION OF THE REMAINING LINK ROADS
The Committee further recommends that the construction of the remaining link
roads (to the extent of 21 kms.) be expedited. The reported wearing and tearing of the link
roads from Dharamshala to BOP Vigokot and Dharamshala to BOP Bediabet, due to heavy
vehicular traffic of NBCC/CPWD  need immediate attention for repair. (Para 2.5.4)
STRENGTHENING OF THE MONITORING MECHANISM IN THE BHUJ SECTOR
The Committee has been given to understand that Creek Sector is a porous border.
A number of small infiltration in collusion with anti-national elements and terrorists, enter
the country through this border. Smuggling of fake currency notes, narcotics, arms and
ammunition, explosives and trafficking of illegal immigrants, are some of the common anti-

16
national activities that are carried out through this area. Creek area is reportedly used as
a launch pad for terrorist activities and gathering information on patrolling pattern of the
country. All these activities indicate the nefarious design of the forces inimical to the
country’s interests, to widen the scope of terrorism to coastal areas. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home affairs should immediately pay
attention towards strengthening of the monitoring mechanism in the Bhuj Sector, and plug
the porous points in the border. Sooner it is done better it would be in the national interest.
(Para 2.5.5)
UPGRADING INDIA’S BORDER SURVEILLANCE AND MILITARY PREPAREDNESS
The Committee was apprised that the bund which was constructed in order to provide
security cover to the persons engaged in fencing work, had now become counterproductive
and was helping militants. It has been reported that Pakistan has made a lot of construction
after ceasefire. It had constructed 97 OP Towers and 162 barracks. The Committee,
therefore, strongly feels that Government of India should upgrade India’s border
surveillance and military preparedness. (Para 3.2.1)
REPLACEMENT OF THE EXISTING BORDER FLOOD LIGHT (BFL) SYSTEM
Keeping in view the fact that the floodlight equipments have outlived their life and
cables have also become obsolete and damaged, the Committee recommends that it is
necessary to replace the existing Border Flood Light (BFL) system with utmost expedition.
(Para 3.4.1)
REALIGNING THE FENCE TOWARDS THE ZERO LINE ON TOP PRIORITY
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the
issue of realigning the fence towards the zero line on top priority as large tracks of
cultivable lands lie beyond the present fencing area. The Committee also recommends that
shifting of fencing in Abohar and Ferozpur Sectors be completed in a scheduled time-frame
and the proposal of shifting of fencing in Gurudaspur sector be finalized and approved at
the earliest. (Para 3.6.1)
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Indian farmers sow the
crops in the large land located between the fencing line and international border areas
which is very fertile, unfortunately, during the harvest time the crops are taken away by
the people from the other side of the border with the connivance and support of the border
guarding forces of the neighbouring country. The Committee is of the view that the problem
being faced by our farmers is expected to be minimized with the forward shifting of this
stretch of fence. (Para 3.6.2)
WOMEN CONSTABLES TO BE DEPLOYED AT THE FENCING GATES FOR FRISKING OF
WOMEN FARMERS
The Committee further recommends that the recruitment of 685 women constables
to be deployed at the fencing gates for frisking of women farmers should be completed at
the earliest so that no inconvenience is caused to the women farmers while being frisked.
(Para 3.6.3)
CHANGE IN COMPOSITION OF METAL USED IN THE FENCE
The Committee has been officially informed that painting of fence is being done
regularly as per specifications and budget and for this purpose funds have been allocated

17
to the battalions. However, the Committee has been given to understand that there are
some funds constraints in this regard. Considering the condition of weather in the area and
to avoid recurring cost, the Committee recommends that the composition of metal used in
the fence should be changed and fencing may be done by using good quality galvanized iron
or steel. (Para 3.6.4)
CONSTRUCTION OF A PONTOON BRIDGE
The Committee appreciates the hardship being faced by farmers in cultivating their
land beyond the rivers Tarna, Sutlej and Ravi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should explore the possibility of construction of a pontoon bridge at Chakri
over river Tarna, bridge over Ravi at Kakkar village and a bridge over Sutlej river.
(Para 3.8.1)
CONSTRUCTION OF PUCCA ROADS ALONG THE ENTIRE STRETCH OF PUNJAB FRONTIER
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the absence of Black Top (Pucca)
road along the entire stretch of fencing of Punjab Frontier. The Committee would like the
Ministry of Home Affairs to look into this grey area. and examine the possibility of
construction of pucca roads along the entire stretch of Punjab Frontier. The Committee
strongly recommends that axial and lateral roads connecting border fence gates, are
required to be constructed for effective patrolling of the border areas.  The Committee is of
the strong view  that pontoon bridges/belley bridges are also required to be constructed at
strategic locations to facilitate movement of BSF troops as well as farmers. The Committee
further recommends that the construction of pucca roads and their timely repairing would
improve better surveillance of border areas by the BSF and curbing of infiltration from
other side of the border area. (Para 3.10.1)
ONE MORE BATTALION AT THE FEROZPUR SECTOR
The Committee desires that the issue of raising one more battalion at the Ferozpur
Sector, may be examined in the Ministry of Home Affairs as this is a hyper sensitive area.
(Para 3.10.2)
CONSTRUCTION OF FORWARD COMMAND POST
The Committee also urges upon the Ministry for an early decision on construction
of Forward Command post. (Para 3.10.3)
UPGRADING AMENITIES FOR THE TOURISTS
During the course of its study visit, the sub-Committee had occasion to witness the
retreat ceremony at the Wagha Border at Amritsar. The Committee observed that although
a large number of tourists flock this area for w itnessing the r etreat cer emony, the
infrastructure and amenities were inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
there is a need for upgrading amenities for the tourists. The Committee also had an
opportunity to visit JCP Hussainiwala. This place is also home to the Samadhis of Shaheed
Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev. However, this spot is less popular amongst the visitors.
Therefore, there is a need to popularize this place amongst the public. The Committee also
recommends that there is an urgent need for a longer gallery to accommodate more persons
to witness the retreat ceremony as the existing one can accommodate small number of
persons, at JCP Hussainiwala. (Para 3.11.1)

18
CHALLENGES IN PROPER MANAGEMENT OF THE BORDER
It is the understanding of the Committee that proper management of the Border
spells out many challenges viz.  co-ordination and concerted action by administrative,
diplomatic, security, intelligence, legal, regulatory and financial agencies of the country to
secure the frontiers and subserve its interests. Keeping in view these facts, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should chalk out a strategic Action Plan
which may include construction of effective and quality fencing, floodlighting and concrete
roads along the border areas; deployment of high-tech surveillance equipments on the
border; strengthening of security of coastal borders of the country etc. (Para 3.11.2)

19
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 1st June, 2007 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
3. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
4. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri U.N. Panjiar, Secretary (Border Management)
2. Shri P.G. Dhar Chakraborty, Ex. Director, National Institute of Disaster Management
3. Shri S.M. Sahai, Director
4. Shri M.L. Batham, ADIG (Ops), Border Security Force
Representatives from other Organisations
1. Shri H.S. Dogra, ADG, Central Public Works Department
2. Col. A.K. Battoo, Jt. Director, Border Road Organisation
3. Shri R.N. Singh, Dy. G.M., Engineering Projects India Limited
4. Shrimati Sunita Purswani, PM, National Buildings Construction Corporation
2. The Convenor welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the newly constituted Sub-
Committee on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects and gave a brief idea about its mandate
and how it may proceed in its examination of the subject. He also apprised the Members of the
fact that though Home Secretary was asked to make the presentation on the subject because of
his prior engagement of visit to J and K, he had requested for exemption from personal appearance
which had been agreed to. Therefore, in his place Shri Umesh Narayan Panjiar, Secretary, Border
Management had been deputed for the presentation.
3. After a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee decided that it will be in the fitness of things
if it visits some of border areas in Rajasthan and Gujarat on Indo-Pakistan Border and if necessary
some North Eastern States on Indo-Bangladesh Border later on. The Sub-Committee proposed that
21

22
the visit may tentatively take place in the last week of June, 2007 to make on the spot study of
the implementation of the project. It authorized its Convenor to approach the Chairperson of the
Committee on Home Affairs for obtaining necessary approval of the Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the
visit.
(At this stage the witnesses were called to the meeting)
4. The Convenor then welcomed the Secretary, Border Management and other officials
accompanying him.
5. The Secretary (BM) then made a powerpoint presentation on the subject explaining details
of India’s International Borders, rationale for border fencing, Border Fencing Projects along Indo-
Bangladesh Border, fast track mechanism for border works, phases of fencing along Indo-
Bangladesh Border, progress of flood lighting along Indo-Bangladesh Border. He also explained
about pilot Project in WB sector, reasons for shortfall, stretches of settlements within 150 yards
of Indo-Bangladesh Border, undemarcated boundary between India and Bangladesh, adverse
positions, agencies engaged in fencing work along Indo-Bangladesh Border, third party inspection,
financial progress for fencing/road works along Indo-Bangladesh Border and Phase-III fencing
along Indo-Bangladesh Border. As regards the Indo-Pakistan Border the Secretary (BM) highlighted
in detail, the progress of fencing therein, progress of floodlighting, shifting of fencing close to
border in Jammu and fencing of LOC in J and K.
6. Thereafter, the Convenor inquired whether Government had any proposal to fence Indo-
Nepal border as there were reports of large scale smuggling of arms and drugs due to its porosity.
He also examined about per Km cost of expenditure on fencing and about smuggling of coal from
India through Meghalaya border. Secretary, Border Management replied that at present there was
no proposal to fence Indo Nepal border. He however said that the border had been strengthened
by posting SSB there. Earlier State Police were performing that function. The Secretary apprised
the Committee that about Rupees 70 lakhs was the cost of fencing per kilometre.
7. One Member enquired why bridges, floodlights were not provided on border roads and why
fencing was done 150 yards away from IB/Zero point. He also enquired about rehabilitation of
those persons whose land had been acquired for fencing and if border fencing was considered a
defence structure. Secretary, BM responded that bridges and floodlighting were there on roads and
not on fencing areas. He also responded by saying that fencing at 150 yards was based on some
understanding between India and Bangladesh and that it was no a defence structure.
8. Another Member enquired whether Government had thought of having a permanent
structure instead of fencing as fencing required huge recurring expenditure and had limited lifespan.
It was explained that fencing besides having the benefit of visibility also did not require much
recurring expenses as coating etc. were done by consulting experts in the field.
9. A verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept.
10. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

23
II
SECOND MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Thursday, 28 June, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
3. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
4. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri S.K. Swami, Director
2. Shri R.S. Panwar, DIG (Ops.), BSF
The Convenor welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Sub-Committee. He then
welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and Border Security Forces.
2. The representatives of the Ministry and BSF then made a detailed presentation on the
forthcoming visit of the Sub-Committee to certain border areas of Rajasthan and Gujarat.
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
23

24
I
FIRST MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, 22 October, 2007 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
3. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and official of the Ministry of Home
Affairs to the meeting of the Sub-Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting.
He also welcomed Director-General, BSF and asked him to make a presentation on the subject
under the consideration of the Sub-Committee.
3. The Director-General, BSF, thereafter, made a presentation with the help of slide. After the
presentation the convenor and the members raised the queries pertaining to issuance of I-cards to
farmers who have their lands on both sides of the fence; Legal hurdles in fencing the border; and
Agencies involved in technical assistance.
4. Another Member of the Sub-Committee raised the problems of farmers in border areas of
Punjab regarding duration allowed across the fences for farming work and also regarding behaviour
of BSF personnel towards the farmers. He suggested that the fencing should be done on the zero
line.
5. Thereafter, a brief presentation was made by the officials of CPWD on the subject
highlighting the achievements and problems faced by them. The Convenor asked about the
problems faced by officials of CPWD in fencing and renovating fences on the border.
6. Some other queries were also raised by the Convenor which were accordingly clarified by
the officials of CPWD and BSF.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
7. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 12.25 
P.M.
24

25
II
SECOND MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 1.30 P.M. on Friday, 30 November, 2007 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Sub-Committee
and apprised them that the meeting had been convened to decide its tour programme.
3. After a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee decided to visit some of the border areas in
the States of J and K and Punjab to make first hand assessment of the implementation of fencing
and floodlighting projects in the border areas during the inter-session period, after the completion
of the Winter Session of Parliament.
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 1.45 
P.M.
25

26
III
THIRD MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 6 May, 2008 in Room ‘63’, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Mohan Singh — Convenor
2. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
3. Shri Biren Singh Engti
4. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Sub-Committee.
3. The Sub-Committee noted that it could not visit border areas of Punjab and J and K, though
permission of Hon’ble Chairman was obtained, due to the busy schedule of the main Committee.
The Sub-Committee, after some discussion, decided to undertake visits to the border areas of
Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir and the North Eastern States to make first hand assessment of the
implementation of fencing and floodlighting projects, during the inter-session period, following the
Budget Session (2008) of Parliament.
3.1 The Sub-Committee authorized its Convener to request the Chairperson, Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for
granting permission to the Sub-Committee to undertake the proposed study visit.
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
26

27
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 3rd October, 2008 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Iliyas Azmi
9. Shri Ajit Jogi
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
for the day.
3. The Chairperson informed the Members that the Ministry of Home Affairs had furnished a
report on the security scenario in Delhi Metro Network and the action to be taken thereon, as a
follow up to the visit undertaken by the Committee to some Delhi Metro Railway Stations on
27th June, 2008 followed by discussion with the Senior Officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), Government of NCT of Delhi, Central Industrial Security
Force (CISF) and Delhi Police. The Chairperson also mentioned that it was a secret report due
to sensitive issues connected to the security arrangement at the Metro Network and therefore, a
request had been made by the Ministry of Home Affairs not to make its contents public.
27

28
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft 135th Report on Border
Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of Indo-Pak Border.
4.1 The Convenor of the Sub-Committee on Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects (Shri
Mohan Singh, Member, Lok Sabha) briefed the Committee of the work done by it and its
observations and findings based on field visits and oral examination of witnesses. The Convenor
suggested for some minor amendments which were acceded to by the Committee. After some
discussion, the report was adopted with minor modifications.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.