ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
The Functioning of Delhi Police
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
176
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


105
C.S.(H.A.)-344
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT
The Functioning of Delhi Police
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (v)-(vi)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (vii )
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—55
Chapter-I Introduction ............................................................................................. 1—2
Chapter-II Crime Situation ....................................................................................... 3—9
Chapter-III Safety and Security ............................................................................... 10—22
Chapter-IV Transparency and Accountability ......................................................... 23—27
Chapter-V Human Resource Management ............................................................. 28—35
Chapter-VI Traffic Management ............................................................................... 36—43
Chapter-VII Safety of Women................................................................................... 44—50
Chapter-VIII Other issues ............................................................................................ 51—55
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ..... 56—67
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 69—90
7. A NNEXURES ..........................................................................................................................   91— 104
(i) Press release ............................................................................................................. 93
(ii) Suggestions recieved from individuals/organisations/associations etc. on the
functioning of Delhi Police .................................................................................... 94—97
(iii) List of the Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs ................................. 98—104
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
†4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
♣5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
† Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy nominated w.e.f. 4 th July, 2012 vice Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ceased to be Member consequent upon expiration
of term of membership from Rajya Sabha on 2 nd April, 2012.
♣ Shri Satish Chandra Misra nominated w.e.f. 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal who resigned from the membership
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 13 th March, 2012.
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee on
Rural Development w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012.
(i)

Departmental-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee  on Home Affairs
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
^2. Vacant
†3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
#8. Vacant
♣9. Vacant
%10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
*16. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
^  Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the appointment
of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet on 28 th October, 2012 and Shri D. Raja, Member, RS ceased
to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013
† Shri Santiuse Kujur, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the resignation
of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
#  Shrimati Kanimozhi ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013
♣ Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries on 28 th October, 2012.
% Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25th July, 2013 and Dr. V .
Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha was re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27 th July, 2013.
* Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, MP , Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the Appointment
of Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary as Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 17 th June, 2013.
(ii)

COMPOSOTION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
(iii)

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Seventy Sixth Report on Functioning of Delhi Police.
2.0 The erstwhile Committee, in its sitting held on 11
th May, 2011, identified the subject “Law
and Order Situation in Delhi” for detailed study. The Committee in its sitting held on 18 th July, 2012
heard the presentation of the Home Secretary on the subject. The Committee in that sitting decided
to change the nomenclature of the subject “Law and Order Situation in Delhi” to “the Functioning
of Delhi Police” to widen the scope and ambit of the subject. The Committee also decided to issue
a Press Release (Annexure-I) inviting memoranda from the people of Delhi on the subject. In
response to the Press Release, Rajya Sabha Secretariat received 52 memoranda (Annexure-II)
which were found relevant and were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for furnishing
comments thereon. The Ministry of Home Affairs has furnished the comments thereon which were
considered by the Committee.
3.0 The Committee, in its sitting held on 4
th December, 2012, further heard the presentation of
Commissioner of Police, Delhi on the subject of Functioning of Delhi Police.
4.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 27 th December, 2012 heard the Secretary (Border
Management), Law Secretary and Commissioner of Police, Delhi in the backdrop of gangrape of
a girl in Delhi and outburst of public anger against Delhi Police leading to deterioration in law
and order situation in Delhi. The Committee in its sitting held on 4
th January, 2013 further heard
Secretary (BM), Ministry of Home Affairs, Secretaries, Departments of Justice, Legal Affairs and
Joint Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and Commissioner of Police,
Delhi on ‘Growing Atrocities/Crimes against Women and General Law and Order situation in
Delhi’.
5.0 The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) Annual Reports 2012-13 of the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Background Note furnished by the Ministry;
(iii) Presentations made by Home Secretary and Commissioner of Police;
(iv) Proceedings of the meetings of the Committee;
(v) Replies to the queries raised by the Members during the Committee’s meetings;
(vi) Replies to the suggestions made in the Memoranda submitted by the individuals/
organizations etc.;
(vii) updated information as submitted by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its
communication dated 18
th October, 2013; and
(viii) The Delhi Police Act, 1978.
6.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 7 th January, 2014 considered and adopted the Report.

7.0 The observations and conclusions of the Committee have been given at respective narrative
part of the Report in bold letters. However, for the sake of convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been arranged at a glance in chapter-VIII.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
N
EW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
7th January,  2014 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
(vi)
 (iv)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

ACRONYMS
BPR&D The Bureau of Police Research and Development
BPO Business Process Outsourcing
CMTS Complaints Monitoring and Tracking System
CRBC Crime Record Bureau Check
CISF Central Industrial Security Force
CPWD Central Public Works Department
DIU District Investigation Unit
DDA Delhi Development Authority
DUAC Delhi Urban Art Commission
DGS&D Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals
ERV Emergency Response Vehicles
FIR First Information Report
GPS Global Positioning System
GRP Government Railway Police
HRM Human Resource Management
IPS Indian Police Service
MCOCA Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999
MCD Municipal Corporation of Delhi
MPV Mobile Patrol Vans
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau
NDPS Narcotic Drugs Psychotropic Substances
NDMC New Delhi Municipal Corporation
NCW National Commission for Women
NHRC Nati onal Human Rights Commission
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
PHQ Police Headquarters
PWD Public Works Department
PPP Public Private Partnership
PIU Public Interface Unit
PSO Protective Services Officers
RPF Railway Protection Force
SW A T Swift Weapon and Tactics Team
SWOT S trength, Weakness, Opportunities and Threats
SIAM Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers
V A TS Vehicle Actuated Traffic Signals
(vii)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Section 3 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978 stipulates that there shall be one police force for
the whole of Delhi and all officers and subordinate ranks of the police force shall be liable for
posting to any branch of the force including the Delhi Armed Police. According to Annual
Report 2012-13 of Ministry of Home Affairs, the priorities of Delhi Police are maintenance of law
and order, prevention of crimes, instilling a sense of security amongst common people including
women, children and senior citizens, improving traffic management and controlling corruption. Top
most priority is given to maintenance of law and order and crime control and emphasis is given
on control of crime through proactive policing with people’s participation.
1.2 Mission Of Delhi Police
1.2.1 According to Citizen’s Charter, the objectives of Delhi Police are as under:–
(i) To uphold the law, fairly and firmly;
(ii) To prevent crime and to pursue and bring to justice those who break the law;
(iii) To keep the peace in partnership with the community;
(iv) To protect, help and reassure the people;
(v) To be seen discharging duty with integrity, common sense and sound judgment;
(vi) To be Compassionate, courteous and patient, acting without fear or favour or
prejudice to the rights of others;
(vii) To be professional, calm and restrained and in the event of mob control, apply
minimum force necessary to accomplish lawful duty;
(viii) To strive to reduce the fears of the public; and
(ix) To respond to well-founded criticism with a willingness to change.
1.2.2 According to the Commissioner of Police, priorities and the main functions of Delhi Police
are as under:–
(i) Keep the capital secure from terror;
(ii) Detect and prevent crime and improve quality of investigation;
(iii) Maintain law and order and protect people under threat;
(iv) Curb street crime;
(v) Build sound police-public relations;
(vi) Initiate measures in collaboration with the community to wean away street-children
and juveniles from committing crime;

2
(vii) Provide a safe environment to working women who work and return during night;
(viii) Looking after the welfare of officers and men;
(ix) Upgrade the capability of the force with high quality training; and
(x) Synergies with traffic engineers, civic agencies and other stakeholders for good traffic
management.
1.3 Brife History of Organisational Structure
1.3.1 As per the information available on Delhi Police website, organized form of policing was
established by the British after the First War of Freedom of 1857, with the adoption of the Indian
Police Act of 1861. Delhi, being a part of the Punjab, remained a unit of the Punjab Police even after
becoming the Capital of India in 1912. In the same year, the first Chief Commissioner of Delhi was
appointed and was vested with the powers and functions of the Inspector General of Police.
1.3.2 Delhi Police was re-organised in 1946 when its strength was almost doubled. In the
year 1966, the Government of India constituted the Delhi Police Commission headed by Justice G.D.
Khosla to go into the problems faced by Delhi Police and it was on the basis of the Khosla Commission
Report that the Delhi Police was once again re-organised. Four police districts, namely, North, Central,
South and New Delhi were constituted. The Khosla Commission also recommended for introduction of
Police Commissioner System which was eventually adopted from 1
st July, 1978. With the passage of
time the population of Delhi and problems of policing kept on multiplying. Accordingly, the strength of
Delhi Police was increased upto about 76,000 as per recommendations of the Srivastava Committee.
At present, there are six ranges, 11 districts, 54 divisions and 184 Police Stations with a total strength
of 83,762 Delhi Police personnel. The Committee is given to understand that Delhi Police is the largest
metropolitan police in the world, larger than London, Paris, New York and Tokyo.
1.3.3 Replying to a query regarding the ratio of Constables, Inspectors and Higher Officers
viz-a-viz. ACP, DCP, etc., the Delhi Police informed the Committee that the ratio between constable
Inspectors, ACP and DCP is as under:
Constable and Inspector = 34 : 01
Constable and ACP = 131 : 01
Constable and DCP = 429 : 01
1.3.4 Replying to the Committee’s query in regard to the ideal ratio of policemen per lakh
populations, Delhi Police stated that no information as to the police and population ratio of other
countries is being compiled by BPR&D. However, as per the report prepared by UN Division for
Policy Analysis and Public Affairs, available on the web site of United Nations, Police-Population
ratio in some of the countries is as follows:– Italy (559.0), Mexico (491.8), Saudi Arabia (386.5)
and Belgium (357.5) which is much higher than in India (143) during the year 2006.
1.3.5 The Committee also sought to know whether any study was conducted /adopted by Delhi Police
on ‘Police Reform’s. The representatives of Delhi Police stated that no such study on Police Reforms
has been conducted. However, reforms are continuous process and necessary measures are taken from
time to time and directions are issued in the form of Circulars/Standing Orders. The Committee was
further apprised that the MHA, Gov ernment of India has set up various Commissions/Committees on
the Police Reforms for all States and Union Territories of India from time to time. The Ministry had
set up a Review Commission to scrutinize the recommendations made by these Commissions/
Committees. On the basis of the recommendations made by the Review Commissions, Ministry of
Home Affairs shortlisted 49 Recommendations and directed all States and Union Territories to implement
the same and Delhi Police has implemented most of these with the approval of MHA.

3
CHAPTER-II
CRIME SITUATION
2.1 According to the background note as furnished by Delhi Police, the law and order situation
in Delhi –2012 is the combined effect of several aspects of police work which inter-alia include
prevention and detection of crime, traffic management, VVIP/VIP security, counter terrorism
measures, handling of protest/agitation/rallies, managing festivals, maintaining police community
relations, surveillance on criminals, public awareness programmes, police response mechanism, etc.
which give the citizens an overall sense of security to carry on with their daily lives.
2.2 Crime Situation
2.2.1 The Committee has noted that Delhi Police is entrusted with the responsibility to ensure a
safe environment to the people living in Delhi especially for working women, senior citizens and
children. According to Delhi Police, during the last 15 years crime has remained under control
despite manifold growth of population in Delhi. It was stated that Delhi Police strives to keep the
Capital secure from terror and detect and prevent crime and improve quality of investigation, curb
street crime, build sound police-public relations and maintain law and order and protect people
under threat.
2.2.2 According to the background note, Delhi Police has undertaken the following new initiatives
to achieve its set objectives:–
(i) High visibility of police by revamping beat police system;
(ii) Integrated police patrolling through PCR, Traffic and local police;
(iii) Deployment of Traffic and local Police Staff at selected Bus Stops for covering 300
Bus Stops for anti-sabotage; checking of Bus Stop; checking of the buses for looking
for unclaimed objects, search of suspicious persons, anti-eve-teasing drive, anti-pick-
pocketing drive etc.;
(iv) Prompt investigation of cases and performance appraisal for all ranks;
(v) ACPs/SDPOs to remain in one police station of their sub division daily between 3.30
PM-5.30 PM; and
(vi) 155 Emergency Response Vehicles in Police Stations make arrangements one in each
PS. These vehicles are first Responder to distress calls, preserve scene of crime using
caution tape, perform Anti-terrorist tasks and ensure higher visibility in PS area.
2.2.3 The Delhi Police claimed that the total IPC Crime per lakh of population has seen a steady
decline during the last 14 years, being 505.71 in 1998 and coming down to 293.13 in 2012. The
number of total heinous offences registered in Delhi in 1998 was 2807, and it came down to 2171
in 2011. Heinous offences per lakh of population declined from 21.88 in 1998 to 14.01 as on
31st October, 2012 which, however, showed increasing trend to 21.79 on 30 th September, 2013.
2.2.4 The Committee was given to understand that in 1998, population of Delhi was 128.3 lakhs
and total IPC crimes were 64882 whereas, while the population rapidly rose to 167.53 lakhs in the
3

4
year 2011, the total IPC crime remained only 53353, thus clearly indicating it was better in 2011
than 14 years back. In geographical terms also, Delhi has grown exponentially and many new
colonies such as Rohini, Dwarka and industrial areas like Narela have come up.
2.3 Causative Factors
2.3.1 Delhi Police apprised the Committee that Delhi, being the capital of the country, has been
developing all around at a rapid pace. This rapid urbanization has also led to certain factors which
have a bearing on the crime rate in the city. The large expansion of new colonies and thousands
of unplanned colonies is also an important crimogenic factor particularly in respect of street crimes
like robberies and snatching. Despite this, the incidents of street crime have come down in the city.
In Delhi, almost 65% of the total population lives in unplanned colonies. 11.7% live in rural/urban
villages, thus leaving only 23.7% people living in planned colonies. This is an important causative
factor for crime in Delhi. Other factors responsible for crime are as follows:–
(i) Socio-economic imbalances;
(ii) Proximity in location of colonies of the affluent and the under-privileged;
(iii) Urban anonymity encouraging deviant behaviour;
(iv) Loosening of social structures and family control;
(v) Adverse sex ratio (866 females/1000 males);
(vi) Easy accessibility/means of escape to criminal elements from across the borders; and
(vii) Extended hinterland in the NCR region.
2.4 Trends of Crimes in Delhi
2.4.1 According to Delhi Police there has been a decline in street crimes in the city in the year
2012 which is a result of enhanced police presence and continuous monitoring of activities of
known criminals. Citing high detection rate achieved in heinous cases, Delhi Police informed the
Committee that a success rate of 85.96% in 2012 and 85.04% in 2013 (upto 30
th September, 2013)
has been achieved as against 91.99 % in year 2011 in heinous offences. This has been achieved
as a result of sustained efforts and police professionalism at the District level and the specialized
units like the Crime Branch and the Special Cell, which whole-heartedly focussed on achieving
breakthroughs, in all important and sensational cases.
Detection rate (upto 30
th September, 2013)
Crime Head 2011 2012 2013
Dacoity 95.24% 95.65% 86.67%
Murder – 76.98% 75.90%
Kidnapping – 93.33% 86.67%
Attempt to murder 87.37% 92.40% 89.09%
Robbery 82.02% 86.61% 80.03%
Rape 87.00% 89.21% 89.30%
Total heinous 83.87% 85.96% 85.04%

5
2.4.2 The Committee was further informed that in the year 2012, 521 murder cases had been
registered as against 543 cases in the corresponding period of year 2011. Incidents of murders, per
lakh of population, have also shown a significant decline during the last ten years. While this figure
was 3.95 in the year 2011, it came down to 3.05 in 2012. Explaining about the motives behind
murders, the Committee was informed that an analysis of motives in murder cases of year 2012
reveals that 20.54 % of the cases were due to sudden provocation on trivial issues followed by
12.86% due to old enmity, 14.59% sex related, 10.94% differences amongst family members and
8.83% disputes over property/money matters. About 13.82% of the murder cases were crime related.
2.4.3 Regarding robbery/dacoity, the Committee was informed that in the year 2012 a total of 608
cases of robbery were reported as against 562 cases in the corresponding period of year 2011. The
detection rate in cases of robbery has been high at 88.32%. During the year 2012, a total of 28
cases of dacoity were reported as against 33 cases in the corresponding period of the year 2011,
showing a significant decline of 15.15%. All the cases (except one case) of dacoity reported during
the year 2012 have been solved.
2.4.4 The Committee was also informed that the broad day light sensational dacoity-cum-murder
case in Defence Colony of more than rupees 5 crores cash was solved in a record time with
arrests of 14 persons and recovery of cash of more than 4 crores and other items purchased from
the looted money.
2.4.5 As regards snatching, the Committee was informed that in the year 2012, a total of 1440
cases of snatching were reported as against 1476 cases reported in the year 2011, a decline of
2.44%. As many as 70.97% cases were solved.
2.4.6 App rising about Motor Vehicle Theft, the representative of Delhi Police stated that in the
year 2012, a total of 14391 Motor Vehicle Theft cases have been reported as against 14668 cases
in the year 2011, registering a decline of 1.89 %. 19.78 % cases of stolen vehicles were solved
in the year 2012. The M.V Thefts per lakh of vehicle population has also come down from 228.35
in the year 2001 to 186.97 in 2012. Motor Vehicle Thefts accounted for 28% of total IPC cases
registered in Delhi. The acute shortage of parking space and the general practice of parking
vehicles on roadsides coupled with the indifference of a majority of motor vehicle owners towards
installing anti-auto theft equipment is a major contributory factor.
2.4.7 The Committee observes that the number of rape case reported in Delhi were higher than
reported in other metropolitan. According to the figures reportedly quoted by Commissioner, Delhi
Police in the Annual Conference on 18th January, 2013 there has been 1.75% increase in crimes
from 54,287 cases in 2012 as compared to 53,353 in 2011. There were 706 cases of rape in 2012
against 572 cases in 2011, 543 of murder (521 in 2011) vehicle theft 14,391 (14,668 in 2011) and
snatching 1,440 (1476 in 2011). The Committee took note of the latest report of the National Crime
Records Bureau (NCRB) on the Crimes in India, 2011. According to the NCRB the number of
complaints received/alleged against Capital’s policemen by citizens nearly doubled to 12,805 in 2011
from 6,614 in 2010. At 17 complaints per 100 policemen, Delhi stands the highest among the UTs.
In response thereto, the Delhi Police furnished the following details of number of complaints
against police personnel (During the Year 2011 and 2012):–
Number of Complaints Number of Complaints Number of Complaints not
received substantiated substantiated
2011 2012 (upto 2011 2012 (upto 2011 2012 (upto
11.12.12) 11.12.12) 11.12.12)
12795 1 1818 273 143 11540 5992

6
2.4.8 The Delhi Police claimed that the total number of complaints substantiated is only 3% of
the complaints received.
2.4.9 The Committee noted that besides Delhi, incidents of heinous crimes are on rise and
continuously taking place in different parts of the country and asked about the additional steps
taken by the Delhi Police to stop recurrence of such crimes in future. The Committee also sought
views of the Government on the educational system, family system, value system and culture and,
the way in which the joint family system takes care and counsel the children.
2.4.10 In its written information, the Delhi Police highlighted inadequate manpower, diverse
policing demands at police station level, increasing number of motor-vehicles on Delhi roads,
porous borders, floating population, socio-economic diversity and a general apathy on the part of
Delhi citizens towards policing, as some of the constraints affecting Delhi Police. Notwithstanding
these constraints, endeavour is to ensure effective patrolling on foot, by motorcycles and PCR
vans. To strengthen the patrolling by field staff, orders have been issued to deploy non-field units
by rotation for patrolling in the Districts. To augment manpower resources of Delhi Police, 68
proposals have been sent for creation of posts, and out of these, 33 proposals for 17,772 posts
are pending with MHA and 35 proposals for 14,956 posts are pending with GNCT of Delhi. The
Committee was further informed that MHA had asked to rework the demand for manpower.
Accordingly, Police Headquarters (PHQ) has sent the comprehensive proposal of Phase-II and III
regarding creation of 8877 additional posts in Delhi Police to MHA.
2.5 Conviction
2.5.1 Delhi Police a pprised the Committee that the conviction rate in criminal cases is dipping
down year by year and furnished following details of conviction rate in Delhi in the last five years
for serious to petty crime-wise, break up thereof, alongwith conviction rate in the country.
Sl. Crime Head Conviction Rate
No.
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
1. Dacoity 31.81% 38.46% 24.00% 33.33% 57.89%
2. Murder 59.68% 48.09% 39.90% 47.93% 55.38%
3. Att. To Murder 39.21% 40.45% 32.39% 43.30% 51.77%
4. Robbery 44.96% 54.83% 45.88% 45.45% 55.23%
5. Riot 43.58% 32.35% 36.36% 51.43% 45.31%
6. Rape 30.58% 47.34% 34.64% 41.52% 49.25%
7. Burglary 61.09% 56.99% 51.64% 49.06% 53.74%
8. Theft 67.87% 58.89% 54.51% 49.67% 45.60%
9. Other IPC 66.82% 58.92% 52.41% 48.09% 54.18%
10. Total IPC 65.25% 58.12% 51.48% 48.10% 52.40%
11. T. Local and Spl. Law 74.20% 74.03% 67.79% 66.44% 61.82%
12. G
RAND T OTAL 69.12% 66.46% 56.60% 53.19% 54.64%

7
2.5.2 The Committee raised the issue of high profile cases and sought to be apprised of the status
of investigation into high profile murder cases during the last 5 years and number of solved and
pending cases. Responding to that Delhi Police furnished the following information:–
Years No. of cases No. of cases Solved %
reported worked out
2008 554 464 83.75%
2009 552 452 81.88%
2010 565 458 81.06%
2011 543 466 85.81%
2012 499 408 81.76%
(upto 15.12.2012)
2.5.3 The Committee is anguished to find that the conviction rate in criminal cases is
dipping year after year i.e. 69.12% in 2008, 66.46% in 2009, 56.60% in 2010 and 53.19%
in 2011. The Committee observes that the conviction rate of crimes committed and detected
in Delhi is abysmally low and one possible reason could be excessive work load with the
courts, but equally important is the undue extraneous pressure being put on the
investigating agencies thus causing delay in the process of investigation. The Committee is
of the view that as investigating agency, the police force has to shoulder an onerous
responsibility. The fate of any case depends upon the outcome of investigation. The
Committee understands that investigation requires a lot of skills, expertise and in-depth
understanding of jurisprudential principles and legal insight. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the training module of Delhi Police must incorporate advance courses on
law and jurisprudence. The training module of Delhi Police on law and jurisprudence may
be revisited involving some legal experts. Besides, the Committee also recommends that
there is a need to have brain storming session to find out reasons for low conviction rate
and take the remedial measures before the situation further deteriorates.
2.6 Crime Prevention Strategy
2.6.1 According to the background note, in regard to tackling the crimes, it was stated that due
attention was given to detective and preventive aspects i.e. integrated patrolling systems with active
participation of PCR vans and special drives launched against eve teasers. Modern scientific and
other techniques were adopted to improve the quality of investigation, quick redressal of public
grievances, active participation of NGOs, follow-up of “Eyes and Ears Scheme”. Roads and lanes/
streets prone to criminal activities, were identified and barricaded besides police personnel patrolling
the area to check any unwarranted incident. Major strategies adopted for crime prevention were
stated to be as under:
(i) Identification of vulnerable areas covering Crime Mapping and analysis, crime-prone
areas identified, resources re-deployed.
(ii) Identification of and action against active criminals includes identification of top
criminals of every Police Station, monitoring and surveillance of criminals released
from jail, updating criminal records, inter-state co-ordination and information sharing,
effective use of MCOCA and Externment Provisions.
(iii) High visibility and presence through Group patrolling inter-alia  covers motor-cycles,
PCR vans and highway patrolling by special teams.

8
(iv) Revamping the Beat Police System incorporates Interaction with beat officers at
senior-most levels, tasking of beat officers to identify top criminals of their beat,
monthly performance appraisal of beat officers, selection of best beat constables every
month.
(v) Integrated policing and patrolling by traffic, PCR and local police and random and
surprise picket deployment.
(vi) Pro-active utilization of women officers in critical areas; optimal usage of modern
technology and enhanced focus on citizen participation.
2.7 Improvement in Police Station functioning
2.7.1 The Committee was informed that it has been an endeavor of Delhi Police to bring an
overall improvement in the functioning of the 180 police stations through close supervision, formal
inspections and strict follow-up action. The improvement in police station performance is assessed
in the major thrust areas which inter-alia includes:–
(i) Disposal of complaints;
(ii) Disposal of pending investigation cases;
(iii) Disposal of inquests;
(iv) Disposal of case property;
(v) Updating record of Proclaimed Offenders;
(vi) Drive for their arrest;
(vii) Drive for locating absent Bad Characters;
(viii) Opening of New History Sheets; and
(ix) Updation of Existing History Sheets
2.8 Drug Trafficking
2.8.1 According to Delhi Police the drive against drug trafficking was taken up in a big way. It
was stated that Delhi Police dealt a severe blow to drug traffickers operating in Delhi by recovering
huge quantity of narcotics. During the year 2012 (up to 15
th December, 2012) 825 cases were
registered and 61.272 kgs. of smack/heroin, 49.500 kgs. of Opium, 1895.068 kgs. of ganja and
1.969 kgs. of cocaine were recovered. A comparison of recoveries of Narcotic Drugs Psychotropic
Substances (NDPS) made in 2011 and 2012 is as under:–
Recoveries (In kgs.)
Smack/Heroin 57.946 61.272
Opium 145.334 49.500
Ganja 2723.188 1895.068
Cocaine 0.553 2.783
2.9 Achievement on Terror Front
2.9.1 Apprising about achievement on Terror Front, the Committee was informed that a total of
12 terrorists/insurgents including five operatives of Indian Mujahideen, four terrorists of Lashkar-

9
e-Taiba, one insurgent of North-Eastern India, one Israel national and one terrorist belonging to
Babbar Khalsa International were arrested by Delhi Police during the year 2012. PAN-India IM
Module was busted with the arrest of 12 militants and four major blast cases of German Bakery,
Chinnaswamy Stadium, Jama Masjid Shoot-out and blast were solved. Israeli diplomat attack case
solved and bomber of Iranian origin was identified.
2.9.2 Summing up the crime and law and order situation in Delhi, Delhi Commissioner of Police
apprised the Committee in its sitting held on 4th December, 2012 assured the Committee as under:–
“we had also attempted to put things in perspective of the vast area that we have to police,
the resources which have been placed at our disposal; their inadequacy at times, the various
criminogenic factors which affect crime, the kinds of problems we face on the law and
order front because, Sir, Delhi being the capital city, a large number of demonstrations,
processions, festivals, etc., take place here. Sir, it is a fact that Delhi is the venue of
several international conferences and seminars and that many Heads of the States visit us,
on account of which we have to provide security cover, traffic cover, so on and so forth.
Sir, we are proud to be the police force of the capital city of Delhi and we try our best
to see to it that the crime and law and order situation in the city remains well under
control.”
2.9.3 The Committee was informed that Delhi Police has taken a large number of anti-terrorist
measures in the city to combat terrorism. These measures can be grouped under the following
heads:
(i) Armed Response Teams includes measures like Quick Reaction Teams, Mobile Striking
Parties, Foot/Static Armed Parties, CP’s Reserves , Mobile Patrol Vans (MPVs), PCR
Vans and PCR Motor Cycles, Emergency Response Vehicles (ERVs), Swift Weapon
and Tactics Team (SWAT).
(ii) T errorist related intelligence collection focused on Human Intelligence Collection,
Technical Intelligence, Revamping of Beat Patrolling system, Inspector (Anti terrorist
operations) and Intelligence Collection by Police Station Staff;
(iii) Security audit of Vital Installations;
(iv) Eyes and Ears scheme and Tenant verification;
(v) Checking of Public Places covers checking of Cyber Café, checking of Guest Houses
and hotels, Checking hideouts, Cinema Halls, Airport, Railway Stations, ISBTs, Taxi
stands, Chemical shops, Public offices, Gurudwaras, Masjids, Mandirs and STD
booths, checking of vehicles and buses, checking of trucks/public carriers, second
hand car/scooter/motorcycles dealers, Wireless Integrated Public Address System;
(vi) Installation of CCTV System in markets and border check posts- Intelligence driven
counter terror operations.
2.9.4 The Committee is of the strong view that NCT of Delhi being the national capital is
required to be a place of no tolerance for crimes and it is the onerous task of Delhi Police
to providing guarantee a safe and secured environment to all dwellers. Performance of Delhi
Police in this onerous task would not only cast its image at the national level but would
also give glimpses of image amongst international community. The Committee, therefore,
exhorts Delhi Police to keep up its prestige and pride high while discharging its entrusted
duties and responsibilities. All steps should be taken to tackle terrorism in Delhi.

10
CHAPTER-III
SAFETY AND SECURITY
3.0 Safety of Senior Citizens, Juveniles and Children
3.1 Some people have suggested to the Committee that meetings with senior citizens should be
held at Thana and District levels and beat officers should regularly visit them. Participation of the
youth should be encouraged through schools and colleges. Safety of senior citizens, women and
children needs to be emphasized. Special juvenile police force should be appointed. There should
be computerization of data of missing children and linkage between district child protection unit and
district level Special Juvenile Police Unit.
3.1.1 The Committee was given to understand that senior citizens, disabled persons, children, are
the vulnerable sections of the society. Senior citizens are quite often killed sometimes by the
domestic help or by criminals. Children especially the child labourers face multi-dimensional
problems. The Committee raised the issue of safety of senior citizen, disabled, and children and
desired to know the steps taken to check crime against senior citizens and children.
3.1.2 Delhi Police informed that as a law enforcing agency committed towards securing a safe
and secure society for the common citizens and especially for the vulnerable sections like senior
citizens, Delhi Police has taken a number of initiatives in this direction. The details of specific steps
taken, apart from the usual security measures, are as follows:–
(i) Creation of Senior Citizens Security Cell  :– To co-ordinate, supervise and monitor the
efforts made by the police and different sections of society and organizations, a Senior Citizens
Security Cell was set up in Police Headquarters in June, 2004, which is presently working under
the supervision of Jt. CP/Crime. Apart from this Senior Citizens Security Cells have also been
created in all the eleven (11) police districts of Delhi.
(ii) Help Line  :– There is a Toll Free Senior Citizens Help Line No. 1291 apart from Police
Control Room no. 100, which is given wide publicity through media as well as through local police
station staff so that the senior citizens could seek prompt police help in case of any kind of
distress. The staff deputed on the helpline is regularly sensitized about the problems of the senior
citizens. The feedback of effectiveness of police action and the extent of satisfaction of senior
citizen is taken in each case and proper redressal of the grievances of senior citizens is ensured.
184 distress calls were received in 2012.
(iii) Identification and Registeration of Senior Citizens :– Senior citizens, who are living
alone or with spouse and are willing to register themselves with Delhi Police are identified by Beat/
Division staff of Police Stations and their names are forwarded to Senior Citizens Security Cell,
PHQ for registration. Senior citizens are being identified and registered with Delhi Police also
through special drives launched from time to time.
(iv) Issue of Identity Cards :– As a new initiative, Delhi Police has recently started issuing
Identity Cards to registered senior citizens which has personal particulars of the senior citizen
alongwith details of illness etc. 12812 senior citizens have been issued Identity Cards till
31.12.2012.
10

11
(v) Visits/Telephonic Contacts  :– The staff of Senior Citizens Security Cell, PHQ regularly
visits senior citizens to know about their well being and assess their security requirements, advise
them on matters such as personal security and servant verification etc. and listen to problems faced
by them. The staff also makes telephonic contacts with the senior citizens, and also visits the
senior citizens. The details of the visits and telephonic contacts by the staff of Senior Citizen
Security Cell PHQ for the year 2012 upto 31.12.2012 is given below:–
Year Visits by staff T elephonic Visits by Local Telephonic
of SCSC/PHQ contracts by Police contracts by
the staff of Local Police
SCSC/PHQ
2012 4602 24062 320789 227057
(upto
31.12.2012)
(vi) Verification of Domestic Helps,Drivers,Chowkidars etc. :– Keeping in view the recent
trend of crime against senior citizens in which domestic helps, drivers, tenants, casual labourers,
chowkidars etc. have been found involved, periodic verification drives have been launched in all the
police stations and the senior citizens are being continuously informed and educated about the
importance of police verification.
(vii) Sensitizaton of Beat Patrolling Staff and Regular Meetings of Police Officers With
Senior Citizens  :– The beat/division staff has been sensitized about the vulnerability of senior
citizens and they have been directed to take all possible measures to ensure their safety and
security. In this direction, they have been instructed to regularly visit the senior citizens, to provide
them their contact numbers as well as that of their seniors, to keep them informed about the recent
crime trend, precautions to be taken etc. Regular meetings of senior citizens with the police
officers of the area are also organized for a better understanding of their problems. 2981 meetings
were organized in the year 2012.
(viii) Distribution of Printed Material Regarding Steps to be Taken for the Saftey of Life
and Property of Senior Citizens  :– The staff of Senior Citizens Security Cell, PHQ and local
police regularly visits the senior citizens and sensitizes them about the steps to be taken for the
safety of their life and property. During these visits the staff also distributes printed literature
(enclosed) regarding safety and security measures, DO’s and DON’Ts etc. to the senior citizens.
(ix) Multi-tasking of PCR Vans  :– Multi-tasking of PCR Vans has been emphasized i.e. making
them more responsive towards all vulnerable sections including senior citizens for providing timely
help in case of any mishappening, rushing them to hospital if they need any medical help etc.
(x) Security Audit of Senior Citizens  :– Besides the above mentioned steps, Delhi Police has
taken concrete steps for ensuring the safety and security of senior citizens by way of conducting
security audit of their residential premises in a comprehensive manner with their concurrence. A
Standing Order No. 377/2009 “Security Audit of Senior Citizens” has been issued in this regard .
Security Audit of 13180 senior citizens has been conducted till 31.12.2012.
The Nodal Officer of the Police Station i.e. Inspector (ATO) shall visit the residence of the
senior citizens and initiate the security audit. A check list for conducting security assessment has
also been prepared. This audit should include advising the senior citizen regarding installation of
certain basic security equipments like door chain, magic eye, iron grills, safety locks etc. It should

12
also include advice regarding verification of all types of domestic help, including servants, maids,
drivers, washer men, malis etc. engaged by them.
(xi) Advisory Body for the Saftey and the Security of Senior Citizens  :– Delhi Police has
constituted state level and district level advisory bodies for the safety and security of senior
citizens. At state level, the advisory body is headed by Joint Commissioner of Police, Crime and
all the district heads and one senior citizen from each district are the members. At district level,
the advisory body is headed by the district head and one senior citizen from each police station
is the member. These advisory bodies interact from time to time to discuss steps and measures
for the safety and security of senior citizens in Delhi.
3.1.3 The Committee is of the considered view that senior citizens are the pillars and old
guards of the society still contributing a lot to the society and they should be respected,
admired and protected at all cost. The Committee, while noting the elaborate arrangements
undertaken by Delhi Police for protection of senior citizens, expresses its deep concern over
the cases of killings of senior citizens either by domestic help or close relatives or other
criminals with the motive to rob the property earned by them in their whole life or for any
other ulterior motive inspite of the steps taken by the Delhi Police. The Committee is of
the considered view that Delhi Police should underline the need for enforcing the preventive
measure to check crimes against senior citizens, children and women. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Delhi Police should review and revamp its senior citizens cell.
The Committee also recommends that the security audit of all the senior citizens residing
alone in the capital may be completed in a time bound manner and representatives of the
resident’s welfare associations of the colonies/localities should also be involved in regular
meetings of Police officers.
3.2 Safety and security of people from North-East
3.2.1 The background note as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs spells out the steps
undertaken by Delhi Police to provide safety and security of people from North-Eastern Region in
order to specifically address the problems faced by the students and other residents from North-
Eastern States in Delhi. 7 officers of the rank of Addl. CP/DCP viz. DCsP North, North-West,
South, South-East, South-West, West and East districts have been designated as Nodal officers.
These Nodal Officers hold periodic meetings with the students and residents of the North-Eastern
States staying in their respective areas and address the issues raised in such meetings. One Joint
CP rank officer has also been nominated as co-ordinator to oversee efforts made by the District
nodal officers and DCP/PCR.
3.2.2 Delhi Police has also issued instructions for the safety and security of people from North-
Eastern States residing in Delhi, highlights of which are mentioned below:–
● ‘Zero Tolerance Policy’ as far as Crime Against Women in general and for those
belonging to North Eastern States in particular.
● Many problems including those such as stalking, sending SMSs etc. can easily be
nipped in the bud if the person concerned is contacted and firmly advised to behave
himself and not to harass the individual concerned.
● Where necessary, action, as made out under substantive laws or preventive action
under the Cr.P.C., can be initiated.
● Wherever cases are made out, they should be immediately registered and investigated
on a day-to-day basis and finalized.

13
● Quick action by the police would restore confidence not only of the victim but also
of the community and send a clear message to the accused that such behaviour would
not be tolerated.
● There should be regular patrolling covering not only hostels where students live but
also pockets in normal residential colonies in which North-Eastern students live in large
numbers in all police stations in North, North-West Districts and Police Stations around
the Delhi University including police stations of Model Town, Mukherjee Nagar, Civil
Lines, Roop Nagar, Timar Pur etc.
● The beat constables in such areas should be sensitized to establish close interaction
with the community leaders of the residents belonging to the North-Eastern states so
that he is aware of the problems, if any, being faced by them and can take appropriate
action himself or inform the Division Officer/SHO for necessary action.
● The SHOs must have a regular quarterly meeting with the community leaders.
● The Area Security Committee which has been formed in the North District should meet
regularly and interact with various stake-holders including the students.
● Besides university area, there are other pockets such as Munirka, Kotla, Satya Niketan,
Dhaula Kuan etc. having a substantial residents belonging to the North-East States. The
concerned SHOs must have regular meeting with the leaders of the Community at least
once in two months. The area should be covered by patrolling and the beat constables
should be sensitized as mentioned above to take action in a proactive manner.
● Active media engagement especially with vernacular press of Delhi and North Eastern
News Papers/audio visual media (Regional Channels) should also be ensured to
dissuade the poor perception and galvanize Delhi Police strategy in winning the
confidence of people of North East States.
● Joint CP/Training shall organize a gender sensitization training programme for all ranks
during basic courses, promotional courses and in-service training. Guest-Speakers
from North East shall be invited.
3.2.3 Further explaining the position, the Commissioner of Police, Delhi Police stated as under:–
“the issue of security of the people who are from the North-Eastern States has been drawing
our attention for a long time. We have a Joint Commissioner of Police, who himself is from
the North-East. He is the Chief Coordinator from the side of the Police. In addition to that,
Sir, we have seven nodal officers, in seven districts, where there are large numbers of
residents from the North-Eastern States, and they have regular meetings. In fact, we already
have nine meetings during the current year. In the last meeting, one request that came from
them was that sometime when they go to a police station they are not able to communicate
with the staff because they do not speak the same kind of language. So, what we have done
is, it is their suggestion, that there should be a co-ordinator from their side as well. So,
six such people have been earmarked, and we are giving them identity cards. So, they will
bring complaints from the North-Eastern students to the police stations. We also noticed that
most of them take houses on rent in certain areas which are dominated by the people from
the rural belt. They take houses there for the simple reason that the rents are low. The
culture of that area, for instance, Munirka or Mahipalpur, is of different type. They have
various reservations about the way of life of the people from other States. We hold meetings
with those residents. We call them, we educate them, we counsel them that they have to have
tolerance for people from other cultures, and they cannot pass remarks or they cannot pass

14
any value judgement on them. So, those meetings are also done, and they are done by the
nodal officers who are looking into the complaints of the North-Eastern States. Sir, this
data is regularly verified. We have the break-up of this. For instance, for eve teasing, there
were a total 111 cases in Delhi. Out of which, only two involved women from the North-
Eastern States. Out of 137 victims of rape, five were from the North-Eastern States, and
most of these cases have been worked out. The well-known case is the Dhaula Kuan case,
where we found that the people coming from neighbouring district of Mewat were involved.
All of them were arrested, and the case is at a very advanced stage of trial. It is being
done by a fast track court. I am happy to inform you, Sir, that we are more than sure that
this case will end in conviction. The total cases in which victims were from the North-East,
which include rape, molestation of women, snatching, eve teasing, kidnapping, dowry death,
etc., are only eight.”
3.2.4 The safety and security of the people from North East is a cause of concern for the
Committee. The Committee notes the reply furnished by Delhi Police and the oral
submission of the Commissioner of Police, Delhi. The Committee, however, feels that just
issuing standing order will not serve the purpose; it is the question of implementation of
order in letter and spirit which matters. Delhi Police should ensure that all the cases are
thoroughly investigated and taken to the logical end at a fast pace. Besides, more concerted
efforts may be taken to ensure safety of the people, particularly, women from North East.
3.3 Safety of Tourists
3.3.1 Responding to the Committee’s query regarding the steps taken to appoint greater number
of ‘Tourist police’, keeping in view the crime against foreign tourists particularly females in the
city, Delhi Police stated that there is no sanctioned strength for Tourist Police. However a proposal
for creation of 266 posts for Tourist Police has been sent to GNCTD. The proposal is still pending
with GNCTD. Out of the existing resources, Mobile Police Vans have been deployed at 10
important tourist places/locations i.e. IGI Airport, New Delhi Railway Station, Hazrat Nizamuddin
Railway Station, Rajghat, Red Fort, Qutub Minar, Palika Bazar, Janpath, India Gate and Paharganj
(Railway Station side) to provide necessary assistance to the tourists.
3.3.2 The Committee understands that the National Capital with several places of
historical values and cultural ethos, attract a large number of foreign tourists including
foreign tourists. The Committee is of the view that safety and security of tourists is the
foremost and primary duty of Delhi Police. In this connection, the Committee takes note
of the fact that the proposal for creation of 266 posts for tourist police is pending with
Government of NCT of Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs and Delhi Police should take up the issue with the NCT of Delhi to clear the
proposal at the earliest.
3.4 VVIP Security
3.4.1 The Committee was informed that the Security Unit of Delhi Police has been entrusted with
the responsibility of providing security cover to the President of India, Vice President of India,
Prime Minister of India, Home Minister of India and all Union Ministers, the leader of opposition,
Judges of Supreme Court of India and Delhi High Court and other protectees. The Security Unit
also provides security to visiting foreign and Indian dignitaries. There are 416 protectees of several
categories located in Delhi who have been given security cover by the Security Unit. In addition
to the Delhi based protectees, visiting protectees from various States are also given security during
their stay in Delhi. During the year 2011, 8822 protected persons were provided security by the
Security Unit. It was further stated that fool-proof security arrangements were provided to 393

15
visiting foreign dignitaries for which elaborate arrangements were made by Districts, Traffic, PCR
and Security units.
3.4.2 Commenting on the issue of segregating VIP security from regular policing in Delhi, the
Delhi Police in its written reply submitted as follows:–
“The Security Unit of Delhi Police is specialized unit which has been entrusted with the
security of Hon’ble President of India, Hon’ble Vice-President of India, Hon’ble Prime
Minister of India and other protected persons. The Security unit also provides security cover
to the Foreign Heads of the States/Government and other foreign dignitaries visiting Delhi.
As per Constitution, responsibility to protect the Protected Persons is of State/UT Police.
As such Delhi Police is responsible for security of Protected Persons in Delhi. Guidelines
have been laid out in Blue Book/Yellow Book. Advance security liaison meeting is
conducted before each function in which detailed arrangements are discussed, planned and
executed with active cooperation of the organizers and all stake-holders.
The Security of the VVIPs in Delhi is not restricted to their houses or offices only, it
also involve their movements in Delhi. The movements of the VIPs in the territory of Delhi
are very frequent in which close coordination is required with Local Police and Traffic
Police. The law and order, traffic, intelligence and Special Branch are integral part of the
Delhi Police to provide safety to the citizen and protected persons. Local police and the
intelligence units of Delhi Police also collect intelligence regarding any threat to the VVIPs
and incorporating the counter action against them in the security arrangements. The law
and order situation, demonstrations, processions, etc. are handled by Delhi Police and
requires to be co-ordinated with the Security Unit to ensure that the VIPs do not become
vulnerable due to such demonstrations, processions and law and order situations. Last
minute coordination on the basis of constant monitoring of the situation is possible only if
Security unit is also an integral part of Delhi Police working under one head of the force
i.e. Commissioner of Police so that the problems of coordination, if any, are resolved there
and then. An allied force under such circumstances would not be effective.
MHA in consultation with Central Security agencies and Delhi Police decide about
category of Protected Persons and deployment is done accordingly. Hence, there is
mechanism of rationalization of manpower. The trained officers and men of Delhi Police
have much better perspective of VVIP/VIP security due to their wide exposure to the society
and circumstances of Delhi than any agency in isolation. The staff presently deployed for
the security of VIP is having wide experience in planning, development and implementation
of the arrangements. Besides they have in-depth understanding of the security concepts and
have the capabilities to take sound judgment. At present the security staff has excellent
coordination and understanding with neighbouring states police which is of paramount
significance in ensuring efficient arrangements as number of Head of States/Government/
PPs visit the neighbouring states. Delhi Police has a wide spread network and intelligence
gathering mechanism which provides real time cutting edge intelligence. This information
has profound implications on the security of VIP . Hence, it is not possible to entrust the
above mentioned responsibilities to some allied force. Even, legally, special/allied force
cannot provide security as it is mandated by the Constitution to State/UT Police.”
3.4.3 The Delhi Police further submitted that there is separate strength sanctioned for Supreme
Court and High Court. The Security Unit of Delhi Police is an independent unit of Delhi Police for
all intents and purposes. It is completely separate from general law and order and crime control
duties. However, as mentioned above the job of VIP/VVIP security cannot be executed without the
close cooperation of other sister branches such as Traffic, Local Police, Special Branch of Delhi
Police, which work in tandem under the command and control of Commissioner of Police, Delhi.

16
3.4.4 The State Police, apart from its routine duties, keep a watch over criminals, anti-social
elements, terrorists and Security Suspects. Delhi Police, thus, are in better position to perform such
duties than that of any other force, because such a force will simply act as the private security
guards. An allied force cannot provide better security to VVIP without the coordination and co-
operation of local police, Traffic and other Units of Delhi Police. The manpower requirement in
any case will remain the same whether they are from Security Unit of Delhi Police or allied forces.
The allied force will face lots of problems and will never be able to provide foolproof security.
The allied force will have a severe handicap of ‘experience deficit’, as it takes years and years of
hands on experience to provide a 360 degree comprehensive and foolproof security cover to any
individual or a function involving high risk personalities. It will also be finally dependent on the
Delhi Police for support for the uniformed support at the place of function, routes, law and order,
intelligence, crowd control and so on.
3.4.5 The Delhi Police also submitted that Delhi Police Headquarter provides extra manpower
from Districts and other units to meet the requirement of the Security Unit which is not possible
with an allied force. For instance, at the time of ASEAN Indian Commemorative Summit-2012 held
on 20-21 December, 2012 when 10 Foreign Heads of the States/Governments visited Delhi, Police
Headquarters provided approximately 2000 officers and men who have earlier served in Security
Unit. Such kind of reserve will never be possible in case of allied forces. There is Delhi Police
presence due to deployment which directly results in prevention of crimes and deterrence to
criminals. Delhi Police personnel are deployed throughout the jurisdiction of Delhi and cover every
geographical area of the NCT. The Delhi Police personnel are well versed with all local roads,
routes and also aware of local resources and pitfalls of any area.
3.4.6 The Committee feels that security of the public representatives/functionaries/visiting
foreign dignitaries is also equally important, but at the same time, the public safety should
also not be sacrificed. The Committee desires that a separate wing for VVIP security within
Delhi Police may be considered with necessary logistic support.
3.5 Problems in Registration of FIRs
3.5.1 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that complainants find it difficult in even
getting FIR registered. Policemen are reluctant to register cases.
3.5.2 Responding to this complaint, the Delhi Police informed the Committee that
● FIRs are registered on any complaints pertaining to commission of a cognizable
offence. In cases where no cognizable offence is prima facie made out, a Non-
cognizable report (NCR) is lodged.
● Strict action is taken against the defaulting police officers for any complaint with
regard to non-registration of FIR.
● Every FIR is uploaded on the Delhi Police website within 24 hours of its registration.
Senior officers also meet the complainants from 11 AM – 1 PM every day, where
grievances of non-registration of case, if any, can be raised.
● Delhi Police has also started a new scheme ‘Aapka Update’ in which a complainant
will get regular feedback on the status of the action taken on his complaint/FIR.
3.5.3 There is a general perception amongst public that police remain reluctant to register
FIR to keep the figures of crimes under control in order to show better ratio of crimes
reported and solved cases. The Committee is of the firm view that the public is entitled to
get its FIRs registered. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that resilient
mechanism should be evolved so that all FIRs are registered. The Committee, also strongly

17
recommends that police personnel posted at Police Station must be instructed in very clear
terms to register FIRs on the commission of cognizable offence. The Committee is of the
firm view that the defaulting police officers for denying registering of FIR must be
punished. The Committee in this connection, reiterates its recommendation made in 167th
Report in respect of registration of FIR which is reproduced as below:
“5.36.2 The Committee feels that registration of FIRs should be made mandatory. The
Committee is of the strong view that strict action should be taken for dereliction of duty
against the officer, who refuses to receive complaints on sexual violence. The Committee
also recommends that once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on to the higher police
officer for information and necessary direction in the matter to ensure time bound
investigation. The Committee further recommends that investigation should be done
within a period of 60 days, and charge sheet should be filed in time so that justice is
not denied.”
3.6 Safety of Pedestrians
3.6.1 The Committee also took up the issue of pedestrians’ safety in the city including deaths of
pedestrians and status of facilities provided to the pedestrians. The Committee was informed that
in order to disciplining pedestrians and prevent the incidence of jay-walking by pedestrians on Delhi
roads, the Delhi Traffic Police undertake prosecution drives from time to time against pedestrians
at selected intersections in various parts of Delhi keeping in view the involvement of pedestrians
in road accidents since pedestrians are the most vulnerable road users on Delhi roads. In addition,
the citizens including school children are educated through media campaign, hoardings and trainings
at Traffic Training Parks maintained by Delhi Traffic Police. This has resulted in better road
discipline and safety among pedestrians. The details of pedestrians killed in road accidents for the
last 5 years in NCT of Delhi are given below:–
Year Pedestrians killed
2007 1074
2008 1043
2009 1170
2010 960
2011 946
2012 (upto 15.12) 799
3.6.2 The Committee views that Delhi Police entrusted with the task of traffic
management must undertake special drive at regular intervals at various busy-intersections
of Delhi roads to ensure pedestrian discipline to ensure safety of their lives. The Committee
recommends that special care should be taken for handling the safety of children, senior
citizens and differently abled persons. The Committee also recommends motorists should be
inavarably instructed to give way to pedestrians at zebra crossings, particularly, at red
lights, they should not be allowed to cross over the zebra crossing bearing very less space
for pedestrians. In this regard, the Committee desires that traffic sensitization needs to be
taken up on a regular basis.
3.6.3 The Committee also desires that Delhi Police should also undertake survey of
intersections and roads where pedestrian movement is substantial and if need be, matter of

18
construction of foot over bridges may be taken up. The Committee also notes that in recent
past, a number of foot over bridges had been constructed, particularly one with escalators/
lifts near hospitals. The Committee understands that there escalator remain non functional
very often. The Committee desires that this issue may also be taken up with civic
authorities. In view of the Committee, some mechanism should be put in place to see that
escalators, particularly the ones, near hospitals, do not remain out of order for long period.
3.6.4 The Committee has also been given to understand that in several areas of the city, the
footpath are either encroached or blocked, forcing therein the pedestrian to walk on the roads. The
Committee sought to know the concrete action taken to remove encroachments from footpaths so
that passage is clear to the pedestrian. Delhi Police informed the Committee that regular action is
being undertaken by Delhi Traffic Police in close co-ordination with concerned civic road agencies
for removal of encroachments from footpaths and roads. The Delhi Traffic Police provides
assistance in the drives for removal of encroachments from roads/footpaths as and when
organized. Action for removing encroachments from footpath is taken under section 83/97 DP Act
and Section 283 of IPC.
3.6.5 The Committee observes that Delhi Police is entrusted with the responsibility to
remove encroachments from footpaths. However, in markets and unorganized colonies and
even in organized colonies the commuters find it very difficult to have their way due to
encroachments on both sides of footpaths. The Committee, in this regard, strongly
recommends that Delhi Police should enforce the law in letter and spirit for removing
encroachments from footpath to facilitate the commuters with hassle-free passage. The
matter may also be discussed with the local civic agencies for appropriate action on their part.
3.7 Security cover to Institutional Establishment including Metro Rail etc.
3.7.1 The major responsibility of guarding the Delhi Metro against a terrorist attack has been
primarily entrusted to CISF. The access control, the X-ray baggage scanning, the DFMD/HHMD
checking frisking, picketing and patrolling is being done by CISF as per their preventive strategy.
Delhi Police has also deployed staff in seven police stations of Metro to primarily prevent and
detect crime. This staff also supplements the CISF staff for guarding Delhi Metro against the
terrorist strikes. Delhi Police details staff at Metro Stations to detect the suspicious persons and
to keep watch inside and at the entrance of the Metro Stations. This staff also keeps a watch over
bad elements/criminals entering or operating in the Delhi Metro.
3.7.2 Apart from above, Mock Drills are also being organized alongwith CISF at different metro
stations from time to time. The parking lots and metro stations are also checked by staff of Delhi
Police with the help of Dog Squads and BDS teams for any suspicious article or movement to
prevent any terrorist attack.
3.7.3 The Committee observes that about 25 lakh commuters travel through metro rail
daily in Delhi and in view of the prevailing security scenario in the country, metro rail in
Delhi appears to be vulnerable to manmade disasters or terrorist attack. The Committee
recommends that Delhi Police should continue to take preemptive steps to guard Delhi
Metro against any causality/strikes. Delhi Police should be in close coordination with CISF
to provide appropriate security without any possibility of lapse. Deployment of Delhi Police
staff at more Metro Stations may also be examined.
3.8 RAILWAY STATIONS
3.8.1 The Committee further desired to know the strategy being adopted to guard various railway
stations against terrorist attack and further security arrangements done in this regard.

19
3.8.2 In response, Delhi Police submitted that the major responsibility of guarding the railway
stations against any terrorist attack has been entrusted to RPF. The access control, the X-ray
baggage scanning, the DFMD/HHMD frisking, picketing and patrolling is done by RPF as per their
preventive plan. Delhi Police has also deployed staff in 5 police stations of Railway to prevent and
detect crime. This staff also supplements the RPF staff for guarding Railways against terrorist
strikes.
3.8.3 Delhi Police added that the CCTV cameras have also been installed at different railway
stations and are being monitored by RPF. Apart from this, the Machans and Morchas have also
been put up in the circulating areas of the railway station by the RPF and Delhi Police. The GRP
(Delhi Police) staff is primarily deployed to prevent and detect crime in the area of the railway
stations. However, the GRP staff also supplements the RPF staff in guarding the railways stations
from the terrorist attack in the following manner:–
(i) A joint patrolling with RPF is organized from time to time.
(ii) Checking of the parking lots and other areas of the railway stations are being done
by the Dog Squad and BDS teams of Delhi Police time to time.
(iii) Picketing and patrolling by the GRP staff to keep watch and surveillance over bad
elements is also being done.
(iv) A regular meeting with the vendors of the railway stations is being held by GRP under
Ears and Eyes Scheme to educate them and brief them so that watch can be kept in
the area.
3.8.4 In addition to the above, the following suggestions have also been proposed by Delhi
Police:–
(i) Large size Cargo Scanners should be installed at the Railway Station to check the
parcels entering the Railway Stations.
(ii) The CCTV coverage should also include the parking lots of the railway stations. The
cameras having the Licensed Plate Reader system should be installed at the entrance
of Railway Station so that effective check can be kept on the vehicles entering the
railway stations.
(iii) The strength of the RPF should be increased so that the visibility and the effectiveness
can be improved.
(iv) The illumination of the dark areas of the Railway Stations should be improved to
prevent any untoward incidents.
3.8.5 The Committee observes that Delhi Police (GRP) has to discharge the security
responsibility in tandem with RPF at the railway stations. In view of the Committee, Joint
mock drills of GRP and RPF are required as these forces have to work in close co-ordination
and any gap in strategy or lapse on the course of action would prove disastrous.
3.8.6 The Committee desires that the proposals of Delhi Police for installation of large size
cargo scanner; CCTV coverage of parking lots; assessment and increase in the strength of
RPF and GRP staff at various Railway stations and illumination of dark areas in Railway
station premises may be addressed at the earliest. Ministry of Home Affairs may work out
a suitable plan in tandem with Ministry of Railways and Government of NCT of Delhi for
ensuring prompt execution of these measures.

20
3.9 Human rights violation-custodial deaths etc.
3.9.1 The Committee sought to know the number of cases of human rights violations reported
and registered in Delhi and action taken against erring officials during the last five years.
Responding to that Delhi Police stated that a number of complaints regarding violation of Human
rights are received through various agencies by Delhi Police. These complaints are enquired by
Vigilance Branch as well as Public Grievances Cell established in the Districts. Strict action against
the erring police personnel is taken against whom the allegations of human rights violations are
substantiated. The details of complaints regarding human rights violation and action taken against
the erring police personnel are given as under:–
Year-wise details of complaints
Year Received Substantiated Not-Substantiated Pending
2008 183 – 183 –
2009 165 – 165 –
2010 173 02 171 –
2011 203 02 195 06
2012 220 05 165 50
T
OTAL 944 09 879 56
Details of action taken against the erring police personnel
Y ear Inspr. SIs ASIs HCs Const.
2008                                        02
2009
2010 01 01 – – 01
2011 – 01 01 01 –
2012 01 05 – – 01
T
OTAL 02 07 03 01 02
3.9.2 Giving the details of the number of custodial deaths in lock ups during the last five years,
Delhi Police furnished year-wise break up with action taken against guilty officials:–
Year No. of cases Status Arrested
2008 01 Pending Investigation Nil
2009 – -do- Nil
2010 02 -do- Nil
2011 – -do- Nil
2012 02 -do- Nil
TOTAL 05 -do- Nil

21
3.9.3 Y ear -wise Number of Custodial Death in Jails in Delhi during the last 5 years is as under:–
Sl. No. Year Total Case Reported Tihar Jail Rohini Jail
1. 2008 – – –
2. 2009 2 – 2
3. 2010 2 2 –
4. 2011 3 2 1
5. 2012 5 4 1
3.9.4 Human rights violation at the hands of law and order enforcing agencies has become
a recurring feature which is a cause of serious concern for a civilized society. Custodial
death has not only earned a bad name for the police but also affects the image of the
country in international fora. Therefore, utmost care is required to be taken to pre-empt
and prevent any custodial death. The Committee also notes with deep anguish that there
had been five cases of custodial deaths in lock ups in Delhi since 2008 and investigation in
all the cases is still pending. The Committee takes serious exception to this unreasonable
delay. The Committee feels that the inordinate delay in investigation can breed a sense of
complacency in the minds of police personnel. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that investigations should be completed at the earliest and action be taken
against the culprits.
3.9.5 The Committee has come across some instances of attachment of personnel of
different State Police forces as PSOs providing security cover with latest weapons to
influential persons belonging to respective States residing in Delhi without knowledge of
Delhi Police. The Committee expresses concern and observes that it is a serious issue as
such instance may affect command and control of Delhi Police Security Unit. Since the
presence of security staff from other States in Delhi is not in consonance with the
provisions/instructions contained in yellow Book, the Committee recommends strongly that
instructions of Ministry of Home Affairs must be complied in letter and spirit so that in
case of eventuality there would not be any problem in fixing the responsibility.
3.10 Amendment to IT Act dealing with cyber law
3.10.1 The Committee was informed of details of cases registered/investigated by Cyber Crime
Cell/EOW during the years of 2010, 2011 and 2012 which are as under:–
Year PS Other T otal Status
EOW PSs
Pending Pending
Trail Investigation
2010 06 04 10 – 10
2 0 1 1 3 00 13 1 0 2 2 9
2012 33 07 40 01 39
3.10.2 The Committee was given to understand that the IT Act needs to be reviewed regularly. The
Delhi Police in this regard gave the following suggestions:–

22
(i) Investigations/Enquiries in the Cyber matter require quick response from Service
Providers. The replies from Service providers get delayed. A formal mechanism has
to be setup for expediting information regarding IP address resolution from Service
Providers.
(ii) W ebsites do not respond to our requests for blocking objectionable contents from their
portals. A policy has to be formulated in soliciting quick response from various
websites.
(iii) Several generalized terms are being used in definition of section 66A of IT Act like
annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, hatred etc. Illustrative definition
of each term should be provided in the Act with some explanation/illustration.
(iv) As per section 78 of the IT Act, police officer not below the rank of Inspector shall
investigate the offence under the Act. But due to limitation of number of Inspectors
in force, Sub-Inspector Rank should also be empowered to investigate offences under
the Act.
3.10.3 The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that out of 68 cyber crime cases
registered since 2010 by the Delhi Police, only 3 are under trial stage and the remaining
are under investigation. This is a very sorry state of affair and warrants no excuses. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all the cases may be brought to their
conclusion stage at the earliest.
3.10.4 The committee feels that the suggestions given by Delhi Police need thorough and
cautious deliberations. The Committee, is of the considered view that the IT Act dealing
with the cyber crime need to be reviewed on a regular basis given the rapid development
of technology and the sophisticated modus operandi the criminals adopt. All the suggestions
made by Delhi Police may be looked into and appropriate action may be taken in the
matter.

23
CHAPTER-IV
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
4.0 Transparency
4.1 One of the suggestions received from the public called for more police-public interaction
and greater transparency in police working. They have urged for change in the attitude of police
officers so that there is fear of law and not of police. They have suggested that image of police
should be improved through better police-public relations and effectively reaching out to public.
The police should conduct regular meetings, invite participation of public and provide a transparent
and citizen-friendly policing. The Members of the Committee also raised this issue during the
discussion with the Home Secretary as well as Commissioner, Delhi Police. They sought to know
the mechanism existing in Delhi Police for facilitation of police-public interaction and whether any
study has been conducted to assess the impact of such mechanism on the reduction of crime rate
in Delhi.
4.1.1 Responding to the query, Delhi Police informed the Committee that the following community
policing measures have been adopted for better police public interaction:
(i) ‘Know your Police Station’.
(ii) ‘Play grounds for Youths’ - YUV A
(iii) W omen Help Desk.
(iv) Rape Crisis Intervention Centers.
(v) Parivartan.
(vi) Senior Citizen’ s Scheme.
(vii) Eyes and Ears Scheme.
(viii) Domestic Help/Tenant Registration Drives.
(ix) Short Message Service.
(x) Integrated Command Control Co-Ordination and Communication Centre( C4i).
4.1.2 According to the Delhi Police, there is a continuous effort and emphasis at all levels of
Delhi Police to provide citizen-centric services by the police. Senior officers continuously brief the
subordinate ranks to be more empathetic towards the complainants and to inculcate a professional
approach in their functioning. All senior levels of police force also have interaction with the general
public for redressal of their grievances. Regular Thana Level and District Level meetings are
conducted by the SHOs/ACsP/DCsP. Apart from this, meetings at various other forums like with
RWAs, Market Associations, Senior citizens, students, transporters, women’s groups, NGOs etc.
are conducted by the police for ensuring greater police-public interaction.
4.1.3 There are Complaint Cells in all units and senior officers have fixed meeting time for the
public every day. Delhi Police has a computerized Complaints Monitoring and Tracking System
(CMTS), through which a track of all complaints received from the public is kept. Various
statutory bodies like the NHRC and other Commissions as well as courts too entertain the
23

24
complaints of the public about the functioning of the police and call for regular reports. The Public
Grievances Commission of the Delhi government also looks into the complaints of the citizens.
4.1.4 Besides this, some recent initiatives for citizen grievance redressal have been taken by Delhi
Police like ‘ Jan Sampark Sabhas ’ being held regularly in all districts and ‘Yuva’ where the police
takes the initiative to wean away youths from under privileged society and channelize their energy
in constructive activities like sports, vocational training etc. Other programmes of Delhi Police like
‘Parivartan’ is aimed at women of vulnerable areas like jhuggi clusters and the ‘Eyes and ears
scheme’ is aim at providing citizen centric policing and working together with the community on
positive aspects.
4.1.5 The Committee was apprised that a recently introduced pro-active measure for public
cooperation is the concept of JAN SAMPARK, wherein senior officers of Delhi Police go to their
respective areas on a pre-scheduled time and date and hear public grievances at a neutral venue
like auditoriums, school-halls, public parks etc. A Standing Order No. 403/2012 has been issued in
this regard by CP/Delhi. This is bound to lead to speedier solutions to problems/grievances.
4.1.6 The Committee was further informed that a new initiative namely ‘AAPKA UPDATE’ has
been taken by Delhi Police to inform the complainants about progress of their complaints/cases.
A Standing Order No. 411/2012 has been issued in this regard by CP/Delhi.
4.1.7 The Committee was also informed that Delhi Police has always given emphasis on public
participation in solving crime through various community policing schemes like Neighborhood
Watch Scheme; Eyes and Ears Scheme; Parivartan – an initiative on women participation in beats
in slum areas, regular meetings with citizens committees, RWAs, market associations, etc. Delhi
Police is, now, taking up new innovative idea of community policing with a view to have a better
out reach to the public. It includes use of technology e.g. Internet and social networking tools like
FACEBOOK.
4.1.8 The Committee is of the considered view that cooperation and participation of
common man is backbone of the whole arrangement made for administration and
maintenance of law and order. The Committee, therefore, feels that Delhi police should gain
appropriate expertise and take advantage of police-public interface mechanisms existing in
metropolitan cities of developed countries like UK, USA, Singapore, and adopt better concepts.
4.1.9 The Committee expresses its concern over the situation where no formal study has
been conducted to assess the impact of the police public interaction measures on the
reduction of crime rate in Delhi. A study may be conducted at the earliest.
4.1.10 The Committee observes that despite the fact that Delhi Police has undertaken
several schemes and programmes, still people continue to suffer from police phobia. The
Committee, therefore, feels that it is high time for Delhi Police for soul searching and
introspection about the effectiveness of the schemes. The Committee is of the considered
view that the Delhi Police should take up brain storming sessions regularly on how to
improve its public image through effective reaching out to public and providing a
transparent and citizen friendly policing.
4.2 Corruption
4.2.1 Some people and organisations complained of rampant corruption in Delhi Police. According
to them corrupt officers should be suitably punished. Important and plum postings should not be
done on the basis of any kind of favour. Anti-corruption initiatives should be taken. Every police
officer should disclose his moveable and immoveable assets. The entire process of recruitment,
selection, transfers and postings should be transparent.

25
4.2.2 Replying to the query, Delhi Police informed the Committee in writing as under:–
(i) Delhi Police has a “zero tolerance” policy against corruption. All the complaints of
corruption are immediately looked into and a strict action is taken if the allegations are
substantiated. Enquiries on allegations of corruption are made by the Vigilance unit as
well.
(ii) As regards the appointments to various posts within the Delhi Police, the transfers and
postings are decided by the Delhi Police Establishment Board and not by any
individual. Further, the transfers and postings are done as per the laid down policies
and guidelines. A complete transparency is maintained by Delhi Police in this regard.
Similarly, the procedures regarding recruitment and promotions in Delhi Police are
highly transparent by adopting several transparent recruitment process features as
given by MHA.
(iii) As regards the disclosure of assets, every Gazetted rank police officer is required to
fill Immovable Property Returns every year.
4.2.3 Explaining about the steps taken by vigilance unit, the Committee was further informed as
under:–
“An exclusive Vigilance Unit exists in Delhi Police for prevention and detection of
corruption of any other malpractices on the part of Delhi Police personnel during their
official or private conduct. Complaints received from various Government agencies against
police personnel’ s involvement in corruption and other misconducts including human rights
violations are enquired by the Vigilance Unit of Delhi Police. For prompt redressal of
public grievances, a flying squad has been established in Vigilance Branch. Periodical
surprise checking of police stations/police posts is also being conducted through its checking
officers of the rank of ACsP/Inspectors. Apart from the above, Public Grievance Cells have
also been established in each District of Delhi Police which also conducts enquiries into
complaints against police officials on allegations of corruption, malpractices etc. A police
station for the Vigilance Unit is likely to be sanctioned soon. Due to aforesaid sustained
efforts, numerous officials of Delhi Police have been identified and punished in the last
five years.”
4.2.4 The Committee observes with concern that there is widespread public perception
regarding rampant corruption making deep dent into the so called ‘clean image and
transparent system of transfers and postings of police personnel. The claim of Delhi Police
of having zero tolerance policy fly on its own face when people observe that traffic police
officials collect money at red lights from bus drivers, commuters on violation of traffic
rules. It is said that transporters, particularly bus operators have to pay monthly at various
points on their route of operations. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that flying
vigilance squad should check proactively corruption amongst Delhi traffic police personnel
by organizing suo-motto surveillance traps and raids, followed by strict and deterrent follow
up action against the erring officials. In order to ensure transparency among the traffic
staff, PRG Cell in Traffic Unit also must act promptly in making enquiry into complaints
of corruption against Traffic Police officials. The Committee is also given to understand that
people generally talk of lucrative posting in certain police stations where high illegal return
is supposed to be extracted easily. Delhi Police should take a serious note of this illegal
practice and take immediate corrective measures to curb the evil.
4.2.5 The Committee is of the view that mandatory provisions should be invoked wherein
police officers of every rank are required to file immovable property return every year. The
Committee feels that, as demanded by public for disclosure of movable property also,

26
personnel in the law enforcing agencies or the agencies where chances of corruption are
high, should also be made to disclose movable property as there have been a number of
cases where movable assets worth crores of rupees were found to be in possession during
raids. The Committee also gathers from the media reports as well as website of the Ministry
of Home Affairs that a large number of IPS officers were yet to file IPRs even after expiry
of stipulated date and some officers did not file the same even after several reminders
issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee takes very serious exception to this
as this is a clear case of failure of control by the cadre-controlling Ministry. The Committee
feels besides vigilance clearance, appropriate actions like deduction in over all grading
marks in Annual Performance Assessment Report should also be enforced.
4.3 Accountability in Police working
4.3.1 Some people in their memoranda felt that the process of disposal of complaints should be
more transparent. Investigation of cases should be completed in a time bound manner and the IOs
should be held accountable for any lapses in the investigation. Citizen centric services like passport
enquiry, job verification, etc should be done in a transparent manner. Citizen Charter should be
there.
4.3.2 Responding to the suggestions, the Committee was informed that
(i) Every police officer is responsible for all his acts of commission or omission done in
official capacity. In cases where the trial ends in acquittal, the IO is held responsible
if the acquittal is attributable to any flaws in the investigation.
(ii) A continuous check on the number of complaints received and disposed in every unit
is kept by the senior officers.
(iii) V arious Citizen Centric Services in Delhi Police like the Licensing Branch, Passport
Enquiry, and Traffic management are very closely supervised by senior officers to
ensure best service to the public.
(iv) Several units/processes in Delhi Police including licensing, provisioning and
recruitment have obtained ISO Certification which is a testimony of high quality of
standards maintained.
(v) The Traffic Police has reached out to the public through Facebook which has made
it one of the most transparent and responsive units.
4.4 Grievance Redressal System
4.4.1 According to Delhi Police, to ensure that assssssll complaints get duly addressed and
complainants get adequate opportunity, a high level of grievance redressal measures have been
implemented for public grievances redressal and open access to complainant which inter-alia
includes the following:
(i) Open access to all senior officers for personal hearing
(ii) Complaint through email
(iii) Complaint through PCR
(iv) Complaint through Vigilance Branch
(v) Dedicated helplines for women/senior citizens/children

27
(vi) Specialised wing to deal with problem of women and juveniles
(vii) Senior Citizen Cell to deal with problem of senior citizen
(viii) Provision of women Help Desk in each police station
(ix) Use of social networking site like Facebook/Twitter
(x) Independent enquiry by Vigilance Branch in case of any malpractice or misconduct.
(xi) Facility of giving any information or feedback to police station, a software called
‘know your police station’ is launched on Delhi Police website.
4.4.2 The Committee was informed that the Vigilance Branch conducts enquiries into complaints
of non-registration of cases, corruption and other mal-practices against police officials. Allegations
of criminal misconduct, breach of discipline, negligence and abuse of authority, disobedience of
orders, insubordination, breach of police and conduct rules, delay, inefficiency and other lapses in
official duties are also enquired into. List of police personnel of doubtful integrity is maintained,
scrutiny of punishments and monitoring progress of criminal cases, departmental enquiries, award
of all major and minor punishments and periodical review is undertaken by vigilance to ensure
timely action.
4.4.3 Delhi Police further informed the Committee that Vigilance Branch has taken various steps
to bring openness and transparency in police working. As a part of the exercise, the Vigilance
Branch has initiated actions with emphasis on “preventive vigilance”. The following measures are
also taken to curb the menace of corruption and encourage police officials to take just and timely
action:
(i) Surprise checks with a view to ensure compliance of law, rules and procedures.
(ii) Computerization and regular updating of data.
(iii) Monthly meetings of Special CP/Vigilance with Disciplinary Authorities to monitor
various actions/progress relating to departmental enquiries, show cause notices and
disposal of complaints/references.
(iv) Disposal of departmental enquiries and show cause notices.
4.4.4 The Committee is of the strong opinion that all the claims and steps seem to be
laudable on papers only particularly when common man has to face difficulties and agony
in getting his work done from thana. The Committee therefore recommends that a close
and vigilant scrutiny of the working of such wings/ units of Delhi Police, where common
people have to come or to be contacted for simple works like verifications etc. should be
done.

28
CHAPTER-V
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
5.0 Administration and Manpower
5.1 Some people in their memoranda raised issue of discrepancy between work hours of staff
posted in some police stations and those in other units. They also raised the issues of separate unit
for bandobast duties, special arrangements. It was observed that shortage of police personnel needs
to be checked.
Response of the Delhi Police
5.1.1 Delhi Police responding to the issue stated that there is a difference in the nature of tasks
performed by the staff posted in police stations and those in other units, the working hours are
also different. Normally the police station staff is involved in multifarious duties which involve
prevention of crime, investigation of cases, law and order duties and various other similar
responsibilities. On the other hand, the staff posted in other units concentrate on specialized jobs
like traffic, security etc. As per the nature of duties, the working hours of staff posted in police
stations tend to be more demanding. However they are given rest on a weekly basis as far as
possible. It was also stated that at present it has not been possible to separate the investigation
duties from the law and order duties since it would involve a huge requirement of man power.
However, this separation has been achieved to some extent by posting a separate Inspector
(Investigation) in each police station who concentrates mainly on the progress of investigation of
cases. Similarly, there are specialized units for investigation purpose like the Crime Branch, EOW,
Special Cell and SPUW&C which concentrate on investigation of cases and detection of crime. All
the districts also have specialized District Investigation Unit (DIU) having separate staff. It was
further informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs has sanctioned 1481 posts (SI-10, HC-1083 and
Ct.-388) in the year 2004 for the purpose of separation of investigation from law and order duties.
In addition, 123 posts of Inspectors were sanctioned by the Government in November, 2005 for
the purpose of supervising the work of crime investigation at police station level. Besides, a
separate proposal for creation of additional 6064 posts in various ranks for separation of crime
investigation from law and order duties and beat staff was sent to MHA in the year 2005 as a part
of comprehensive proposal and it is under consideration in MHA.
5.1.2 The Committee sought to know the status whether Delhi Police has sent any proposal to
the Ministry of Home Affairs for augmentation of staff in Delhi Police keeping in account the ever
expanding role of Delhi Police. In response to that the Committee has been informed that to
augment manpower resources of Delhi Police, 69 proposals have been sent for creation of 35,234
posts which are pending with MHA. MHA had asked to rework the demand for manpower.
Accordingly, PHQ has sent the comprehensive proposal of Phase-II and III for creation of 8877
posts in Delhi Police to MHA with copy to Government of NCT of Delhi, who in turn, has also
forwarded the same to MHA for sanction.
5.1.3 The Committee in this regard feels that adequate attention is required to assess
actual requirement of police strength for improving police population ratio, review of
recruitment rules for face lifting and providing cosmopolitan character, rationalization of
working hours, separation of investigation and VVIP security from law and order,
28

29
introduction of motivational schemes under effective HRM besides putting in place
transparent and accountable system of policing. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Delhi Police may get the assistance and guidance of BPR&D for revisiting the whole
Delhi Police Administration and come out with concrete suggestions/recommendations on
imbibing operational efficiency into Delhi Police organization and functions.
5.1.4 The Committee further observes that the policemen placed at Police Stations have to
juggle between performing multifarious jobs of investigating into the cases as well as
maintaining the general law and order and appearing in different courts time to time. The
Committee notes that a proposal of Delhi Police for creation of additional posts in various
ranks for separation of crime investigation from law and order duties is pending with the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs
should actively consider the proposal and forward the same to the Ministry of Finance for
approval.
5.1.5 The Committee was further informed that MHA vide its letter dated 10.01.2013 has
accorded approval for conversion of 522 posts of male Constables (Executive) to female posts of
(Executive) to which recruitment process to fill the same is being started on priority. The
Committee was also informed that the ratio of women officers and constables in the Delhi Police
is less than seven per cent. It is not because of lesser availability of candidates, but it is because
of not paying enough attention to this aspect. A request has been made and the Home Minister had
assured that he would manage to get some more posts created for women police officers.
5.1.6 The Committee feels that women can participate in all walks of life at par with men
successfully and there are ample articles and studies to suggest this. The Committee is,
therefore, of the view that all out efforts should be made to fill up the post converted from
male Constables (Executive) to female posts of (Executive). The Committee also desires that
the new posts of police officers as assured by the Home Minister may be created at the
earliest. The Committee feels that number of women police staff should be at least 33%
of the total strength and recommends that sincere efforts may be made in this direction.
5.1.7 The Committee was also informed that Delhi Police takes the following steps for effective
HR Management:
(i) There is a constant effort by Delhi Police to encourage every policeman to take pride
in his/her job. For this, it is necessary that the welfare of police personnel is given
due priority. Delhi Police has taken various measures in this regard.
(ii) To encourage the good work of the staff, various motivators like ‘Best beat Officer
of the month’ , reward rolls, etc are given. Regular Sampark Sabhas are held by the
Senior officers to redress the grievances of the subordinate ranks. A culture of
organising ‘Bada Khana’ is followed to provide an informal platform to various ranks
to interact vertically as well as horizontally in the hierarchy.
(iii) As regards working hours, the nature of police work is such that fixed duty shifts
are not possible for all, owing to the multifarious tasks required to be performed by
the police. However, weekly rests are ensured for all ranks. A healthy rotation of
duties also keeps the staff motivated.
5.1.8 The Committee was further informed that the following measures have been taken for HR
Management to take optimum use:–
(i) As per Delhi Police (Promotion and Confirmation) Rules, 1980, promotion panel for
various promotion lists are drawn in a time bound manner subject to the availability

30
of vacancy in the next higher rank/grade. Accordingly, promotions of subordinate’s
ranks are made.
(ii) As per Rule-19 (ii) Delhi Police (Promotion and Confirmation) Rules-1980 incentives
in the form of ‘Out of turn Promotion’ to the subordinate ranks officers are granted
for their exceptional gallant act in the discharge of their official duties.
(iii) “Asadharan Karya Puraskar” and Commendation Rolls are also granted to the
subordinate ranks officers for their outstanding performance in the discharge of their
official duties for their future encouragement.
(iv) President Police medals for meritorious and distinguished services are also got
awarded to the police officers/men of Delhi Police having clean record in their service
career.
5.1.9 The Committee was further informed that out of turn promotions to the subordinate ranks
officers are granted for their exceptional gallant act in the discharge of their official duties. The
details of out of turn promotion granted to the police personnel from 2008 to 2012 are as under:–
Year Ranks
SI ASI H C Ct.
2008 – – 2 –
2009 – 1 1 –
2010 – – – –
2011 5 – 30 9
2012 1 1 22 6
T
OTAL 6 2 55 15
5.1.10 The Committee understands that Human Resource Development is an essential
ingredient of every Government set up and Delhi Police is no exception. The Committee
believes that effective Human Resource Management would keep the morale of Delhi Police
high, leading to efficient functioning. The Committee understands that the job profile of a
police requires good deal of dedication, efforts, commitment, honesty and sacrifice, and
therefore there is a need to pay due attention to motivate police-personnel in order to
enhance their morale.
5.1.11 The Committee notes various motivational schemes under implementation in Delhi
Police and believes that the existing motivational schemes would have positive impact on the
functioning of Delhi Police. The Committee appreciates the concept of awards “Best Beat
Officer” and “Asadharan Karya Puraskar” and desires that more such motivational schemes
may be introduced to accelerate operational efficiency of Delhi Police.
5.2 Residential Accommodation for Delhi Police
5.2.1 The Committee observed that the availability of accommodation for the personnel of Delhi
Police is not adequate. At present 15,584 staff quarters are available against the strength of 83,762
Police personnel. The housing satisfaction level of Delhi Police is 18.60%. However, Delhi Police
has planned to construct 1,204 staff quarters in Twelfth Five Year Plan Scheme (2012-2017).
Besides this, Delhi Police has also started process to construct 5,202 staff quarters at Dheerpur

31
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. 1,688 staff quarters under Non-Plan Head (Police
Modernization Scheme) are under construction. It was stated that in view of the above position
housing satisfaction level will be increased from 18.60% to 28.27% by the end of Twelfth Five
Year Plan Scheme (2012-2017).
5.2.2 Delhi Police also apprised the Committee about the problems coming up in the way of
completing the housing projects which are as under:–
(i) Non-allotment of land by land-owning agencies.
(ii) Non-clearance of building plans by local bodies like DDA, MCD, NDMC, Delhi Fire
Service and DUAC etc. in time.
(iii) Non-completion of constructions by PWD/CPWD in time.
(iv) Non-allotment of land as well as ready built flats by concerned agencies.
(v) Increase in man-power strength of Delhi Police from 58,877 (as on 01.04.2002) to
83,762 (as on 30.11.2012)
(vi) 877 flats were purchased on 18.03.2005 and their possession was taken on
03.11.2009 in Rohini from DDA, which are still lying vacant as water supply and
sewerage disposal has not been completed by DDA/MCD authorities.
5.2.3 On the issue of construction of residential quarters for police personnel, Commissioner of
Police, Delhi stated as under:-
“....it is a major problem, and, we would seek your help in this direction because the most
important thing is availability of land. The availability of land in the city is very limited
and there are various pulls and pressures from various sources. Therefore, if we are able
to reach a satisfaction level of over 30 per cent, we would have achieved a great deal.”
5.2.4 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the shortage of
adequate accommodation for the personnel of Delhi Police. At present the Housing
satisfaction level is only 18.60% and the same is likely to be increased to level of 28.27%
by the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17). The Committee, strongly recommends
that the 5,202 staff quarters which are under construction at Dheerpur under Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode and 1,688 staff quarters under Non-Plan Head (Police Modernization
Scheme) must be completed within stipulated time frame . The Committee is of the
considered view that the pace of construction of housing projects for Delhi Police must
match the pace of increase in man-power strength of Delhi Police, otherwise the housing
satisfaction level would further deteriorate.
5.2.5 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up
the matter and coordinate with the concerned Ministries/agencies to resolve the issue of
non-allotment of land by land-owning agencies and non-clearance of building plans by
agencies like DDA, MCD, NDMC, Delhi Fire Service and DUAC etc. The Committee, while
taking a serious view of the issue of non-completion of construction by PWD/CPWD in
time, recommends that Delhi Police in tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs should
take necessary action to invoke the penalty clause for non-completion of work within
stipulated time.
5.2.6 The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that though Delhi Police purchased
877 flats and took possession in 2009, the DDA and MCD have not provided water and sewage
facilities. It shows negligence on the part of both the agencies. The Committee recommends
that the matter may be taken up immediately and it may be informed of the outcome.

32
5.2.7 The Committee is concerned with the pace of construction of residential quarters for
police personnel. With regard to construction of residential quarters, if the construction
works continue at this pace, it would take a long period to achieve the set target and, by
that time, strength of the police personnel would achieve further go up requiring enhanced
number of residential quarters for Delhi Police staff and officers. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that all hurdles on the way to achieve the set target of satisfaction
level with regard to construction of residential quarter must be overcome. The Ministry of
Home Affairs must be for thcoming in pursuing the issue of making available of land for
providing site for construction of residential quarters.
5.3 Training
5.3.1 Training is an important aspect required to prepare policemen for the present day demands
of policing. They should be given training to keep them physically and mentally fit. Training in
technical and behavioral aspects should also be provided to the policemen.
5.3.2 Delhi Police stated that the training schedules of the policemen at all ranks are continuously
revisited to make suitable amendments as and when required. Besides the basic course, regular
refresher courses are held to impart training in subjects related to the job. The basic training of
Constables and Sub-Inspectors in Delhi Police is very elaborate and it undergoes continuous
improvement. Topics like human rights, RTI, gender issues, rights of juveniles, issues concerning
SCs/STs are included in the training curriculum. They are also given training on subjects like use
of computers, driving, use of sophisticated weapons and commando training etc. Training on Yoga,
physical fitness and behavioural aspects is also included in the curriculum. Apart from the basic
training, there are a number of in-service courses on various subjects organized for different ranks.
Delhi Police officers are also sent to outside specialized training institutes for refresher courses.
The Committee was informed that in 2012 (upto October 31), 2145 personnel completed their basic
training and 721 personnel underwent promotional courses at PTC. As many as 584 Delhi Police
personnel were sent to other training institutions for specialized courses.
5.3.3 It was also stated that a specialized Unit called Special Cell has been created in Delhi Police
to deal with counter terror measures and other specialized operations. All police personnel posted
in the Unit undergo in-house training on technical analysis and surveillance, interrogation
techniques, use of latest equipment to aid investigation and detection etc. The unit keeps itself
updated and acquires latest equipment for improving surveillance, detection and investigation.
5.3.4 All police personnel joining the force in the rank of SIs and ACsP undergo one year training
in law, police science and investigation, terrorism and other subjects. Use of state-of-the-art
technology is essential component for induction training. Similar training is provided to constables
who are trained for 10 months. Investigation and terrorism are part of the training syllabus for all
promotional training courses in which latest investigation techniques are taught to all police officers,
who get promoted to the rank of HCs, ASIs and SIs.
5.3.5 In-service courses are organized in the field of use of science and technology, explosives and
anti terrorist measures and for prevention of terrorist attack. The courses organized are as under:–
Sl. Name of Course No. of Courses Level of
No. per year Participants
12 3 4
1. Course on Prevention of terrorist attacks 06 Inspr.
2. Facets of terrorism and how to investigate terror 04 SI to Inspr.
crimes

33
12 3 4
3. Searching and Frisking of suspects, upgradation of 06 Ct. to SI
outdoor skills, explosive measures
4. VIP/VVIP security related issues 03 HC to Inspr.
5. 3 months Commando Course 04 Constables
(Male/Female)
6. Use of science and technology in Police work 01 ASIs to Insprs.
5.3.6 The Committee was also informed that selected police personnel are nominated for advance
commando training at NSG, CRPF, BSF and other specialized centers including Police Training
College, Delhi Police. Besides, physical fitness and advance training on use of latest weapons,
police personnel have also been sent for training abroad and in India as well in collaboration with
specialized institutions located abroad for the use of state of the art technology, commando training
and bomb detection and disposal courses. Such courses are organized at the instance of BPR&D.
5.3.7 Besides the basic and promotion training courses, stress management training is provided by
holding in-service training programmes for police personnel on stress management at STC/Rajinder
Nagar. A group of 1000 police personnel who belonged to tourist police and Police Control Room
were given training on stress management and soft skills by Delhi Police through Haryana Institute
of Public Administration with the help of financial aid provided by Tourism Ministry.
5.3.8 The de tails of courses undertaken in the last three years is as follows:–
Year Name of Course No. of Courses Participants
2010 Stress and Time Management 01 20
Course aimed at attitudinal change to gear 114 10433
up for the.Commonwealth Games
2011 Stress and Time Management 02 34
Art of Living 03 127
Course for Tourist Police and PCR 20 1000
2012 Stress and Time Management 08 363
Art of Living 01 29
Refresher course for constables 05 1902
5.3.9 The Committee understands that training is one of the most vital components for
effective policing job. Therefore, Delhi Police should be imparted basic, regular, refresher
and on the job training for not only ensuring physical and psychological fitness but also
keeping in view the changing composition of crimes and to combat the challenges on that
front. The functions of Delhi Police ranges from maintaining law and order situation to
keep the national capital safe and secured, allowing demonstration rallies/dharnas and at
the same time, projecting and protecting international image of India by providing world-
class policing system.
5.3.10 The Committee is of the considered view that NCT of Delhi must have sufficient
infrastructure and training facilities to impart training not only to Delhi Police personnel

34
but of neighboring States as well. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs must consider to create infrastructure for setting up adequate
training facilities for Police personnel.
5.3.11 The Committee also feels that training to police force in different areas ensures
sustained improvement and efficiency in its functioning and Delhi Police is not exception to
this principle. As training is an on-going process, it needs to be taken with special care in
order to make the police force result-oriented. The Committee recommends that Delhi
Police may also consult Sardar Vallabhai National Police Academy for chalking out syllabus
for training of Delhi Police in regard to combating terrorism and other areas of Police
functioning, particularly collection of evidences.
5.3.12 The Committee strongly recommends that dedicated physical fitness programmes
must be organized on regular basis to ensure efficiency in the police force. Attending
Physical fitness programmes must be made compulsory for promotion to all grades. All
Delhi Police staff and officers, irrespective of rank and file must undergo compulsory
annual medical check-up to bring awareness about their health status. Necessary
arrangements may be made for such health check up.
5.3.13 The Committee understands that long hours of duty by the personnel of Delhi Police
generate amongst them fatigue leading to disorder in behavior pattern which has its bearing
on the force as a whole. The Committee, while noting training course for stress
management undertaken during last three years feels that number of participants are still
low. Therefore, comprehensive stress management needs to be organized on regular basis
for all ranks and file.
5.4 Vacancies
5.4.1 The Committee was informed of the vacancies in Delhi Police as under:–
Sl. No. Rank Sanction Present V acancy
1. DCPs and above 157 110 47
2. ACP 348 239 109
3. Insprs. 1350 1319 31
4. SI 5805 4940 865
5. ASI 6752 5861 891
6. H C 20817 19340 1477
7. Ct 45929 44591 1338
8. Civilian 94 40 54
9. MTS*** 2200 1765 435
G
RAND T OTAL 83452 78205 5247
***There is a ban on recruitment of MTS.
5.4.2 According to the Delhi Police, vacancies have been created due to sanction of new posts
sanctioned by MHA, promotions, retirements and death and non-availability of suitable candidates.
The proposal for creation of 472 posts for 7 metro Police Stations was sent to MHA in 2007 as

35
a part of Comprehensive Proposal and still pending with MHA. In 2011, the proposal was revised
from 7 Metro Police Stations to 8 Metro Police Stations in which 2088 posts have been demanded
and sent to Delhi Government. The proposal is still pending.
5.4.3 W ith regard to query of sanctioning of additional posts of women police personnel, the Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Finance informed that there was no pending proposal of Delhi Police in the
Ministry of Finance for sanctioning of posts of women Police. However, over the last five years,
the Finance Ministry has sanctioned a total of 19,090 posts for Delhi Police as has been asked for.
5.4.4 The Committee, in this regard, was further informed by the representatives of MHA that
very recently the Home Minister had taken a complete review of the necessity of inducting women
police in Delhi Station Houses. It has been approved in principle to create 2,506 posts which
involves giving two Sub-Inspectors and ten women constables to each Thana.
5.4.5 The Committee is not happy with the situation arising out of vacancies at different
levels in the Delhi Police. The vacancies have cost the citizens heavily as the crime graph
in Delhi has ended with increase. The Committee therefore recommends that all the
vacancies be filled at the earliest without further delay. Process of sanctioning and filling
of additional posts be completed at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the
new recruits may be sent to nearby training colleges, if situation so warrants to avoid delay
in posting.
5.4.6 The Committee was also informed that proposal for creation of the post of Deputy Legal
Advisor for each Distrct, Crime and Railway and Special Branch was sent to Delhi Government
in 1999 which is still under consideration.
5.4.7 The Committee recommends that the Commissioner of Police, Delhi and the Home
Ministry should get the sanction for the post of Deputy Legal Advisor for each district,
crime and railway and special branch at the earliest and start the process of filling the post
without delay.
5.4.8 It was also brought to the notice of the Committee by the Ministry of Home Affairs that
presently the Public Prosecutors are paid in perks equivalent to Grade I Officers of the Central
Government in accordance with the hierarchy of the Government of India. They may be
incentivised but structure of this may need wider consultation. However, Public Prosecutors are
vital cog in the wheel and some promotional measures to attract best talents should be initiated.
5.4.9 The Committee feels that good professional legal assistance is very important in all
criminal cases from the very beginning of the investigation. The police must get good legal
assistance. It is difficult to get good lawyers at the time of need. The Home Ministry may
consider the proposals of Delhi Police.

36
CHAPTER-VI
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
6.0 Road Accidents
6.1 According to the representatives of Delhi Police, reduction in road accidents remained one
of the top priorities of the traffic police. Efforts in this regard gave some satisfaction as the
numbers of fatalities on Delhi’s roads have registered a decline.
Years Total Road Accidents Total Fatal Accidents
(upto 30
th June)
2011 3582 1038
2012 3261 842
Variation -8.96% -18.88%
6.1.2 Traffic police also strengthened night deployment and carried-out special night checking
cum patrolling in various parts of Delhi with an objective to curb road accidents and enforce
discipline on stretches of roads prone to over-speeding and drunken driving in coordination with
district police and Police Control Room vehicles.
6.1.3 The Committee was informed that a special drive for enforcement has been started on
certain high speed corridors where dangerous traffic violations are rampant. This Benevolent
Special Action for Enforcement (“Be Safe”) is conducted on a sustained basis. The objective of
“Be Safe” is to create awareness towards observance of traffic safety norms and thereby develop
the habit of respecting traffic rules.
6.1.4 The Committee notes that women pillion riders have been exempted from wearing
helmets in Delhi. The Committee believes that an accident does not differentiate on
gender, religion, cast and creed basis, it hurts human being and lives of women are
equally precious and should not be exposed to any avoidable risks. The Committee
therefore earnestly desires that an awareness programme should be vigorously launched
to create awareness among women pillion riders about the necessity of wearing helmets
in their own safety.
6.2 Better Management demonstration/rallies/dharnas
6.2.1 The representative of Delhi Police apprised the Committee that Delhi Being the country’s
Capital, a large number of demonstrations/rallies are held in the city by people who come from
various States. There were 1434 demonstrations, 779 dharnas/strikes, 613 fairs/festivals, 932
processions, 447 meetings, 176 rallies/march, 1897 visits of high dignitaries and 1586 miscellaneous
programmes with large gathering in the city in 2011 pertaining to political, communal, labour, youth
and students issues etc. Special Branch develops extensive advance intelligence/information about
these programmes. Advance liaison meetings with the organizers of such important rallies/dharnas
alongwith the representative officers from local police, traffic and security were also held to make
such rallies/processions smooth and peaceful.
36

37
6.2.2 During the year 2012, Delhi Police handled a total of 8405 demosntrations, Dharnas,
Processions, Rallies etc. which included MCD elections, IPL Cricket Series, Ramdev agitation, Anna
Hazare agitation, BRICS Summit, ASEAN Summit, etc.
6.3 Traffic Management
6.3.1 Some people in the memoranda raised the issue of corruption among traffic police
personnel. They felt that connivance of traffic police with traffic violators leads to loss of revenue
for the government. Action should be taken against the school bus drivers who are without
uniform. Parking is a major concern and people have alleged harassment by parking mafia. Police
personnel who violate traffic rules do not pay any fine. Traffic signal should be installed in a
manner that they are more visible. CCTV cameras should be installed at all junctions and readily
used for challaning the offenders.
6.3.2 Responding to the above issues, the Committee was informed that management of traffic
in a city like Delhi is a huge challenge and Delhi Police has done well in this regard. The Delhi
Traffic Police takes all possible measures which include the following to ensure a smooth flow of
traffic on Delhi roads.
(i) The limited capacity of roads and parking space in comparison to the ever increasing
number of vehicles on the city roads poses great challenge. There are about 72 lakh
registered vehicles on the roads of Delhi and this vehicular population is increasing
with an estimated 5% to 6% every year.
(ii) As regards controlling of corruption among the traffic staff, a constant vigil is
maintained for the same. Any complaints of corruption received from the public against
the police personnel are taken very seriously and immediate enquiry is initiated.
(iii) People of Delhi give continuous suggestions for improvement of traffic on Delhi roads,
which are considered by Delhi Police and the good suggestions are implemented.
People of Delhi also give regular feedbacks on the Facebook page of the Delhi Traffic
police on which prompt action is taken.
(iv) Delhi Police also carries out regular campaigns for education of people, often involving
celebrities, on traffic safety measures. Various enforcement drives against drunken
driving, tinted glasses etc. are launched in the interest of better traffic management and
safety of people on city roads. During the year 2012 (upto October 31), 21608 people
were challaned for drunken driving and action against as many as 2,45,365 vehicles
was taken for tinted glasses. Total persons challaned on Delhi roads during this period
for various traffic violations were 30,06,044. A total of 4,87,401 persons were caught
and challaned by the Chase-and-Challan Teams.
(v) Special drives are held periodically to check school buses also and action is taken if
these are found violating any Traffic Rules or the Guidelines of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India. Tenders for parking lots are floated by the civic authorities. However
local police checks the incidences of illegal parking by unauthorized persons. CCTV
Cameras have been installed at some important intersections to monitor vehicular
movement and check traffic violations.
6.3.3 The Committee, keeping in view, the alleged prevalence of corruption amongst traffic
police, recommends for installation of CCTV cameras at various traffic signals to keep a
constant vigil not only for monitoring vehicle movement and check traffic violation but also
ensuring honest discharge of duties by Delhi Police personnel entrusted with the task of
traffic management. The Committee also understands that parking is a huge challenge for

38
both the commuters and the police. Delhi Police may discuss the issue with the civic
authorities and take appropriate action in the matter.
6.3.4 The Committee was informed that in order to ensure the proper functioning of all traffic
signals in the NCT of Delhi, the following steps are being taken by Delhi Traffic Police:–
(i) Regular preventive maintenance activities are undertaken by the signal maintenance
agency so as to ensure proper and efficient functioning of traffic signals at all times.
(ii) Regular reviews by senior traffic police officers with the representatives of signal
maintenance agency for rectification of faulty traffic signals.
(iii) Dedicated Complaint Centre at Traffic Management Centre for lodging complaints
regarding faulty traffic signals. The general public can also lodge complaints for faulty
signals on Traffic Police Helpline Nos. 25844444 and 1095 working round the clock.
(iv) Regular sensitization of traffic police officers and men to closely monitor the
functioning of traffic signals and activities of signal maintenance agency.
(v) Dedicated teams of signal maintenance agency for undertaking signal repairs and other
maintenance activities on day to day basis.
(vi) Manual regulation of traffic at important traffic signals in case of electricity failure or
other major fault so as to ensure uninterrupted and smooth flow of traffic.
6.3.5 The Committee understands that in a mega metropolitan city like Delhi, the role of
traffic police is very crucial and important. In Delhi, lakhs of people commute from one
part of the city to another everyday. It is estimated that Delhi has the largest number of
vehicles on roads in comparison to other metropolitans of the country. The onerous task of
ensuring smooth flow of traffic lies on the shoulders of Delhi Police. The Committee has
been given to understand that malfunctioning of red lights at many places/points sometimes
cause traffic jams and such junctions are not manned by police personnel thus causing not
only inconvenience to commuters but major traffic jams across the city. Regular
maintenance of traffic signals needs to be augmented and monitored.
6.3.6 The Committee is of the view that Delhi Traffic Police should take all possible steps
to ensure safety to school going children and suitable action should be taken against school
buses flouting the norms. From time to time at short interval, verification of drivers and
helpers should also be undertaken.
6.3.7 The Committee also desires that feasibility of providing solar energy system to
traffic signals to ensure un-interrupted supply of power to signals for efficient working may
also be explored. In this regard the matter may be taken up with Ministry of NCRES.
6.4 Drunken driving
6.4.1 In response to the Committee’s query regarding the measures taken to check drunken
driving on Delhi roads alongwith the punishment given to the culprits involved in road rage in the
past few years, the Committee received a reply as under:–
“Regular enforcement action is undertaken against drunken driving on Delhi roads. During
the year 2012 (upto 30.11), 22,916 drivers were prosecuted for drunken driving in the city.
During the year 2012 (upto 30.11), 3690 cases along with original driving licenses and
judicial orders were sent to State Transport Authority (STA) for disqualifying the driving
license of the drivers. STA has initiated action against in 3356 cases for suspension of
driving license. It is further submitted that all the challans of drunken driving are sent to

39
court for cognizance, since the offence is not compoundable. It is the courts which decide
the punishment ranging from fine to imprisonment as per section 185 MV Act, 1988. There
is no data available with Delhi Traffic Police which can indicate the pattern of habitual
offenders.”
6.4.2 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that campaign against drunken
driving must be continued and it should be pursued more vigorously during nights and early
hours of mornings and strict action be taken against defaulters.
6.5 Road Rage
6.5.1 The Committee noted that the cases of road rage are on the increase in Delhi and, therefore,
sought to know the steps being taken by the Delhi Police in all such cases and also to prevent
road rage.
6.5.2 The Delhi Police responded by stating that the factors causing road rage vary from
increasing number of vehicles competing for the limited road space, rising stress levels and
diminishing power of tolerance of drivers, inadequate punishments to act as a deterrent for flouting
traffic rules, inflated egos, and influence of alcohol and difficult weather conditions which
aggravates the stress levels. Road Rage tends to destabilize the person so completely that it makes
him/her irrationally impulsive, to do things they normally would not like to do such as chasing,
abusing, running down, hurting, bashing, at times even killing other persons. A scientific study by
experts on human behaviour can be initiated to know exact causes and its remedial measures. The
role of Traffic Police is limited in respect of road rage. The only way to control road rage is
introduction of stern and exemplary punishment so that it may deterrent impact on the mind of
public. In addition, education is other means by which it can be tackled. The details of road rage
figure for the year 2009 to 2012 (upto 15.04.2012) is as under:–
Year Cases No. of No. of Persons
reported persons persons
killed injured
Arrested PT PI Others
2009 25 00 26 36 33 00 02-Compromised
01-Admonished
2010 29 02 34 51 34 04 06-convicted
03-Compounded
04-Discharged
2011 06 03 35 49 35 10 04-Convicted
2012 14 01 17 20 07 13
(upto
15.04.12)
6.5.3 Strong penal action against drunken driving and irrational and impulsive driving can
be effective for preventing road rage. The Committee feels that educating commuters
through various means is an effective way to tackle the incidents of road rage. Similarly,
the traffic police, who is in the nearby, when a scuffle or argument starts, should
immediately intervene so that it may not lead to a big incident. The Committee also desires
that Delhi Police should sponsor a scientific study on human behavior to show exact causes
of road rage and suggest remedial measures.

40
6.6 Blocking of Roads due VVIP/VIP Movement
6.6.1 The Committee took the issue of frequent blocking of roads due to VVIP/VIP movement,
thus causing inconvenience and jam on the affected roads.
6.6.2 In r esponse, the Delhi Police submitted:–
“Delhi Police Roads are closed during a very few VVIP movements and that too for
minimum time for general traffic. However, on all arterial roads having central verge, one
carriageway is made available for movement of general traffic during VVIP movements.
Traffic policemen deployed for such duties are briefed regularly to ensure that common
people should not suffer in such situation. They are also regularly briefed to stop the
general traffic for minimum period, so that no congestion and idling of vehicles occur on
roads. In order to control traffic in Delhi more scientifically, Delhi Traffic Police is
introducing state-of-the-art technology and undertaking lot of modernization measures.”
6.6.3 The Committee, while taking note of the steps taken by Delhi Police in the direction
of Scientific Traffic Management feels that long traffic jams at various intersections causing
a lot of inconvenience to the commuters should be avoided. After introducing the state-of-
art-technology for avoiding the traffic jams, the situation may be reviewed to see the impact
of the new system. The Committee also recommends that the Delhi traffic police should
look into the matter comprehensively and find out other better ways and means for
ensuring traffic management to the optimum level.
6.7 Modernization of Delhi Traffic Police
6.7.1 The Committee was apprised that as a part of modernization of Delhi Traffic Police, the
following measures have been undertaken for efficient traffic control in Delhi:
(i) LEDs at Signalized Junctions
6.7.2 To cut down the electricity consumption and to increase the visibility of signal aspects,
LEDs have been introduced on traffic signals. 698 junctions (607 signals and 91 blinkers) have
been provided with LEDs out of 1178 (790 signals and 388 blinkers) junctions in the NCT of Delhi.
6.7.3 The Committee feels that LED signals are a better proposition and all the junctions
in Delhi should be covered at the earliest. Required budget may be provided for the
purpose.
(ii) Vehicle Actuated Traffic Signals (V ATS)
6.7.4 To overcome the problems of fixed time traffic signals, Delhi Traffic Police also installed
vehicle-actuated signals. These signals collect the data through loop detectors and decide the signal
timings according to traffic flow on a particular road stretch. With the installation of vehicle
actuated traffic signals at the locations there has been a free movement of traffic. There are 16
Vehicle Actuated Traffic Signals installed in the NCT of Delhi.
6.7.5 The V ATS signals are the need of the hour in Delhi. This will reduce traffic
congestion to a large extent. The Committee recommends that all the areas may be covered
by V ATS at the earliest.
(iii) Pelican/Pedestrian Traffic Signals
6.7.6 To facilitate safe crossing of pedestrians in the NCT of Delhi, new pelican signals (PPTS)
working on demand mode have been installed on roads having significant crossing of pedestrians.

41
These pelican signals have resulted in avoiding conflict of pedestrians with motorists thereby
reducing the possibility of involvement of pedestrians in road accidents. There are 130 Pedestrian
Signals installed in the NCT of Delhi.
6.7.7 PPTS signals will improve the pedestrian discipline to a large extent. With this
pedestrians may not cross roads at random. Delhi Police should introduce these signals in
all such areas where pedestrian movement is more.
(iv) Accident Crash Lab
6.7.8 A more professional and scientific approach towards accident investigation and prevention
was made by setting up a “Accident Crash Lab” to reconstruct the road accidents and study the
causative factors leading to these accidents so that suitable remedial measures are taken for
prevention and recurrence of accidents at the spot. The software known as “PC Crash” is found
to be effective in Indian environment for reconstruction of accidents. The database having details
of Indian models of vehicles is being enriched. The system takes into account the skid marks,
positioning of vehicles and other technical clues available at the scene of accidents to reconstruct
and analyse the causative factors of accident for taking suitable remedial measures.
(v) Road Disaster Management Vehicle
6.7.9 A multi-utility vehicle named the “Road Disaster Management Vehicle” was indigenously
designed, fabricated and introduced by the Traffic Police that carries multiple tools and gadgets on
board for crucial use in disaster situations. The vehicle is fitted with a crane to tools that can cut
through heavy metal/steel to rescue trapped passengers in vehicles following road accidents, cut
and remove uprooted trees from roads, water pump and is equipped to deal with exigency on the
road. The portable traffic light works on a battery, which is charged by a generator fitted in the
vehicle. It also has a cordless cutter and a portable illumination system with four high-powered
lights fitted on mechanical hoists that can be remotely controlled. There are 06 such Road Disaster
Management Vehicles with Delhi Traffic Police.
(vi) Red Light and Speed Check Violation Enforcement System
6.7.10 The system automatically detects the traffic violations by using sensors. Digital images of
the traffic violations from different angles with relevant data of the offence committed is
communicated by dedicated lines and stored in the computer system for prosecuting a violator as
documentary evidence in support. Ticket/notice is sent to the owner of the offending vehicle along
with the photo.
(vii) Mobile Traffic Law Enforcement/Education Unit - Interceptors
6.7.11 The Surveillance units consist of camera, speed measuring devices with viewing, recording
and printing facility. These are very effective in preventing and enforcing the traffic laws, where
violator can be shown the nature of violation committed by him. Such interceptors are used for
enforcement of (i) speed limits (ii) lane discipline (iii) violation of central yellow line (iv) defective
number plates (v) Zigzag/dangerous driving etc. There are 11 such Interceptors with Delhi Traffic
Police.
(viii) Breath Analyzers
6.7.12 Drunken driving is one of the major causes of road accidents. Regular surprise checks are
carried out by the traffic staff near hotels, pubs, bars and other places, where people consume
alcohol and drive vehicles. There are 255 Breath Analyzers with Delhi Traffic Police at present.

42
(ix) Cheque Depository Machine
6.7.13 Delhi Traffic Police has installed Cheque Depository Machines at 07 places for collecting
the compounding amount against the notices sent to Traffic Rules violators u/s 133 Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988.
(x) Retro Reflective Gadgetry
6.7.14 To ensure effective and safe traffic regulation of traffic, the Traffic Police personnel have been
provided with 3500 cross belts and 4500 light safety bars. Extensive use of this gadgetry is being made
during night hours, on VVIP routes and during smog at strategic and vital points/intersections.
(xi) Traffic Help Line
6.7.15 The Traffic Help Line works round the clock and public persons/complainants can record
their complaints/suggestions on Telephone No. 25844444 and 1095 on traffic matters. The Traffic
Helpline attends the complaints on traffic jams, vehicles breakdowns or non-functional traffic
signals and also invite suggestions for improvement in traffic situation through traffic Helpline. The
help line keeps a close liaison with F.M. channels to provide timely information to general public
regarding traffic jams/diversions.
(xii) Traffic Web Site
6.7.16 In its endeavour to keep the public up to date with the latest information on traffic related
matters, the Delhi Traffic Police has modified and updated its web site which was hoisted on
24.11.2005. The URL of Delhi Traffic Police website is www.delhitrafficpolice.nic.in.
(xiii) E-mail facility
6.7.17 The Delhi Traffic Police provided the facility of E-mailing complaints/suggestions or sharing
views on improving traffic management and safety on Delhi Roads.
(xiv) Complaints against TSR on 56767
6.7.18 The Delhi Traffic Police has also launched the Short Message Service on 56767 to lodge
complaints against auto rickshaw drivers for refusal, overcharging, misbehavior or harassment.
(xv) Public Interface Unit
6.7.19 A PIU (Public Interface Unit) has been established in the Traffic Unit. In order to reach
to the general public, the Delhi Traffic Police has also joined the social networking sites i.e.
Facebook and Twitter. A number of suggestions/complaints from general public are received on
Facebook/Twitter which are attended on priority by Traffic Police. Action taken reports are
collected from all concerned field officers and due feedback is provided.
(xvi) Real Time Traffic Information
6.7.20 The Delhi Traffic Police in association with SIAM established a link on the official web site of
Delhi Traffic Police to keep the citizens informed of the restrictions, blockades, diversions etc. This
was primarily planned for XIX Common Wealth Games – 2010 and has now been extended for whole
of Delhi. The portal is dynamic and blockades etc. can be displayed in real time from the traffic
helpline. The portal uses the Google map available on the internet and has the following features:–
(a) Dynamic Traffic information like blockades, suggested detours and other traffic
restrictions overlaid on online map.

43
(b) Alternate routes suggestion in case of blockade or restriction.
(c) Real time display of restriction due to accidents, water logging, traffic jam etc.
6.7.21 The application suggests alternate routes even without blockades and the routes are
displayed on the map as well as directions are listed in a separate window.
(xvii) Road Management Equipment
6.7.22 The Delhi Traffic Police introduced modern road management equipments, viz, 990 Crash
Barriers, 850 Channelizers, 6250 Bollards, 160 Portable Loudhailers etc. with a view to bring in
efficiency in regulation by Traffic Police so that the benefits reach the common man.
6.7.23 The Committee takes into account the steps taken in the direction of modernization
of Delhi Traffic Police. The Committee hopes that such elaborate modernization system
would definitely lead to smooth flow of vehicles on Delhi roads and would facilitate the
commuters. Delhi Police should regularly review the working of all the systems in place
under modernization etc. and monitor them. There should not be any complacency and
sufficient funds may be provided for modernisation.
(xviii) E-challan
6.7.24 Traf fic Police is introducing E-enforcement as a part of the modernization initiative. All the
traffic police challaning officers will be equipped with hand held electronic devices for challaning the
traffic offenders on the spot. The device will be capable of retrieving relevant data relating to the
violating vehicles or the driver from the data base of the traffic police. The system would be used to
generate various reports, periodical diaries, MIS, studies, etc. as a total integrated solution. The system
shall also be able to generate data of such violators who are found indulging in repeated traffic violations
and shall be liable for invoking enhanced punishment under the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act as and
when apprehended by a challaning officer. A total of 1200 devices and all setups for operating the
system are being hired from M/s Bharti Airtel Ltd., Gurgaon (HR) for a period of three years.
6.7.25 The Committee desires that the system may be introduced throughout Delhi and if
needed more devices and set ups may be purchased and if the results are encouraging this
faculty may be continued beyond three years.
(i) New Interceptors – Night Vision
6.7.26 In the past, Traffic Police had been facing the handicap of not being able to prosecute
speed violators during night time. In order to overcome this difficulty, the process to acquire
compact, modular and state of the art speed detection equipment with night use capability using
infrared flash gun has been initiated. In the proposed system the speed detection would be
automatic and the data along with coloured digital image can be transmitted wirelessly to a remote
enforcement station up to 1 km. down the road. The equipment would be able to cover multiple
lanes and would not need an operator to aim at the vehicle. It is proposed to acquire 10 such
equipments in the financial year 2012-13 and process of which is already under progress.
6.7.27 These interceptors will be able to reduce night accidents to a large extent. Delhi Police
should use these equipments in all the accident prone areas.
6.7.28  The Committee takes into account plans of Delhi Traffic Police for expansion and
modernization of traffic control system and hopes that the steps taken would go a long way
in streamlining the traffic in a scientific way and the measures taken would also ensure
traffic discipline and sharp decline in road accidents. The Committee recommends that fund
requirements for further modernization plans of Delhi Traffic Police may be looked into
seriously on priority basis.

44
CHAPTER-VII
SAFETY OF WOMEN
7.0 Crime Against Women
7.1 The Committee, in the backdrop of Delhi gang rape on 16 th December, 2012 sought views
of Delhi Police. According to the Delhi Police, the number of cases reported and worked out from
2008 to 2012 (upto 15.12.2012) are as under:
Years No. of Cases Reported W /OUT Solved % Age
2008 466 440 94.42%
2009 469 440 93.82%
2010 507 471 92.90%
2011 572 558 97.55%
2012* 661 623 94.25%
7.1.1 In year 2012 (upto 15
th December, 2012), 661 rape cases have been reported as compared
to 564 cases of the corresponding period of year 2011. However, the incident of rape per lakh of
population, has shown a steady decline in Delhi under this head with the incidence of rape per lakh
of population coming down from 4.42 in 2005 to 4.05 in 2012 (upto 15
th December, 2012).
7.1.2 Another important factor about rape cases and molestation is that in most of the cases the
accused were found to be known to the victim or her family. In all the rape cases (except twenty
five cases) reported in the year 2012 accused were known to the victim and can be categorized
as opportunistic crimes committed in private spaces.
7.2 Steps taken to improve the responsiveness of the police
7.2.1 W ith regard to steps taken to improve the responsiveness of the police when a crime is
reported and to maintain law and order in Delhi ensuring security and safety of women, the Delhi
Police in its written reply submitted that safety of women in Delhi has been receiving special
attention and following measures have been taken for Women Security:–
(a) Security audit of Paying Guest accommodations and hostels
District police has done the security audit of all paying guest accommodations and
hostels for women and girls. Security measures required to be taken by them have
been explained to them. A total of 218 paying guest accommodations/ hostels have
been covered.
(b) Directions to BPOs and Call Centres
BPOs and Call centres have been directed to take measures for the safety of women
working with them. Meetings were held to understand their problems and to express
concerns of police to them regarding security of women. The Delhi Police has issued
44

45
orders U/s 144 Cr.P.C. directing BPOs, Corporate and Media Houses for taking certain
steps for the safety and security of Women employees, like ensuring that they do not
travel alone in cab and are dropped right at their door steps.
(c) Anti-Stalking Cell and Anti Obscene Calls Cell
Ant-Stalking Cell and Anti-Obscene Calls Cell can be approached through helpline
number 1096. 24,220 calls were received in Anti-Obscene Cell and 48 calls were
received in Anti-Stalking Cell in Delhi Police.
(d) Women Help Desks and Help Line
There is a women help desk in each Police Station. NGOs working in the areas of
Women Empowerment and for the cause of women have been associated at the police
station level. A women helpline, 1091 is also available to women to express their
grievances. 563 calls were received on this helpline.
(e) Interaction with NGOs
13 NGOs working for women and members of NCW were called for a meeting by
the Commissioner of Police, Delhi at Police Headquarters. The steps being taken by
Delhi Police were explained to them and their suggestions to improve the police
response to the problems of women were noted for implementation. District Police
have been sensitized about these measures to make the Police Station Staff friendlier
towards women complainants.
(f) C ontinuation of scheme Parivartan
Parivartan Scheme has been functioning in many areas of Delhi where lady Police
Officers have been posted to work as Beat Officers so that they can interact with the
women of the area and help them in overcoming their problems related to domestic
violence and other atrocities.
(g) Crisis Intervention Centres
Crisis Intervention Centre interacts and provides support to the victims of sexual assault
in overcoming the trauma. Several rape victims were provided assistance during 2012.
(h) Action against Brothels
In a drive against commercial sexual exploitation of women, Delhi Police requested for
closure of brothels in a big way. Four brothels (Kothas) were closed on the orders
of SDM and one brothel has been closed on the orders of Judicial Magistrate.
(i) Rescue Operations
The trafficking of girls and women for forced labour has been tackled effectively by
conducting rescue operations with the help of NGOs and 240 numbers of girls were
recovered during such operations.
(j) North-East residents
Students and other persons hailing from North-Eastern States have been receiving the
attention of Delhi Police and during the current year, we have formalized the response

46
of police by creating 7 Nodal Officers and a Co-ordinator of Joint C.P. rank
specifically for persons from the North-East. A Standing Order has also been issued
to ensure a standardized procedure to be adopted in respect of complaints from people
of North-East. Delhi police website for northeast people: delhipolicefornortheast.com
has also been made operational this year.
7.2.2 On the issues of making area policemen responsible for happenings in their area of
jurisdiction and then their confidential reports based on their responsiveness to the incidents, the
Delhi Police informed that all staff deployed in the field is responsible for whatever happens in their
area of jurisdiction. However, if negligence of the staff deployed in that particular area is
established, departmental action is taken against them and punishment is awarded as per the rules.
A mention of negligence is also made in the ACRs of erring police personal keeping in view the
gravity of misconduct which hampers their promotional avenues.
7.2.3 The Commissioner further stated that Delhi Police runs 24x7 helpline for women, Anti-
Obscene Calls Cell and Anti-Stalking Cell. Women Mobile Team is specialized in responding to
domestic violence. PCR vans with women police officers are deployed around selected women
colleges and schools as well as North and South University campuses. Crime-Against-Women Cell
in each district is also there and a special police unit for women and children for the entire city
is headed by a lady officer. There is a women’s helpdesk in each police station where NGOs are
also involved. More women staff at the police station level have been inducted. Women Sub-
Inspectors and Inspectors are not used in the offices but are posted at police stations and used
for investigation of rape cases.
7.2.4 A database of all employees, security personnel, cab drivers and contractual workers of
BPO is maintained and it is the security personnel, who are hired by them, who are from licensed
agencies. Verification of antecedents of all employees, including contractual employees, through
respective police stations is done. It is also ensured that women employees travel with verified
security guards or male colleagues during night hours between 8.00 p.m. and 7.00 a.m.
7.2.5 BPOs have been instructed to choose routes in such way so that the woman employee is
not the first one to be picked up or the last one to be dropped back and that during night hours,
women employees are picked up and dropped at their doorsteps. This was initiated post the Dhaula
Kuan rape case, in which the person was dropped at a distance and she was walking home through
a dark stretch. An order under Section 144 of the Cr.P.C. has been issued.
7.2.6 BPOs have been instructed that only verified security guards or male colleagues are to
accompany a woman till her home, if the road is not motorable. It has been instructed that cabs
do not stray from the route or pick up strangers on the way. Cabs have been instructed to get
installed GPS system. Cab operators have been given an offer for criminal record verification of
employees for a nominal charge of Rs.250. Instructions have been reiterated in various meetings
with the BPOs, as recently as on the 18 th of September, 2012.
7.2.7 The Commissioner drew attention of the Committee that in certain countries, a system
namely Criminal Record Bureau Check (CRB check) is followed wherein all people dealing with
women from very close quarters, like dentists, male teachers in girls’ schools or colleges, doctors,
are properly verified by the Police and given permission to work. The employers of such people
have to pay for the CRB check. He suggested a measure on the similar lines for consideration of
the Committee.
7.2.8 The Commissioner informed the Committee that as per standard operating procedure, all
rape cases are investigated by women officers. Women police officers have been deployed in 198
beats under a Scheme called Parivartan. Bail application in all rape cases is opposed with the help

47
of advocates from the Delhi Commission for Women, and guidelines have been laid down by the
Delhi High Court for child sexual abuse cases to be followed in letter and spirit.
7.2.9 It was informed that several placement agencies were put under scrutiny because
sometimes they also indulge in human trafficking and trafficking of women and 23 persons were
arrested in 16 cases registered against placement agencies. From time to time, Delhi Police inform
the civic agencies through the Office of the Lieutenant Governor, of various dark stretches in our
city. There are some self-defence training camps. 7797 girls were trained during the year. Special
Commissioner of Police has been appointed by the Lieutenant Governor as the nodal officer for
monitoring complaints of women for submitting daily report to him. He will have interaction with
NGOs on the last Friday of every month at 4.00 p.m.
7.2.10 It was also informed that women NGOs have been requested to provide volunteers for
Women Help Desk in Police Stations, manning women help-lines, Domestic Violence Response
Vehicle as well as assist in imparting gender sensitization to policemen. He however admitted that
there is need to focus more on the area of gender sensitization of police officials so that the
response to complaints from women improves even further.
7.2.11 It was further stated that permits for transport vehicles are given by the Transport
Department of the Delhi Government and it has been emphasized to put in place a very strong
regime so that permit for running chartered buses, etc., should not be given to all and sundry. It
should be given to people who have been properly vetted and verified and they have to inform the
Transport Department in advance, details of drivers and cleaners with shifts. Commercial vehicles,
buses, etc., have been directed to keep the lights inside switched on at night. Displaying of
particulars like names, licence, photographs and other relevant details of drivers is essential, as is
being done in radio taxis in this city itself and as is done abroad, so that a person who is sitting,
knows who the driver is. If he is not satisfied with the service, he can inform the law enforcement
agencies. Off-duty private buses should not be parked anywhere but should be parked at notified
places.
7.2.12 On the issues of presence of policemen in buses particularly, DTC buses and checkings
therein, the Committee was informed that generally Delhi Police staff do not travel free of cost in
DTC buses. However, the General Manager of DTC in the year 1965 allowed two lower
subordinates to travel free at a time in any DTC bus and extended from time to time with a view
to reduce the incidence of crime, i.e. misbehavior by rowdy elements, assault on the operational
staff, pick pocketing, eve teasing, etc. The above concession offered by DTC is purely in the
interest of maintenance of law and order in DTC buses. However, now Transport Department has
withdrawn this facility. But, it is evident that the presence of on/off duty police personnel in the
buses gives a sense of security amongst the travelling passengers.
7.3 Additional measures taken by the Delhi Police post 16
th December, 2012 incident
7.3.1 The Committee has been apprised of the steps taken in the aftermath of Delhi gang rape
incident by Delhi Police for making Delhi safer for women, which are enumerated as under:–
(i) 255 routes taken by families and women returning from entertainment hubs at night
identified.
(ii) PCR Vans, Motorcycle Patrols, Emergency Response Vehicles along these routes
redeployed.
(iii) 1600 dark stretches identified and concerned civic agencies informed.
(iv) Patrolling by Beat officers intensified around malls, cineplexes, restaurant clusters.

48
(v) Shri Sudhir Yadav, Special CP, appointed nodal officer for monitoring complaints by
women
(vi) Interaction with women NGOs on last Friday of every month at 4.00 PM
(vii) Local Police and PCR vans deployed outside girls’ schools and colleges at the
closing as well as opening time.
(viii) Self-defence programmes for women.
(ix) Creation of fast Track Courts.
(x) Additional and integrated police pickets.
(xi) Database of criminals arrested in rape cases and offences against women.
(xii) Thana level committees of local representatives to meet every fortnight.
(xiii) Proposal to recruit additional women police
(xiv) Telephone lines to 100 increased from 60 to 100.
(xv) W omen and Child Helpline increased from 4 to 10.
(xvi) Standardised protocol finalized for Anti-obscene and Anti-stalking helpline.
(xvii) Additional 370 PCR vans being inducted.
(xviii) Public transport vehicles asked to display name of the driver and staff alongwith
photographs and PSV No. inside the bus by 31
st January, 2013.
(xix) DTC/Cluster buses to install GPS and crew to display photo identify cards.
(xx) Exclusive Telephone lines installed at Women Helpdesk 24X7 in each Police Station.
(xxi) More policemen to patrol roads after dark.
(xxii) Mobile numbers of the night GOs publicized again.
(xxiii) Action against drinking at public places like dhabas, juice stalls, parks etc.
(xxiv) Intensified campaign to remove black films on vehicles.
(xxv) All discotheques and night clubs to close by 01.00 AM.
Fresh Instruction to SHOs
(xxvi) No jurisdictional issue to be raised.
(xxvii) Complaints from women to be recorded verbatim-no tutoring.
(xxviii) W omen complainants not to be made to wait.
(xxix) Particulars of women complainants giving confidential information to be kept secret.
(xxx) Zero tolerance for eve-teasing.
(xxxi) District Additional CPs/DCPs to patrol their jurisdiction till midnight.
7.3.2 The Committee notes the measures undertaken by Delhi Police to curb atrocities
against women in Delhi. However, despite the measures so undertaken the incidents of rape
has not decreased in the NCT of Delhi which is reflected from the updated information

49
furnished by Delhi Police which indicates that the reported incidents of rape in 2013 (upto
30th September, 2013) is 1271 in comparison to reported rape cases of 556 in 2012,
startlingly, an increase of 128.60%. The Committee is totally aghast.
7.3.3 The gang rape of a 23-year-old girl on a Delhi on 16 th December, 2012 bus triggered
unprecedented outcry from public. Thousands of citizens came to the streets across the
country and in capital city there were massive spontaneous protests particularly by the
youths. Almost a year has elapsed and there has been a 125% jump in the number of rape
cases in Delhi. Similarly, molestation cases are up to massive 417%. The Committee is of
the view that a lot still needs to be done with regard to instilling fear in sexual offenders.
The Committee understands that the fear of law in the minds of sexual offenders will only
be there if there is strict enforcement of criminal laws in this regard otherwise all efforts
will be merely cosmetic.
7.3.4 The infamous Sixteenth December Gang rape incident had brought the issue of non-
availability of public transport during the late hours to the limelight. The Committee
recommends that the government should make available safe mode of public transport for
women, especially during night. The Police presence on the roads, especially at isolated
places and stretches should be increased. There are many sensitive footpaths, bye-lanes,
subways and parks which continue to be hostile to women due to poor lighting, shrinking
pavements, isolated subways and parks occupied by petty criminals. The Committee
recommends that CCTV surveillance and police pickets should be increased at vulnerable
spots of capital city. Cameras need to be installed at major roads and intersections.
7.3.5 The Committee understands that for a victim of sexual assault, the real trauma
begins once she decides to report the case. Right from making rounds of the police station
and court rooms to dealing with the social stigma attached to it, a victim of sexual assault
has to face a lot of trauma. Delhi Police should shed the image of being infamous for not
registering cases to keep/show crime statistics down and should be more pro-active in this
regard. The Committee recommends that police force should be made more positive towards
complaints from sexual assault victims who often face harassment instead of help from
Police.
7.3.6 The Committee in its 167th Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
made a number of recommendations on the issues concerning safety and security of women
in the country. Attention to the invited to the following relevant recommendations:-
7.4 Better Policing System
7.4.1 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress upon
the State Governments to set up women cells compulsorily in all the police stations
throughout the country so that victim woman could be able to have free and easy access
to lodge complaints against the perpetrators. Women cell in each police station would
further enhance the participation of women in the policing system. The Committee also
took note of the fact that women police in over all police strength in the country is only
about 6% which is very inadequate. The Committee is of the view that the strength of the
women police force should be at least be 33 per cent of total strength, and therefore
recommends that Union Ministry of Home Affairs may impress upon the Delhi Police to
take suitable measures in this regard.
7.4.2 The Committee feels that registration of FIRs should be made mandatory. The
Committee is of the strong view that strict action should be taken for dereliction of duty
against the officer, who refuses to receive complaints on Sexual violence. The Committee

50
also recommends that once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on to the higher police
officer for information and necessary direction in the matter to ensure time bound
investigation. The Committee further recommends that investigation should be done within
a period of 60 days, and charge sheet should be filed in time so that justice is not denied.
7.5 Responsibility of Higher Officers
7.5.1 In case the crime committed by the subordinate is in the knowledge of the higher
officer and he does not take timely action, such superior officer should be held responsible
and omission of such acts on the part of superior officer must be recorded in his official
dossiers/ACR.
7.6 Repeat Offenders
7.6.1 The Committee has been given to understand that in our country, there is no system
of keeping a watch on repeat sex offenders. The Committee has also been given to
understand that, according to a study conducted on the sex offenders, majority of the
offenders had committed a sex crime earlier and escaped notice of the police authorities and
were roaming freely. The Committee has also been given to understand that Western
European countries and the US have developed a mechanism for tracking such type of sex
offenders and are maintaining a data base in this regard. The Committee recommends that
a suitable mechanism may be evolved to keep a watch on habitual and repeat sex offenders.
The Committee also recommends that after the conviction on first offence, the names of
the convicted persons should be publicized for information of the public by the Delhi Police.
The Committee reiterates that State and UT Governments also should set up crime records
bureaus and the data, including the names of convicted people must be maintained and
updated, from time to time.
7.6.2 The Committee reiterates the above recommendations and suggests that Ministry of
Home Affairs may take suitable steps in implementations with particular reference to Delhi
Police.

51
CHAPTER-VIII
OTHER ISSUES
8.0 Infrastructure
8.1 Based on the discussion held in its earlier meeting on 27th December, 2012, the Committee
observed that there are bottlenecks in providing adequate funds to Delhi Police for fulfilling logistic
requirements, especially, the availability of PCR vans. The Committee, accordingly, invited
representatives of the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and
Justice as its sitting held on 4 th January, 2013.
8.1.1 The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance informed as follows:–
“A request from MHA for purchase of 370 PCR vehicles was received in the
Finance Ministry on the 27 th of December, and it is under examination. We will be
processing it. Earlier this year, in 2012, in September, we were asked for purchase of
19 PCR vans by the MHA for the Delhi Police, which was agreed to. So, this request of
370 PCR vans has been recently received. We are examining it, Sir, and we are agreeing
for purchase of vehicles on operational grounds. So, it will definitely be examined on merits
and we will definitely keep the advice of the hon. Committee in mind when we are
examining it.”
8.1.2 The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance further informed the Committee as follows:–
“the austerity measures which have been introduced almost every year for the last 5-6 years
generally imposed a ban on purchase of vehicles. However, we do agree to purchase the
vehicles on operational needs and based on the merits of the case, particularly, for sensitive
security-related organizations.”
8.1.3 When sought to explain reasons for applicability of austerity measures on replacement of
condemned vehicles, the Secretary, Border Management, MHA submitted that when austerity
measures are put in place, they apply across the board. There is complete ban on purchase of
vehicles. These are the normal measures which are taken by the Ministry of Finance. But, for
operational reasons, on a case-to-case basis, relaxation is given. The ban does not distinguish
between a new vehicle and a replacement for a condemned vehicle.
8.1.4 The Commissioner of Police informed that various proposals for additional vehicles are
pending with the Government. The proposal of purchase of 370 additional vans for PCR has been
pending since 2008. Then, a proposal for 12 Gypsies, 6 troop carriers and 157 motor cycles is
pending since May, 2011. Sanction for 12 Toyota Innovas and 12 Motorcycles for the Anti-Human-
Trafficking Unit in Districts and in the Crime Branch has been pending. Besides, Delhi Police had
asked for 23 additional jail vans for movement of undertrial prisoners in November, 2012.
8.1.5 However, the Joint Secretary, MHA submitted that various proposals were received at
various points of time in the last three to four years and all these proposals were scrutinized and
MHA has sanctioned 1,700 new vehicles which includes vehicles against the condemned ones.
Apart from that, for the Commonwealth, additional 167 vehicles were sanctioned. Presently, MHA
was only considering the proposal of 370 PCR vans. It is correct that the proposal was with MHA
51

52
for the last two or three years. The previous Home Minister has raised certain queries on the
number of 370 PCR vans. Perhaps, he was not very happy about the way the PCR vans were
being deployed and he was of the opinion that the number of vehicles proposed was o the higher
side. Then, MHA again sought the views of the Delhi Police. The Delhi Police had submitted their
proposal for a particular model, a Sedan kind of a model, on which questions were raised. After
the incident, the Home Minister was kind enough to review the whole situation. He approved the
proposal in the last week of December in principle to provide 370 PCR vans of Toyota Qualis
model to Delhi Police, which is for both replacements as well as new ones.
8.1.6 The Committee takes serious exception to this inordinate delay in procurement of
PCRs. The Committee disagrees with the submission of the Commissioner, Delhi Police that
the procurement of vehicles in large quantity will need time. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the proposal should have been cleared at the earliest and all the
formalities for procurement be completed at the earliest.
8.1.7 Regarding shortage of PCR vans, the Delhi Police in its written submission, informed as
under:–
“As regards to increasing the strength of police vehicles, a proposal to sanction 370 MPVs
to enhance the fleet to the level of 1000 Mobile Patrol Vans (MPVs) was sent to MHA in
the year 2008. Several observations and queries were made by the MHA, from time to time,
which all have been replied to. The issue of choice of the type of vehicle most suited for
to use as mobile patrol vans has also been settled and MHA has been informed. MHA has
also been requested to replace 240 vehicles nearing condemnation and Hon’ble LG/Delhi
has also written to Hon’ble Union Home Minister emphasizing the need for replacement of
the condemned vehicles and also for sanction of the additional requirement of 370 vehicles
for the Police Control Room.”
8.1.8 The Commissioner during the meeting held on 27
th December, 2012 informed that the
demand had been made a long time back, soon after the condemnation. Earlier, replacements of
condemned vehicles were a matter of routine. As soon as any vehicle was condemned, the
proposals were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs and they got the replacements as a matter
of routine. But after the austerity measures, Delhi Police had got the replacements only for some
vehicles. If Delhi Police had got replacements for all the condemned vehicles, it would have,
perhaps, been able to man two more additional points. He requested that the Police Department
should be exempted from the austerity measures since Police is a service department to provide
emergency response to victims of crime, because shortage of vehicles adds to the lack of mobility
and delayed Police response.
8.1.9 The Commissioner further submitted that the Ministry of Home Affairs was taking up the
matter with the Ministry of Finance so that, notwithstanding austerity, these vehicles should be
sanctioned. All PCR vans are being installed with GPS system so that their movements can be
monitored.
8.1.10 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide its communication dated 18th October, 2013 apprised
the Committee about the status of procurement of PCRs vans viz-a-viz actual requirement. It has
been stated that as per expenditure sanction of the competent authority, on 19.02.2013, M/s Toyota
Kirloskar Motors Pvt. Ltd. was issued a supply order on 20.02.2013 for supply of 370 Toyota
Innova vehicles on DGS&D Rate Contract. The supply of all these 370 Innova vehicles has been
received. The payment of 
R25,55,01,890/- in respect of 290 vehicles, out of 370 vehicles has since
been released during the current financial year, 2013-14 and payment of R7,04,83,2802/- for
remaining 80 vehicles would be made to the firm as soon as the funds are allotted to Delhi Police.

53
8.1.11 The Committee has been further informed that Delhi Police is facing lack of fund as a result
of which the following proposals for 196 PCRs, apart from above are pending:–
(i) Sanction for procurement of 12 Toyata Innova vehicles against condemned 12 Qualis
vehicles and 02 Maruti Gypsy against 02 condemned Gypsy has been received from
the competent authority but supply orders of these vehicles have not been placed due
to non-availability of funds. Supply orders for these 14 vehicles will be placed after
allotment of additional budget.
(ii) Proposals for procurement of 36 PCR vans against condemnation of 12 Maruti Gypsy,
22 Qualis and 02 Tata Sumo (Ambulance) will be resubmitted after availability of
sufficient funds.
(iii) Besides, the process for condemnation of 146 PCR vans is almost complete or in
advance stage. Proposal for procurement against these (146) vehicles will be sent to
MHA after completion of usual formalities.
8.1.12 The Committee is anguished to find that Delhi Police has not been provided adequate
fund for procurement of PCRs which are the basic infrastructure for patrolling and
surveillance. It is quite surprising that the payment for remaining 80 vehicles is still
pending which is likely to be made to the firm as soon as the funds are allotted to Delhi
Police. Moreover, Delhi Police requires 196 more PCRs for better surveillance. The
Committee, views that the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the proposals of Delhi
Police with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for providing sufficient funds
for procurement of PCRs as per requirement and meeting the pending liabilities against
already procured PCRs. The Committee, in view of the fact that Delhi is expanding at a
very high rate and presence of PCR vans is required in outlying areas where new colonies,
industrial areas and slums have come up, strongly recommends that the proposal of Delhi
Police for procurement of requisite number of PCR vans by Delhi Police must be forwarded
to the Ministry of Finance for approval in time bound manner
8.1.13 The Committee notes that facilities of PCR vans of Delhi Police is an effective
mechanism for policing, but the problem with PCR mechanism is that the staff manning the
Call Centre have a great problem in identifying locations or understanding the locations or
the names of the roads and places which victim or a person tell them. It is because staff
are not familiar to the locations and various places resulting that personnel posted take a
lot of time trying to understand position. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
people at the Call Centre must be familiar and must have enough inputs on the location
of various places of Delhi.
8.2 Heavy Pendency at Forensic Labs.
8.2.1 The Committee noted that the various samples for the DNA test, etc. are sent to the some
other places because of inadequate forensic facility in Delhi resulting very late receipt of forensic
reports. Delhi Police has a large number of cases in which forensic support is required on real time
basis on the scene as well as in the laboratory. With regard to augmentation of the Delhi FSL to
reduce large pendency there, the Commissioner, Delhi Police submitted that recently MHA directed
the exhibits to be sent to CFSL at Kolkata, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Ahmedabad and Delhi. He
however felt that the facility at Delhi should be to take care of all the FSL requirements of Delhi
Police. Besides, a mobile FSL facility should be given to each District for better collection of
evidence. Further, the Ministry of Home Affairs in its written submission informed that the Forensic
Science Laboratory, Delhi functioning under the administrative control of the Government of NCT
of Delhi was not fully capable to cater the requirements of Delhi Police. The Government of NCT,

54
Delhi has assured its full-fledged functioning after the recruitment process of experts for filling-
up of large number of vacant posts is completed. Delhi Police has also proposed to the
Government of NCT, Delhi to create facilities to conduct on-the-spot examination/report of viscera
samples taken at the time of post-mortem examination in the mortuaries. However, the Ministry of
Home Affairs has allotted additional facilities at Central Forensic Science Laboratories Kolkatta,
Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Delhi (CBI) and Forensic Science Laboratory, Ahmadabad (Gujarat) for
accepting samples from Delhi Police. A total of 8986 cases are pending for examination/opinion of
which 8208 in FSL/Delhi, 499 in CFSL/Kolkatta, 152 in CFSL/Hyderabad, 29 in CFSL/Chandigarh,
23 in CFSL/CBI (Delhi) and 75 in FSL/Ahmedabad (Gujarat).
8.2.2 The Committee expresses its anguish on this sorry state of affairs and is of the
strong view that the Government should take immediate steps to improve the situation and
capital city should have state of the art facility of forensic investigation. The Committee
feels that trial would risk letting off of the culprits and any other help may not be of any
use until and unless a conclusive forensic investigation is not done in time bound manner.
The Committee therefore recommends that there should be some consistent policy and
support for creating forensic infrastructure in Delhi to investigate heinous offences and
crimes quickly as it is well known fact that the evidence, particularly forensic evidence, is
a very fast evaporating thing to catch hold of criminals. The Committee strongly
recommends that early action should be taken to enhance the capacity and strength of
forensic labs in Delhi to ensure proper and speedy investigation and trials.
8.3 SWOT - Analysis of Delhi Police
8.3.1 The Committee wanted to know the key concern areas which come in the way of the
functioning of Delhi Police efficiently and effectively through the SWOT (Strength, Weaknesses,
Opportunities and Threats) analysis. The Delhi Police informed that the main area that comes on
way in the functioning of Delhi Police is shortage of staff and infrastructure. Following are the
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats:–
Strengths
Main strength of Delhi Police is Beat System,
vehicles communication system and prompt
response. Professionalism, close supervision,
easy access to technology and modern gadgets.
Opportunities
Delhi Police is undertaking community police to
impart vocational training to unemployed youths
so that they could earn their livelihood through
fair means. Sports activities under YUV A
programme are organized at selected police
station level. Variety of situation and cases,
force multipliers and international exposures.
Weaknesses
Shortage of staff and infrastructure in
proportion to population and area of Delhi.
Lack of integrated database with other
department. Large number of floating population
borders with many states, wide gaps in many
features of the society, over workload.
Threats
The main threats to law and order are influx of
migrants in Delhi as well as widened long open
area touching to Haryana state. Besides, NH-1
and other exiting points gave a safe escape to
the criminals, interstate criminals and
unaccounted households.
8.3.2 The Committee was further apprised that the following organizational intervention is
required to address weaknesses and threats and to utilize the strengths and opportunities for the
functioning of Delhi Police:–

55
(i) Upgradation of training to match the international standards.
(ii) One staff playing many role concepts.
(iii) Research Cell can develop a concept of Post Mortem/Analysis of investigation of
important case after filing charge sheet.
(iv) Strong and speed mechanism to encourage/reward the hard working staff.
8.3.3 The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs in tandem with Delhi Police
should undertake brain-storming session over SWOT-analysis of Delhi Police. Taking into
account the main strengths and available opportunities of Delhi Police, the policy,
programme and course of action should be chalked out to achieve set objectives and every
effort should be made to streamline the functioning of Delhi Police and only then
operational and professionalism efficiency would be achieved by Delhi Police while
discharging its functions and responsibilities. The Committee feels that optimization of
staff-strength and infrastructure, upgradation of training quality matching international
standard and strengthening of research cell are most important fields of Delhi Police
reforms. The Ministry may look into the organizational interventions that are required for
strengthening Delhi Police.

56
56
CHAPTER-IX
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
Conviction
The Committee is anguished to find that the conviction rate in criminal cases is
dipping year after year i.e. 69.12% in 2008, 66.46% in 2009, 56.60% in 2010 and 53.19%
in 2011. The Committee observes that the conviction rate of crimes committed and detected
in Delhi is abysmally low and one possible reason could be excessive work load with the
courts, but equally important is the undue extraneous pressure being put on the
investigating agencies thus causing delay in the process of investigation. The Committee is
of the view that as investigating agency, the police force has to shoulder an onerous
responsibility. The fate of any case depends upon the outcome of investigation. The
Committee understands that investigation requires a lot of skills, expertise and in-depth
understanding of jurisprudential principles and legal insight. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the training module of Delhi Police must incorporate advance courses on
law and jurisprudence. The training module of Delhi Police on law and jurisprudence may
be revisited involving some legal experts. Besides, the Committee also recommends that
there is a need to have brain storming session to find out reasons for low conviction rate
and take the remedial measures before the situation further deteriorates. (Para 2.5.3)
Achievement on Terror Front
The Committee is of the strong view that NCT of Delhi being the national capital
is required to be a place of no tolerance for crimes and it is the onerous task of Delhi
Police to providing guarantee a safe and secured environment to all dwellers. Performance
of Delhi Police in this onerous task would not only cast its image at the national level
but would also give glimpses of image amongst international community. The Committee,
therefore, exhorts Delhi Police to keep up its prestige and pride high while discharging
its entrusted duties and responsibilities. All steps should be taken to tackle terrorism in
Delhi. (Para 2.9.4)
Safety of Senior Citizens, Juveniles and Children
The Committee is of the considered view that senior citizens are the pillars and old
guards of the society still contributing a lot to the society and they should be respected,
admired and protected at all cost. The Committee, while noting the elaborate arrangements
undertaken by Delhi Police for protection of senior citizens, expresses its deep concern over
the cases of killings of senior citizens either by domestic help or close relatives or other
criminals with the motive to rob the property earned by them in their whole life or for any
other ulterior motive inspite of the steps taken by the Delhi Police. The Committee is of
the considered view that Delhi Police should underline the need for enforcing the preventive
measure to check crimes against senior citizens, children and women. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Delhi Police should review and revamp its senior citizens cell.
The Committee also recommends that the security audit of all the senior citizens residing
alone in the capital may be completed in a time bound manner and representatives of the
resident’s welfare associations of the colonies/localities should also be involved in regular
meetings of Police officers. (Para 3.1.3)

57
Safety and security of people from North-East
The safety and security of the people from North East is a cause of concern for the
Committee. The Committee notes the reply furnished by Delhi Police and the oral
submission of the Commissioner of Police, Delhi. The Committee, however, feels that just
issuing standing order will not serve the purpose; it is the question of implementation of
order in letter and spirit which matters. Delhi Police should ensure that all the cases are
thoroughly investigated and taken to the logical end at a fast pace. Besides, more concerted
efforts may be taken to ensure safety of the people, particularly, women from North-East.
(Para 3.4.2)
Safety of tourists
The Committee understands that the National Capital with several places of
historical values and cultural ethos, attract a large number of foreign tourists including
foreign tourists. The Committee is of the view that safety and security of tourists is the
foremost and primary duty of Delhi Police. In this connection, the Committee takes note
of the fact that the proposal for creation of 266 posts for tourist police is pending with
Government of NCT of Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs and Delhi Police should take up the issue with the NCT of Delhi to clear the
proposal at the earliest. (Para 3.3.2)
VVIP Security
The Committee feels that security of the public representatives/functionaries/visiting
foreign dignitaries is also equally important, but at the same time, the public safety should
also not be compromised. The Committee desires that a separate wing for VVIP security
within Delhi Police may be considered with necessary logistic support. The Committee also
feels that the security personnel posted with VIPs should not be changed frequently. Due
to frequent change, the personnel posted with the VIPs find it very difficult to adjust to the
working environment at the residences and offices of such persons . (Para 3.4.6)
Problems in Registration of FIRs
There is a general perception amongst public that police remain reluctant to register
FIR to keep the figures of crimes under control in order to show better ratio of crimes
reported and solved cases. The Committee is of the firm view that the public is entitled to
get its FIRs registered. The Committee therefore, strongly, recommends that resilient
mechanism should be evolved so that all FIRs are registered. The Committee, also strongly
recommends that police personnel posted at Police Station must be instructed in very clear
terms to register FIRs on the commission of cognizable offence. The Committee is of the
firm view that the defaulting police officers for denying registering of FIR must be
punished. The Committee in this connection, reiterates its recommendation made in 167th
Report in respect of registration of FIR which is reproduced as below:
“5.36.2 The Committee feels that registration of FIRs should be made mandatory. The
Committee is of the strong view that strict action should be taken for dereliction of duty
against the officer, who refuses to receive complaints on Sexual violence. The Committee
also recommends that once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on to the higher police
officer for information and necessary direction in the matter to ensure time bound
investigation. The Committee further recommends that investigation should be done
within a period of 60 days, and charge sheet should be filed in time so that justice is
not denied.” (Para 3.5.3)

58
Safety of Pedestrians
The Committee views that Delhi Police entrusted with the task of traffic
management must undertake special drive at regular intervals at various busy-intersections
of Delhi roads to ensure pedestrian discipline to ensure safety of their lives. The Committee
recommends that special care should be taken for handling the safety of children, senior
citizens and differently abled persons. The Committee also recommends motorists should be
inavarably instructed to give way to pedestrians at zebra crossings, particularly, at red
lights, they should not be allowed to cross over the zebra crossing bearing very less space
for pedestrians. In this regard, the Committee desires that traffic sensitization needs to be
taken up on a regular basis. (Para 3.6.2)
The Committee also desires that Delhi Police should also undertake survey of
intersections and roads where pedestrian movement is substantial and if need be, matter of
construction of foot over bridges may be taken up. The Committee also notes that in recent
past, a number of foot over bridges had been constructed, particularly one with escalators/
lifts near hospitals. The Committee understands that there escalator remain non functional
very often. The Committee desires that this issue may also be taken up with civic
authorities. In view of the Committee, some mechanism should be put in place to see that
escalators, particularly the ones, near hospitals, do not remain out of order for long period.
(Para 3.6.3)
The Committee observes that Delhi Police is entrusted with the responsibility to
remove encroachments from footpaths. However, in markets and unorganized colonies and
even in organized colonies the commuters find it very difficult to have their way due to
encroachments on both sides of footpaths. The Committee, in this regard, strongly
recommends that Delhi Police should enforce the law in letter and spirit for removing
encroachments from footpath to facilitate the commuters with hassle-free passage. The
matter may also be discussed with the local civic agencies for appropriate action on their
part. (Para 3.6.5)
Security cover to Institutional Establishment including Metro Rail etc.
The Committee observes that about 25 lakh commuters travel through metro rail
daily in Delhi and in view of the prevailing security scenario in the country, metro rail in
Delhi appears to be vulnerable to manmade disasters or terrorist attack. The Committee
recommends that Delhi Police should continue to take preemptive steps to guard Delhi
Metro against any causality/strikes. Delhi Police should be in close coordination with CISF
to provide appropriate security without any possibility of lapse. Deployment of Delhi Police
staff at more Metro Stations may also be examined. (Para 3.7.3)
Railway stations
The Committee observes that Delhi Police (GRP) has to discharge the security
responsibility in tandem with RPF at the railway stations. In view of the Committee, Joint
mock drills of GRP and RPF are required as these forces have to work in close co-ordination
and any gap in strategy or lapse on the course of action would prove disastrous.
(Para 3.8.5)
The Committee desires that the proposals of Delhi Police for installation of large size
cargo scanner; CCTV coverage of parking lots; assessment and increase in the strength of
RPF and GRP staff at various Railway stations and illumination of dark areas in Railway
station premises may be addressed at the earliest. Ministry of Home Affairs may work out

59
a suitable plan in tandem with Ministry of Railways and Government of NCT of Delhi for
ensuring prompt execution of these measures. (Para 3.8.6)
Human rights violation-custodial deaths etc.
Human rights violation at the hands of law and order enforcing agencies has become
a recurring feature which is a cause of serious concern for a civilized society. Custodial
death has not only earned a bad name for the police but also affects the image of the
country in international fora. Therefore, utmost care is required to be taken to pre-empt
and prevent any custodial death. The Committee also notes with deep anguish that there
had been five cases of custodial deaths in lock ups in Delhi since 2008 and investigation in
all the cases is still pending. The Committee takes serious exception to this unreasonable
delay. The Committee feels that the inordinate delay in investigation can breed a sense of
complacency in the minds of police personnel. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that investigations should be completed at the earliest and action be taken
against the culprits. (Para 3.9.4)
The Committee has come across some instances of attachment of personnel of
different State Police forces as PSOs providing security cover with latest weapons to
influential persons belonging to respective States residing in Delhi without knowledge of
Delhi Police. The Committee expresses concern and observes that it is a serious issue as
such instance may affect command and control of Delhi Police Security Unit. Since the
presence of security staff from other States in Delhi is not in consonance with the
provisions/instructions contained in yellow Book, the Committee recommends strongly
that instructions of Ministry of Home Affairs must be complied in letter and spirit so that
in case of eventuality there would not be any problem in fixing the responsibility.
(Para 3.9.5)
Amendment to IT Act dealing with cyber law
The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that out of 68 cyber crime cases
registered since 2010 by the Delhi Police, only 3 are under trial stage and the remaining
are under investigation. This is a very sorry state of affair and warrants no excuses. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all the cases may be brought to their
conclusion stage at the earliest. (Para 3.10.3)
The committee feels that the suggestions given by Delhi Police need thorough and
cautious deliberations. The Committee, is of the considered view that the IT Act dealing
with the cyber crime need to be reviewed on a regular basis given the rapid development
of technology and the sophisticated modus operandi the criminals adopt. All the suggestions
made by Delhi Police may be looked into and appropriate action may be taken in the
matter. (Para 3.10.4)
Transparency
The Committee is of the considered view that cooperation and participation of
common man is backbone of the whole arrangement made for administration and
maintenance of law and order. The Committee, therefore, feels that Delhi police should gain
appropriate expertise and take advantage of police-public interface mechanisms existing in
metropolitan cities of developed countries like UK, USA, Singapore, and adopt better
concepts. (Para 4.1.8)

60
      The Committee expresses its concern over the situation where no formal study has
been conducted to assess the impact of the police public interaction measures on the
reduction of crime rate in Delhi. A study may be conducted at the earliest. (Para 4.1.9)
The Committee observes that despite the fact that Delhi Police has undertaken
several schemes and programmes, still people continue to suffer from police phobia. The
Committee, therefore, feels that it is high time for Delhi Police for soul searching and
introspection about the effectiveness of the schemes. The Committee is of the considered
view that the Delhi Police should take up brain storming sessions regularly on how to
improve its public image through effective reaching out to public and providing a
transparent and citizen friendly policing. (Para 4.1.10)
Corruption
The Committee observes with concern that there is widespread public perception
regarding rampant corruption making deep dent into the so called ‘clean image and
transparent system of transfers and postings of police personnel. The claim of Delhi Police
of having zero tolerance policy fly on its own face when people observe that traffic police
officials collect money at red lights from bus drivers, commuters on violation of traffic
rules. It is said that transporters, particularly bus operators have to pay monthly at various
points on their route of operations. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that flying
vigilance squad should check proactively corruption amongst Delhi traffic police personnel
by organizing suo-motto surveillance traps and raids, followed by strict and deterrent follow
up action against the erring officials. In order to ensure transparency among the traffic
staff, PRG Cell in Traffic Unit also must act promptly in making enquiry into complaints
of corruption against Traffic Police officials. The Committee is also given to understand that
people generally talk of lucrative posting in certain police stations where high illegal return
is supposed to be extracted easily. Delhi Police should take a serious note of this illegal
practice and take immediate corrective measures to curb the evil. (Para 4.2.4)
The Committee is of the view that mandatory provisions should be invoked wherein
police officers of every rank are required to file immovable property return every year. The
Committee feels that, as demanded by public for disclosure of movable property also,
personnel in the law enforcing agencies or the agencies where chances of corruption are
high, should also be made to disclose movable property as there have been a number of
cases where movable assets worth crores of rupees were found to be in possession during
raids. The Committee also gathers from the media reports as well as website of the Ministry
of Home Affairs that a large number of IPS officers were yet to file IPRs even after expiry
of stipulated date and some officers did not file the same even after several reminders
issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee takes very serious exception to this
as this is a clear case of failure of control by the cadre-controlling Ministry. The Committee
feels besides vigilance clearance, appropriate actions like deduction in over all grading
marks in Annual Performance Assessment Report should also be enforced. (Para 4.2.5)
Grievance Redressal System
The Committee is of the strong opinion that all the claims and steps seem to be
laudable on papers only particularly when common man has to face difficulties and agony
in getting his work done from thana. The Committee therefore recommends that a close
and vigilant scrutiny of the working of such wings/units of Delhi Police, where common
people have to come or to be contacted for simple works like verifications etc. should be
done. (Para 4.4.4)

61
Administration and Manpower
The Committee in this regard feels that adequate attention is required to assess
actual requirement of police strength for improving police population ratio, review of
recruitment rules for face lifting and providing cosmopolitan character, rationalization of
working hours, separation of investigation and VVIP security from law and order,
introduction of motivational schemes under effective HRM besides putting in place
transparent and accountable system of policing. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Delhi Police may get the assistance and guidance of BPR&D for revisiting the whole
Delhi Police Administration and come out with concrete suggestions/recommendations on
imbibing operational efficiency into Delhi Police organization and functions. (Para 5.1.3)
The Committee further observes that the policemen placed at Police Stations have to
juggle between performing multifarious jobs of investigating into the cases as well as
maintaining the general law and order and appearing in different courts time to time. The
Committee notes that a proposal of Delhi Police for creation of additional posts in various
ranks for separation of crime investigation from law and order duties, is pending with the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs
should actively consider the proposal and forward the same to the Ministry of Finance for
approval. (Para 5.1.4)
The Committee understands that Human Resource Development is an essential
ingredient of every Government set up and Delhi Police is no exception. The Committee
believes that effective Human Resource Management would keep the morale of Delhi Police
high, leading to efficient functioning. The Committee understands that the job profile of a
police requires good deal of dedication, efforts, commitment, honesty and sacrifice, and
therefore there is a need to pay due attention to motivate police-personnel in order to
enhance their morale. (Para 5.1.10)
The Committee notes various motivational schemes under implementation in Delhi
Police and believes that the existing motivational schemes would have positive impact on the
functioning of Delhi Police. The Committee appreciates the concept of awards “Best Beat
Officer” and “Asadharan Karya Puraskar” and desires that more such motivational schemes
may be introduced to accelerate operational efficiency of Delhi Police. (Para 5.1.11)
Residential Accommodation for Delhi Police
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the shortage of
adequate accommodation for the personnel of Delhi Police. At present the Housing
satisfaction level is only 18.60% and the same is likely to be increased to level of 28.27%
by the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17). The Committee, strongly recommends
that the 5,202 staff quarters which are under construction at Dheerpur under Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode and 1,688 staff quarters under Non-Plan Head (Police Modernization
Scheme) must be completed within stipulated time frame . The Committee is of the
considered view that the pace of construction of housing projects for Delhi Police must
match the pace of increase in man-power strength of Delhi Police, otherwise the housing
satisfaction level would further deteriorate. (Para 5.2.4)
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up
the matter and co-ordinate with the concerned Ministries/agencies to resolve the issue of
non-allotment of land by land-owning agencies and non-clearance of building plans by
agencies like DDA, MCD, NDMC, Delhi Fire Service and DUAC etc. The Committee, while
taking a serious view of the issue of non-completion of construction by PWD/CPWD in

62
time, recommends that Delhi Police in tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs should
take necessary action to invoke the penalty clause for non-completion of work within
stipulated time. (Para 5.2.5)
The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that though Delhi Police
purchased 877 flats and took possession in 2009, the DDA and MCD have not provided water
and sewage facilities. It shows negligence on the part of both the agencies. The Committee
recommends that the matter may be taken up immediately and it may be informed of the
outcome. (Para 5.2.6)
The Committee is concerned with the pace of construction of residential quarters for
police personnel. With regard to construction of residential quarters, if the construction
works continue at this pace, it would take a long period to achieve the set target and, by
that time, strength of the police personnel would achieve further go up requiring enhanced
number of residential quarters for Delhi Police staff and officers. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that all hurdles on the way to achieve the set target of satisfaction
level with regard to construction of residential quarter must be overcome. The Ministry of
Home Affairs must be for thcoming in pursuing the issue of making available of land for
providing site for construction of residential quarters. (Para 5.2.7)
Training
The Committee understands that training is one of the most vital components for
effective policing job. Therefore, Delhi Police should be imparted basic, regular, refresher
and on the job training for not only ensuring physical and psychological fitness but also
keeping in view the changing composition of crimes and to combat the challenges on that
front. The functions of Delhi Police ranges from maintaining law and order situation to
keep the national capital safe and secured, allowing demonstration rallies/dharnas and at
the same time, projecting and protecting international image of India by providing world-
class policing system. (Para 5.3.9)
The Committee is of the considered view that NCT of Delhi must have sufficient
infrastructure and training facilities to impart training not only to Delhi Police personnel
but of neighboring States as well. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs must consider to create infrastructure for setting up adequate
training facilities for Police personnel. (Para 5.3.10)
The Committee also feels that training to police force in different areas ensures
sustained improvement and efficiency in its functioning and Delhi Police is not exception to
this principle. As training is an on-going process, it needs to be taken with special care in
order to make the police force result-oriented. The Committee recommends that Delhi
Police may also consult Sardar Vallabhai National Police Academy for chalking out syllabus
for training of Delhi Police in regard to combating terrorism and other areas of Police
functioning, particularly collection of evidences. (Para 5.3.11)
The Committee strongly recommends that dedicated physical fitness programmes
must be organized on regular basis to ensure efficiency in the police force. Attending
Physical fitness programmes must be made compulsory for promotion to all grades. All
Delhi Police staff and officers, irrespective of rank and file must undergo compulsory
annual medical check-up to bring awareness about their health status. Necessary
arrangements may be made for such health check up. (Para 5.3.12)

63
The Committee understands that long hours of duty by the personnel of Delhi Police
generate amongst them fatigue leading to disorder in behavior pattern which has its bearing
on the force as a whole. The Committee, while noting training course for stress
management undertaken during last three years feels that number of participants are still
low. Therefore, comprehensive stress management needs to be organized on regular basis
for all ranks and file. (Para 5.3.13)
Vacancies
The Committee is not happy with the situation arising out of vacancies at different
levels in the Delhi Police. The vacancies have cost the citizens heavily as the crime graph
in Delhi has ended with increase. The Committee therefore recommends that all the
vacancies be filled at the earliest without further delay. Process of sanctioning and filling
of additional posts be completed at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the
new recruits may be sent to nearby training colleges, if situation so warrants to avoid delay
in posting. (Para 5.4.5)
The Committee recommends that the Commissioner of Police, Delhi and the Home
Ministry should get the sanction for the post of Deputy Legal Advisor for each district,
crime and railway and special branch at the earliest and start the process of filling the post
without delay. (Para 5.4.7)
The Committee feels that good professional legal assistance is very important in all
criminal cases from the very beginning of the investigation. The police must get good legal
assistance. It is difficult to get good lawyers at the time of need. The Home Ministry may
consider the proposals of Delhi Police. (Para 5.4.9)
Traffic Management
The Committee, keeping in view, the alleged prevalence of corruption amongst traffic
police, recommends for installation of CCTV cameras at various traffic signals to keep a
constant vigil not only for monitoring vehicle movement and check traffic violation but also
ensuring honest discharge of duties by Delhi Police personnel entrusted with the task of
traffic management. The Committee also understands that parking is a huge challenge for
both the commuters and the police. Delhi Police may discuss the issue with the civic
authorities and take appropriate action in the matter. (Para 6.3.3)
The Committee understands that in a mega metropolitan city like Delhi, the role of
traffic police is very crucial and important. In Delhi, lakhs of people commute from one
part of the city to another everyday. It is estimated that Delhi has the largest number of
vehicles on roads in comparison to other metropolitans of the country. The onerous task of
ensuring smooth flow of traffic lies on the shoulders of Delhi Police. The Committee has
been given to understand that malfunctioning of red lights at many places/points sometimes
cause traffic jams and such junctions are not manned by police personnel thus causing not
only inconvenience to commuters but major traffic jams across the city. Regular
maintenance of traffic signals needs to be augmented and monitored. (Para 6.3.5)
The Committee is of the view that Delhi Traffic Police should take all possible steps
to ensure safety to school going children and suitable action should be taken against school
buses flouting the norms. From time to time at short interval, verification of drivers and
helpers should also be undertaken. (Para 6.3.6)
The Committee also desires that feasibility of providing solar energy system to
traffic signals to ensure un-interrupted supply of power to signals for efficient working

64
may also be explored. In this regard the matter may be taken up with Ministry of
NCRES. (Para 6.3.7)
Drunken driving
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that campaign against drunken
driving must be continued and it should be pursued more vigorously during nights and early
hours of mornings and strict action be taken against defaulters. (Para 6.4.2)
Road Rage
Strong penal action against drunken driving and irrational and impulsive driving can
be effective for preventing road rage. The Committee feels that educating commuters
through various means is an effective way to tackle the incidents of road rage. Similarly,
the traffic police, who is in the nearby, when a scuffle or argument starts, should
immediately intervene so that it may not lead to a big incident. The Committee also desires
that Delhi Police should sponsor a scientific study on human behavior to show exact causes
of road rage and suggest remedial measures. (Para 6.5.3)
Blocking of Roads due VVIP/VIP Movement
The Committee, while taking note of the steps taken by Delhi Police in the direction
of Scientific Traffic Management feels that long traffic jams at various intersections causing
a lot of inconvenience to the commuters should be avoided. After introducing the state-of-
art-technology for avoiding the traffic jams, the situation may be reviewed to see the impact
of the new system. The Committee also recommends that the Delhi traffic police should
look into the matter comprehensively and find out other better ways and means for
ensuring traffic management to the optimum level. (Para 6.6.3)
LEDs at Signalized Junctions
The Committee feels that LED signals are a better proposition and all the junctions
in Delhi should be covered at the earliest. Required budget may be provided for the
purpose. (Para 6.7.3)
Vehicle Actuated Traffic Signals (VATS)
The V ATS signals are the need of the hour in Delhi. This will reduce traffic
congestion to a large extent. The Committee recommends that all the areas may be covered
by V ATS at the earliest. (Para 6.7.5)
Pelican/Pedestrian Traffic Signals
PPTS signals will improve the pedestrian discipline to a large extent. With this
pedestrians may not cross roads at random. Delhi Police should introduce these signals in
all such areas where pedestrian movement is more. (Para 6.7.7)
Road Management Equipment
The Committee takes into account the steps taken in the direction of modernization
of Delhi Traffic Police. The Committee hopes that such elaborate modernization system
would definitely lead to smooth flow of vehicles on Delhi roads and would facilitate the

65
commuters. Delhi Police should regularly review the working of all the systems in place
under modernization etc. and monitor them. There should not be any complacency and
sufficient funds may be provided for modernisation. (Para 6.7.23)
E-challan
The Committee desires that the system may be introduced throughout Delhi and if
needed more devices and set ups may be purchased and if the results are encouraging this
faculty may be continued beyond three years. (Para 6.7.25)
New Interceptors – Night Vision
The Committee takes into account plans of Delhi Traffic Police for expansion and
modernization of traffic control system and hopes that the steps taken would go a long way
in streamlining the traffic in a scientific way and the measures taken would also ensure
traffic discipline and sharp decline in road accidents. The Committee recommends that fund
requirements for further modernization plans of Delhi Traffic Police may be looked into
seriously on priority basis. (Para 6.7.28)
Additional measures taken by the Delhi Police post 16
th December, 2012 incident
The Committee notes the measures undertaken by Delhi Police to curb atrocities
against women in Delhi. However, despite the measures so undertaken the incidents of rape
has not decreased in the NCT of Delhi which is reflected from the updated information
furnished by Delhi Police which indicates that the reported incidents of rape in 2013 (upto
30th September, 2013) is 1271 in comparison to reported rape cases of 556 in 2012,
startlingly, an increase of 128.60%. The Committee is totally aghast. (Para 7.3.2)
The Committee in its 167
th Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
made a number of recommendations on the issues concerning safety and security of women
in the country and ways and means to improve the judicial process for speedy trial of rape
cases accused to give justice to the victim. The Committee desires that Delhi Police should
intensify its efforts in protecting women and in providing a safe environment for women in
Delhi. Special efforts may be envisaged in this regard. Inculcation of values is an important
aspect for which all agencies/institutions including family are to be involved. (Para 7.3.3)
The gang rape of a 23-year-old girl on a Delhi on 16
th December, 2012 bus triggered
something unprecedented. Thousands of citizens came to the streets across the country and
in capital city there were massive spontaneous protests particularly by the youths. Almost
a year has elapsed and there has been a 125% jump in the number of rape cases in Delhi.
Similarly, molestation cases are up a massive 417%. The Committee is of the view that a
lot still needs to be done with regard to instilling fear in sexual offenders. The Committee
understands that the fear of law in the minds of sexual offenders will only be there if there
is strict enforcement of criminal laws in this regard otherwise all efforts will be merely
cosmetic. (Para 7.3.3)
The infamous Sixteenth December Gang rape incident had brought the issue of non-
availability of public transport during the late hours to the limelight. The Committee
recommends that the government should make available safe mode of public transport for
women, especially during evening and night. The Police presence on the roads, especially at
isolated places and stretches should be increased. There are many sensitive footpaths, bye-
lanes, subways and parks which continue to be hostile to women due to poor lighting,

66
shrinking pavements, isolated subways and parks occupied by petty criminals. The
Committee recommends that electronic surveillance should be increased at vulnerable spots
of capital city. Cameras need to be installed at major roads and intersections. The
Committee understands that if a crime takes place at places which is covered by a CCTV
camera, there are chances of it getting recorded and footage could prove vital for the police
to nail the culprits and conviction of offender. (Para 7.3.4)
The Committee understands that for a victim of sexual assault, the real trauma
begins once she decides to report the case. Right from making rounds of the police station
and court rooms to dealing with the social stigma attached to it, a victim of sexual assault
has to withstand a lot. Delhi Police should shed the image of being infamous for not
registering cases to keep/show crime statistics down and should be more pro-active in this
regard. The Committee recommends that police force should be made more positive towards
complaints from sexual assault victims who often face harassment instead of help from
Police. (Para 7.3.5)
7.3.6   The Committee in its 167th Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
made a number of recommendations on the issues concerning safety and security of women in the
country. Attention to the invited to the following relevant recommendations. (Para 7.3.6)
7.4     Better Policing System
7.4.1   The Committee  is of the view  that the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress
upon the State Governments to set up women cells compulsorily in all the police stations
throughout the country so that victim woman could be able to have free and easy access
to lodge complaints against the perpetrators. Women cell in each police station would
further enhance the participation of women in the policing system. The Committee also
took note of the fact that woman police in over all police strength in the country is only
about 6% which is very inadequate. The Committee is of the view that the strength of the
women police force should be at least be 33 per cent of total strength, and therefore
recommends that Union Ministry of Home Affairs may impress upon the Delhi Police to
take suitable me asure in this regard.      (Para7.4.1)
7.4.2  The Committee feels that registration of FIRs should be made mandatory. The
Committee is of the strong view that strict action should be taken for dereliction of duty
against the officer, who refuses to receive complaints on Sexual violence. The Committee
also recommends that once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on to the higher police officer
for information and necessary direction in the matter to ensure time bound investigation.
The Committee further recommends that investigation should be done within a period of 60
days, and charge sheet should be filed in time so that justice is not denied.           (Para7.4.2)
7.5    Responsibility of Higher Officer
7.5.1   In case the crime committed by the subordinate is in the knowledge of the higher
officer and he does not take timely action, such superior officer should be held responsible
and omission of such acts on the part of superior officer must be recorded in his official
dossiers/ACR.       (Para7.5.1)

67
7.6     Repeat Offenders
7 .6.1   The Committee has been given to understand that in our country, there is no system of
keeping a watch on repeat sex offenders. The Committee has also been given to understand that,
according to a study conducted on the sex offenders, majority of the offenders had committed a
sex crime earlier and escaped notice of the police authorities and were roaming freely. The
committee has also been given to understand that Western European countries and the US have
developed a mechanism for tracking such type of sex offenders and are maintaining a data base
in this regard. The Committee recommends that a suitable mechanism may be evolved to keep a
watch on habitual and repeat sex offenders. The committee also recommends that after the
conviction on first offence, the names of the convicted person should be publicized for information
of the public by the Delhi Police. The Committee reiterates that State and UT Governments also
should set up crime records bureaus and the data, including the names of convicted people must
be maintained and updated, form time to time.         (Para7.6.1)
7.6.2    The Committee reiterates the above recommendations and suggests that Ministry of
Home Affairs may take suitable steps in implementations with particular reference to Delhi
Police.        (Para 7.6.2)
Infrastructure
The Committee takes serious exception to this inordinate delay in procurement of
PCRs. The Committee disagrees with the submission of the Commissioner, Delhi Police
that the procurement of vehicles in large quantity will need time. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the proposal should have been cleared at the earliest and all
the formalities for procurement be completed at the earliest. (Para 8.1.6)
The Committee is anguished to find that Delhi Police has not been provided
adequate fund for procurement of PCRs which are the basic infrastructure for patrolling
and surveillance. It is quite surprising that the payment for remaining 80 vehicles is still
pending which is likely to be made to the firm as soon as the funds are allotted to Delhi
Police. Moreover, Delhi Police requires 196 more PCRs for better surveillance. The
Committee, views that the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the proposals of Delhi
Police with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for providing sufficient
funds for procurement of PCRs as per requirement and meeting the pending liabilities
against already procured PCRs. The Committee, in view of the fact that Delhi is
expanding at a very high rate and presence of PCR vans is required in outlying areas
where new colonies, industrial areas and slums have come up, strongly recommends
that the proposal of Delhi Police for procurement of requisite number of PCR vans by
Delhi Police must be forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for approval in time bound
manner. (Para 8.1.12)
The Committee notes that facilities of PCR vans of Delhi Police is an effective
mechanism for policing, but the problem with PCR mechanism is that the staff manning
the Call Centre have a great problem in identifying locations or understanding the
locations or the names of the roads and places which victim or a person tell them. It is
because staff are not familiar to the locations and various places resulting that personnel
posted take a lot of time trying to understand position. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the people at the Call Centre must be familiar and must have enough
inputs on the location of various places of Delhi. (Para 8.1.13)

SWOT - Analysis of Delhi Police
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs in tandem with Delhi Police
should undertake brain-storming session over SWOT-analysis of Delhi Police. Taking into
account the main strengths and available opportunities of Delhi Police, the policy,
programme and course of action should be chalked out to achieve set objectives and every
effort should be made to streamline the functioning of Delhi Police and only then
operational and professionalism efficiency would be achieved by Delhi Police while
discharging its functions and responsibilities. The Committee feels that optimization of
staff-strength and infrastructure, upgradation of training quality matching international
standard and strengthening of research cell are most important fields of Delhi Police
reforms. The Ministry may look into the organizational interventions that are required for
strengthening Delhi Police. (Para 8.2.3)
68

MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th May, 2011 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Raman Deka
9. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
15. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
16. Shri Harsh Vardhan
17. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sharada Subramaniam, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
for the meeting.
3. The Committee then took up the draft 152
nd Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the 136 th Report on Revamping and Revitalisation
of Civil Defence in the Country. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the report with
some changes.
71

72
4. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the subjects to be undertaken by the Committee for
detailed study and examination. After some discussion the following subjects were identified by the
Committee for the purpose :–
1. Security at Airports in the country;
2. Working of Immigration Division in the Ministry of Home Affairs;
3. Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad;
4. Disaster Management in the country;
5. Administration of Union Territories;
6. Infrastructure Projects and Economic Development in NE Region;
7. Functioning of Civil Defence Training Institutes in the country;
8. Coastal Security Management;
9. Indo-Bangla Border Fencing;
10. Problems faced by the Home Guards and their Working Conditions; and
11. Law and order situation in Delhi.
5.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 11.15 
A.M.

73
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Wednesday, the 18 th July, 2012 in Committee Room
“D”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
13. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
14. Shri Adhi Sankar
15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
17. Shri Ravneet Singh
18. Shri Harsh Vardhan
19. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri Satpal Chouhan, JS (C&PG)
73

74
3. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Director
4. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Commissioner of Police, Delhi
5. Shri B.S. Bassi, Special Commissioner of Police (Admn.), Delhi Police
6. Shri P.N. Aggarwal, Special Commissioner of Police (Special Cell), Delhi Police
7. Shri Ranjit Narayan, Special Commissioner of Police (Crime), Delhi Police
8. Shri Dharmendra Kumar, Special Commissioner of Police (L&O), Delhi Police
9. Shri T.N. Mohan, Special Commissioner of Police (GA), Delhi Police
10. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic), Delhi Police
11. Shri S.B.K. Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime), Delhi Police
12. Shri K.C. Dwivedi, Additional Commissioner of Police, Delhi Police
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them about the agenda
of the day which was to hear the views of the Home Secretary on various aspects of ‘Law and
order situation in Delhi.’
[On arrival of witnesses]
3.0 The Chairman then welcomed the officials to the sitting of the Committee. He observed
that, despite the onerous responsibility shouldered and commendable work being done by Delhi
Police, the perception of the public about the Delhi police is still poor which needs to be improved
by making sincere efforts to cater to the needs of the people. He further viewed that Delhi Police
should evolve itself as a people-friendly agency by ensuring security and well-being of the citizens
dwelling within its jurisdictional limit. He then asked the Home Secretary to present his views
regarding the steps taken for improving the security environment for women, children, senior
citizens, and students from far-flung areas of the country like those from the North-East and also
asked him to inform about the steps taken for modernization of the police force.
3.1 He also informed the Secretary about the visit of Sub-Committee on UT Administration to
Chandigarh on 26
th and asked him to issue necessary instructions to the UT Administration to
provide it required information.
4.0 The Chairman then welcomed Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy (BJP) as a new Member of the
Committee. Thereafter a power point presentation was made by the officials of Delhi Police. The
following were the highlights of the presentation:
(A) Crime Statistics upto 30 th June, 2012
➢ Dacoity down by 24%
➢ Robbery down by 16%
➢ Snatching down by 18%
➢ Motor Vehicle Theft down by 421 cases (6%)
➢ Heinous cases detection 86.95% against 83.87% last year
➢ Detection in Total IPC Cases 46.01% against 43.61% last year
➢ Stolen property recovery- 18.30 crore against 13.41 crore last year
(B) Women’s Safety Issues
➢ Women’s Help Desk in each PS
➢ Order under 144 Cr.P.C. for safety of women employees of BPOs
➢ Women centric Police Stations in North and South Campus
➢ Deployment of women staff for beat patrolling

75
➢ Investigation of rape cases by women officers
➢ Fast Track Courts for trial of gang rape cases
➢ Women staff deployed in areas prone to Crime against women e.e. North and
south Campus
➢ Intensive coverage of areas inhabited by North-Eastern residents- both by PCR
vans and local police
➢ 24X7 Helpline for women (emphasis on quality response)
➢ 24X7 Women mobile team (specialized response to domestic violence)
➢ Anti-obscene Cell set-up
➢ Anti-stalking Cell set-up
➢ PCR Vans with women police officers deployed around selected women colleges/
schools
(C) Safety of Senior Citizens staying alone
➢ 13,484 senior citizens registered
➢ 1,174 added in the current year
(D) War against Terror
➢ PAN-India 1M Module busted-15 arrested 4 cases solved- German Bakery-
Chinnaswamy Stadium- Jama Masjid Shoots out and Blast solved
➢ Israeli Diplomat attack case solved- Bomber of Iranian origin identified
➢ Lashker-E-Toiba Modules busted
(E) Traffic Management
➢ Action against drunken driving
➢ 16 Intensive enforcement corridors
➢ Action against tinted glasses
➢ Disciplining at Bus Stop
➢ Checking of commercial vehicles
➢ Chase and challan
➢ Action against bikers
➢ Decline of 12.64% in fatal accidents from 981 cases to 857 cases
(F) Safety and Security of people from North Eastern Region
➢ 7 Nodal officers nominated at District level
➢ Regular meetings with residents of North-Eastern states
➢ One Joint CP Nominated as coordinator to oversee efforts made by District Level
Nodal Officers.
5.0 The Members of the Committee then raised the following points:
➢ The cases relating to rape has gone up.
➢ The field work done in getting the tenant verification and registration is required to
be digitized.
➢ The issue of security of the people who are from the North-Eastern States should be
given top priority and there should be regular meetings with the community
representatives.
➢ Kidnapping/abduction, rape and molestation of women are bringing a bad name to
Delhi Police and should be checked at any cost.

76
➢ For all drivers, domestic helps, attendants, identity card should be made mandatory
with address and other details.
➢ Exploitation of domestic helps, especially children, should be severely dealt with.
6.0 The Chairman then suggested to change the nomenclature of the subject to ‘functioning of
Delhi Police’. The Committee agreed to the suggestion. The Committee also decided a Press
Release may be issued inviting public memoranda from the people of Delhi on the subject.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.

77
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 4 th December, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati S. Sudha, Under Secretary
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri B.S. Bassi, Special Commissioner of Police
3. Shri S.N. Shrivastava, Special Commissioner of Police
4. Shri Ranjit Narayan, Special Commissioner of Police
5. Shri Dharmendra Kumar, Special Commissioner of Police
6. Shri S.B.K Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police
77

78
7. Shri Sandeep Goyal, Joint Commissioner of Police
8. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Commissioner of Police
9. Shri Rajan Bhagat, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
and apprised them the agenda i.e. to further hear the presentation of the Commissioner of Police,
Delhi on various aspects of “Functioning of Delhi Police” in continuation of the sitting held on
18
th July, 2012, wherein it heard the Home Secretary along with the Commissioner of Police, Delhi
on the subject “Law and Order Situation in Delhi.” He recapitulated that the nomenclature of the
subject had been changed to the “Functioning of Delhi Police” for detailed and comprehensive
examination of the subject.
2.1. The Chairman then informed the Members that in response to the Press Release on the
subject, the Secretariat had received 63 memoranda. Out of which, 52 memoranda were found
suitable for forwarding to the Ministry of Home Affairs for furnishing comments thereon. The
comments received from Ministry of Home Affairs had been circulated to the Members along with
response of the Ministry on the queries of Shri Naveen Jindal, MP, Lok Sabha. The Chairman also
underlined the importance of the subject and a detailed scrutiny of various aspects of the
functioning of the Delhi Police.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the Commissioner, Delhi Police and other officers to the meeting
and asked him to make further presentation on the subject by covering the issues like the problems
being faced by Delhi Police in discharging duties, action required to overcome those problems,
recruitment, composition of Delhi Police and steps required to make it cosmopolitan and to give
a modern outlook to it, steps taken or further required to improve police-public interface and to
maintain law and order in Delhi, ensuring security and safety of the citizens dwelling within its
jurisdictional limit, especially, the safe and secured environment for women, children and senior
citizens and steps taken and required to be taken for modernization of the police force keeping in
view the veiled threat from terrorist attack.
4. The Commissioner made the following submissions in the presentation:–
(i) Regarding police- public interaction and police image, meetings with Market Welfare
Associations, Resident Welfare Associations, Senior Citizens were held besides fixed
time meeting by senior officers;
(ii) Special schemes like Jan Sampark Sabha, Yuva, Pehchan, Aapka Update, Awareness
Programme on FM Radio and use of social media and internet are taken;
(iii) Police personnel were provided training on behavioral aspects consisting of human
aspects, RTI, physical fitness, issues concerning weaker sections minorities and
other vulnerable groups;
(iv) Monitoring of complaints through Complaint Monitoring and Tracking System is
being made. Regular visit and inspection of police stations by gazetted officers done;
(v) Under Yuva programme, youth and under privileged children are weaned away from
crime by involving them in sport activities, vocational activities and painting workshops;
(vi) Pehchan Scheme has been evolved for tracing of missing children and children of
under privileged families are being photographed with first copy with the family,
second copy with police station and the third one with District Missing Persons Unit;
21064 photo I Cards were issued under the scheme;

79
(vii) Aapka Update Scheme keeps complainant informed of the progress of their complaint
through emails, SMS, telephone calls, personal visits and letters;
(viii) Zero tolerance against corruption has been adopted and enquiries on allegation of
corruption are made by Vigilance Unit. All transfers and postings are decided by
Delhi Police Establishment Board headed by the Commissioner of Police and the four
senior-most Special Commissioners in accordance with the Supreme Court guidelines
in Prakash Singh case as per laid down policies and guidelines;
(ix) Emphasis on free registration of FIRs and uploading of the same on the Delhi Police
Website is being made besides regular feedback through Aapka Update. Action against
not filing of FIRs was also taken;
(x) Several steps for welfare of police personnel viz. construction of staff quarters to
raise satisfaction level from 18.60% to 29.28% had been taken. Quarters were being
constructed under PPP mode. Several incentive schemes like Asadharan Karya
Puraskar, Commendation Roll, Out Of Turn promotion, Gallantry and Police Medals,
appointment on compassionate ground were also being taken;
(xi) All actions of Delhi Police were under scrutiny of Courts, media and Various
Commissions like NHRC, Minority Commission Police Complaint Authority, etc. IOs
are accountable for acquittals of criminals. Immovable Property Returns are filed by
Gazetted officers;
(xii) Regarding modernization of Delhi Police, every police station has been provided with
computers connected through a cyber Highway and internet connectivity. FIRs are
uploaded on the internet within 24 hours. 1337 CCTVs had been installed and 3952 are
proposed to be installed at various places like markets, railway stations, airports, etc.;
(xiii) Police to public ratio stands at 403 per 100,000 persons. Large number of personnel
deployed on personal security which is provided after threat perception, traffic and
under trial prisoners duty. 7286 police personnel deployed on security duties;
(xiv) There is need to bring changes in old laws. Amendment in Delhi Police ACT, 1978
required for implementation of Supreme Court Guidelines issued in case of Parkash
Sing vs UOI I.T. Act also required amendments to deal with cyber crimes.
4.2 On specific queries of the Chairman and Members of the Committee, the Commissioner,
Delhi Police submitted as follows:
(i) There are about 30-40 Members in the Thana-level Committees comprising of the
local representative, the Member of Legislative Assembly, respectable persons of the
local society, women representatives, and members of the senior citizens and it is a
very well-considered and well-defined composition.
(ii) Traffic is blocked to give clear passage to certain dignitaries who are under high
security risks as per the prescribed Blue Book. It is a fact that people are subjected
to inconvenience, but Delhi Police try to keep the blockages to the barest minimum.
However with the increase in traffic volume over the years, even a minute or two
minutes of stopping of traffic leads to heavy build-up having cascading effect on the
traffic flow. It is not a colonial hangover rather a pure security requirement.
5.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.

80
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 27 th December, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
14. Shri Naveen Jindal
15. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Mangotra, Secretary (BM)
2. Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary (UT)
3. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
4. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judl.)
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri B.S. Bassi, Special Commissioner of Police (Admn.)
80

81
3. Shri Dharmendra Kumar, Special Commissioner of Police (L&O)
4. Shri Sudhir Yadav, Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
5. Shri S.N. Shrivastava, Special Commissioner of Police (Spl. Cell)
6. Shri S.B.K. Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime)
7. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
8. Shri Taj Hassan, Joint Commissioner of Police (Central)
9. Shri K.C. Dwivedi, Addl. Commissioner of Police (ND)
10. Ms. Suman Nalwa, Dy. Commissioner of Police (CAW)
11. Shri Rajan Bhagat, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed about the
agenda of hearing the Home Secretary and Commissioner of Police, Delhi on Growing atrocities/
crimes against women and general law and order situation in Delhi in the backdrop of the incident
of brutal gang rape in Delhi on 16
th December, 2012 and the outburst of public anger against Delhi
Police. He also mentioned that the Delhi Police function under the Ministry of Home Affairs through
Lieutenant Governor and Delhi Government had no control over it. He also informed the Members
about inability of the Home Secretary in attending the meeting due to sudden illness and that the
Secretary (Border Management) was attending the meeting along with Commissioner of Police,
Delhi. The Chairman also welcomed Shri Sandeep Dikshit, who was attending the meeting for the
first time.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3.0 The Chairman, while welcoming the Secretary (Border Management), Law Secretary,
Commissioner of Police, Delhi and other senior officers, expressed concerns on the rising heinous
crimes, especially crimes against women, throughout the country and more particularly in Delhi.
The recent brutal gang rape of a girl had exposed lacunae in the preventive mechanism. The way
the girl was raped in a bus driven through busy stretches of the city reflected the assaulters’
complete lack of fear of the law.
4.0 The Chairman further observed that the incident had shown that women have no proper
protection and the Police and the law-implementing agencies had no control over the anti-social
elements. The incident had shocked the entire country and people all over the country were
disturbed and agitated. There were protests across the country in the aftermath of the rape
incident. The Chairman desired to know the problems coming in the way of proper patrolling,
discharging the duties and responsibilities by police personnel and action required to be taken to
overcome the problems as well as the steps taken or further required to be taken to improve the
responsiveness of the police when a crime is reported. He also asked the witnesses to focus on
the steps taken and required to be taken for modernisation of the police force such as installing
CCTV cameras at various places and efficient monitoring of incidents through it. The chairman also
drew attention of the witnesses to the following points:
(i) High incidences of rape cases in Delhi as compared to other metropolitan cities.
(ii) Highest numbers of complaints against Delhi police than any other State Police in the
country in 2011.
(iii) Need to introduce universal FIR lodging system where anyone can lodge FIR in any
nearby police station instead of jurisdictional police station where the crime took place.

82
(iv) Mechanism to check the position of the personnel on patrolling duty.
(v) Rationalisation of police personnel in the VIP security by creating a separate force to
guard the VIPs and freeing Delhi Police personnel to secure the citizens of Delhi.
5.0 The Chairman also highlighted other issues such as sensitising the police force across the
country, making them responsible for the happenings in their area of jurisdidion and entry in their
confidential reports based on their responsiveness to the incidents in their area of jurisdiction, the
need for total in-camera trial in rape cases and cases of assault on women.
6.0 He also sought views of the Government on the educational system, family system, value
system and culture as well as the evil influence of the electronic media programmes on children.
The Chairman felt that the protests across the country, and more particularly in Delhi, was not
because of one incident. It was an accumulated anger in the minds of the women, particularly
youth across the country about the governance. He further observed that slowly, some impression
is gaining ground that the Parliamentary system is not taking enough care. The Chairman also
expressed displeasure over the pendency of cases in the courts.
7.0 The Chairman asked the Commissioner, Delhi Police to make a presentation on the incident
of gang rape case in Delhi on 16
th December, 2012.
8.0 While making power point presentation, the Commissioner, Delhi Police informed that the
victim girl was returning to home with a friend after watching a movie. They took an auto
rickshaw upto a bus stand in Munirka, from where they boarded the bus. The bus was having dark
film on the window glasses as well as curtains. He informed that no call was given by the victims
at any stage as they were deprived of their phones immediately as the scuffle started. Those mobile
phones were subsequently recovered from the accused. PCR was informed by a passer-by after
they had been thrown out of the bus. In response to that call, PCR van reached the spot within
four minutes. He also informed that the injuries were very grave and extremely brutal, which
cannot be described. The condition of the girl was critical and she had been admitted in a Hospital
in Singapore. The Commissioner, Delhi Police also informed that within a couple of days police
would be able to complete the investigation.
9.0 The Commissioner, Delhi Police further informed that the owner of the bus was having an
office in Noida and the accused, who were known to each other, except the juvenile, had
assembled at a jhuggi at the Ravidas Marg near Sector 3 of R.K. Puram for a small party. They
were heavily drunk and drove the bus for a joy ride. There was no past record of these people.
The Beat staff and Divisional staff had never found anything against them and there were no
previous arrests of any kind.
10.0 They first robbed a person, who boarded the bus. He complained to motorcycle-borne
policemen, but they directed him to the Vasant Vihar police station. Those two motorcycle-borne
policemen had been suspended. The Commissioner, Delhi Police further informed that Police would
file first charge sheet as there was enough evidence. The supplementary charge sheets would be
filed after receiving forensic evidence from the CFSL the DNA profiling, etc. A Special Public
Prosecutor had been appointed. The entire charge sheet would be vetted by him and other legal
experts. A Fast Track Court was being appointed, and the trial would be conducted on a day-to-
day basis and the accused will be given the sentence as early as possible.
11.0 The Commissioner, Delhi Police informed about shortage of PCR vans by stating that the
demand had been made a long time back. Earlier, replacements of condemned vehicles were a
routine matter. As soon as any vehicle was condemned, the proposals were sent to the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the replacements ware provided. But after the austerity measures, Delhi Police
had got the replacements only for some vehicles. He requested that the Police Department should

83
be exempted from the austerity measures since Police was a service department to provide
emergency response and shortage of vehicle affected its mobility and response. He further informed
that all PCR vans were being installed with GPS system so that their movements can be monitored.
12.0 Commenting on the reported news that the bus had crossed three police pickets, the
Commissioner of Police submitted that on the main arterial roads like the NH-8, police pickets and
barriers are not put because they lead to major traffic jams, unless there is any emergency or a
requirement to check vehicles and it was not humanly possible for the patrolling team or anyone
who is standing by the side of the road to see what was happening inside the bus, when people
who were driving alongside or behind the bus, did not notice anything.
13.0 On the issues of the bus having dark films and curtains on the windows, the Commissioner,
Delhi Police gave details of the drive against tinted glasses in vehicles. Regarding query on the
action against the bus owner, the Commissioner informed that the he had not been spared and
would be roped in.
14.0 The Commissioner, Delhi Police mentioned about 24x7 help line for women, Anti-Obscene
Calls Cell and Anti-Stalking Cell, Crime-Against- Women Cell in each district, deployment of women
police officers in PCR vans around selected women colleges and schools, women’s helpdesk in
each police station, posting of more women staff at the police stations, for investigation of rape
cases instead of posting them in the offices. He also mentioned that the ratio of women officers
and constables in the Delhi Police was less than seven per cent, as per the sanctioned strength and
some more posts would be created for women police officers.
The Commissioner, Delhi Police also deliberated on the following issues:–
– Instructions issued to BPO industry in the matter of providing security to female
employees;
– Scrutiny of placement agencies because sometimes they also indulge in human
trafficking and trafficking of women;
– Manning of eight Metro Police Stations without sanctioned staff for them;
– Self-defence training camps for girls;
– Absence of strong regime in giving permits for chartered buses, etc., in the Transport
Department to ensure that it should not be given to all and sundry; and
– Informing civic agencies of various dark stretches in the city.
15.0 The Commissioner drew attention of the Committee that in certain countries, a system
namely Criminal Record Bureau Check (CRB check) was followed wherein all people dealing with
women from very close quarters, were properly verified by the police and given permission to
work. The employers of such people have to pay for the CRB check. He suggested a measure on
the similar lines for consideration of the Committee.
16.0 The Secretary, MHA assured that issues of vacancies and shortage. of vehicles will be taken
up with the Ministry of Finance and Department of Personnel.
17.0 Some other queries and issues like forensic facility in Delhi, Fast Track Courts, handling
of the mob at the Rajpath and absence of anti-riot gear to the police, throwing back of stones by
police on the mob, absence of control and supervision of senior officer at thana level, were also
raised by the Members, which were replied to by the witnesses.
18.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
19.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.

84
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Friday, the 4 th January, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Shafiquar Rahman Barq
9. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
10. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
11. Shri Rathod Ramesh
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Mangotra, Secretary (BM)
2. Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary (UT)
3. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri B.S. Bassi, Special Commissioner of Police (Admn.)
3. Shri Ranjit Narayan, Special Commissioner of Police (Crime)
4. Shri Dharmendra Kumar, Special Commissioner of Police (L&O)
84

85
5. Shri Sudhir Yadav, Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
6. Shri S.N. Shrivastava, Special Commissioner of Police (Spl.Cell)
7. Shri Virender Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police (Headquarter)
8. Shri S.B.K. Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime)
9. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
10. Shri K.C. Dwivedi, Adl. Commissioner of Police (ND)
11. Shri Anil Shukla, Additional Commissioner of Police (Headquarters)
12. Ms. Suman Nalwa, Dy. Commissioner of Police (CAW)
13. Shri Rajan Bhagat, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. B.A. Aggrawal, Secretary
2. Shri D. Bhardwaj, JS & LA
Representatives of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri Devender Kumar Sikri, Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar Gulati, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Finance
Shrimati Sudha Krishnan, Joint Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and made a reference to the passing
away of recent Delhi gang rape victim in a Singapore hospital. The Committee observed a minute’s
silence as a mark of respect to the memory of departed soul. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised
the Members of the agenda of the meeting i.e. further hearing the Secretary of the Ministry of
Home Affairs, Commissioner, Delhi Police, Secretaries, Department of Justice and Legal Affairs and
representative of Ministry of Finance on the issues of setting up of fast track courts, shortage of
PCR vans and vacancies in Delhi Police and stringent punishment including death penalty for rape/
gang rape convicts which remained inconclusive during the meeting held on 27
th December, 2012.
The Chairman also welcomed Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana and Shri D. Raja who have been attending
meeting for the first time after their nominations to the Committee.
3.0 The Chairman also informed the Members that the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
and Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012 have been referred
to the Committee for examination and report within three months. The Chairman suggested that the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 may be taken up on priority as it seeks to provide stringent
punishment for the offences of rape. The Chairman also suggested that a Press Release may be
issued soliciting view of the individuals/organizations, women organizations on the various
provisions of the Bill. He also suggested that views of the State Governments/UT Administrations
may also be obtained in this regard. The Committee after some discussion agreed to the
suggestions of the Chairman
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
4.0 The Chairman of the Committee expressed displeasure over the sequel absence of the Union
Home Secretary during the meeting of the Committee and asked the Secretary (BM), Ministry of
Home Affairs to convey the feelings of the Committee to him. The representative of the Ministry
of Finance apprised the Committee about the proposals of providing PCR vans to Delhi Police,
which were pending with the Ministry and assured that all necessary clearance will be given on
priority basis. She also informed that there was no proposal pending for creating additional posts.
The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs, however, informed that some proposals for

86
additional posts were under consideration with them and the same will be forwarded shortly to the
Ministry of Finance for further action in this regard.
5.0 With regard to setting up of Fast Track Courts, the Secretary, Department of Justice
submitted that the subject of Fast Track Courts falls within the domain of State Governments and
the respective High Courts. The Central Government after the 11
th Finance Commission’s
recommendations has been providing central assistance to States. The setting up of Fast Track
Courts was a one time measure to reduce pendency in the courts. The Supreme Court while
upholding the discontinuation of financing of Fast Track Courts scheme by the Central Government
had observed that States are at liberty to continue the Fast Track Courts as a permanent feature.
Regarding concluding the trials in the courts within a specified period, the Justice Secretary drew
attention to the Section 309 of Cr.P.C. which provides that as far possible every inquiry shall be
held expeditiously and recording of examination of witness shall be continued on day to day basis.
With regard to rape cases under Sections 376 to 376 D of IPC, the inquiry or trial shall as far
possible be completed within a period of two months from the date of commencement of the
examination of witnesses. He also mentioned about the guidelines relating to adjournments during
the trials.
6.0 The Justice Secretary, when asked to comment on the experience of the countries where
death penalty is in vogue, submitted that they have not studied this aspect and this information has
to be obtained from the Missions/Embassies abroad. With regard to provision of death penalty in
rape/gang rape cases, he submitted that his Ministry has not formed any view and it will consider
the issue when the same will be referred to it.
7.0 The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs as well as the Commissioner, Delhi Police informed
the Committee about the development/progress made in the investigation of the brutal gang rape of
a girl on 16
th December, 2012. It was informed that the case will be referred to the Fast Track
Court, recently set up in Saket, New Delhi. The Committee took note of the information on the
details of the cases of clemency given during the last six years to the convicts of rape and murder
cases. The Committee sought to know the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs in such cases.
The Secretary, MHA submitted that the information cannot be shared as it is privileged on account
of being communication between Minister and President of India. The Chairman of the Committee
took serious exception to the submission of the Secretary and felt that Committee is interested in
the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs only.
8.0 Some more queries were raised by Members which were replied to by the witnesses. With
regard to queries concerning speedy trails in Fast Track Courts, financial assistance to States in
setting up of Fast Track Courts, penalties and court procedures, the Chairman suggested that they
will be taken up while examining the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.

87
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 7 th January, 2014 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
14. Shri Rathod Ramesh
15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
16. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shumsher K. Sheriff, Secretary-General
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Secretary
2. Shri Rajiv Sharma, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Lokesh Jha, Joint Secretary (PP)
87

88
4. Shri S.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary (BM)
5. Shri Rakesh Singh, Joint Secretary (IS-I)
6. Shri V . Vumlunmang, Joint Secretary (F)
7. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary (NE)
8. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary (NM)
9. Shri R.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary (K)
10. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
Representatives of Intelligence Bureau
1. Shri S.A. Ibrahim, Director
2. Shri Rajiv Jain, Additional Director
3. Shri Anand Kumar, Additional Director
4. Shri M.K. Lall, Joint Director
Representative of CRPF
Shri Dilip Trivedi, DG
Representatives of CISF
1. Shri Arvind Ranjan, DG
2. Shri A.C. Verma, Special DG
3. Shri S.B. Singh, IG
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri B.S. Bassi, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri S.N. Shrivastava, Special Commissioner of Police
3. Shri T.N. Mohan, Special Commissioner of Police
Representatives of NSG
1. Shri B.S. Das, IG (Ops.)
2. Shri Enos Massey, Major
Representative of Ministry of Urban Development
Shri C.K. Khaitan, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Shipping
Shri N. Muruganantam, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Steel
Shri T. Srinivas, Director
Representatives of Steel Authority of India Ltd.
1. Shri H.S. Pati, Director (Pers.)
2. Shri Samir Swarup, DGM (Pers.)
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri G. Asok Kumar, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Ocean Development
Shri Ravikant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Department of Atomic Energy
1. Shri K.A.P. Sinha, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar, IG, Atomic Energy

89
Representatives of Indian Air Force
1 Shri B. Suresh, ACAS Ops.
2. Shri Manmeet Singh, D Ops. AD
Representatives of Department of Space
1. Dr. Shankar Kumar, Sr. Hindi Officer, ISRO Office, New Delhi
2. Shri Mohit Satyadeep, Administrative Officer, ISRO Office, New Delhi
Representative of Ministry of Power
Shri R.S. Thakur, Director
Representatives of NMDC
1. Shri K. Jayan, DGM
2. Shri N.R.K. Prasad, DGM
Representatives of RINL
1. Shri Y .R. Reddy, Director
2. Shri P.K. Mahapatra, DGM
Representative of Ministry of Coal
Shri M.K. Sharma, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Shrimati Rashmi, Aggarwal, Director
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the Committee and
wished all a happy and prosperous New Year, and thereafter, apprised them the agenda of the day
i.e. consideration and adoption of two draft Reports, namely, (i) 176
th Report on the functioning
of Delhi Police, and (ii) 177 th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme and hearing the Home
Secretary on Internal Security : Security of Vital Installations Including Airports.
2.1 The Chairman then recalled that the Committee discussed the subject ‘Delhi Police’ at
length. The Committee received suggestions and incorporated most of them. With regard to Costal
Security Scheme also, the Committee had enough opportunity to go through the presentations made
by various stakeholders involved in the Coastal Security Scheme. He recapitulated that the
Committee had an opportunity to visit the East Coast and the Southern Coast and visited Nellore
in Andhra Pradesh and Chennai in Tamil Nadu, and had interaction with the concerned State
Governments. The Committee had enough inputs from the two State Governments. Beside that, the
Committee also received views from the Coastal State Governments. The Committee also called the
agencies involved in the coastal security and discussed the issue with them threadbare.
2.2 The Chairman then informed that he received a letter from Shri Naveen Jindal raising
following three issues:–
Delhi Police
(a) heavy pendency at forensic labs where a lot of time is taken to get reports from
forensic labs, which is delaying the investigation and prosecution of the people
involved, therefore, suggesting that an early action should be taken to enhance the
capacity and strength of the forensic labs in Delhi.
(b) Wearing of helmets for women drivers and pillion riders should be made compulsory
because an accident does not differentiate between a man or a woman. In Delhi, it is
optional for women whether riding on pillion or driving a two-wheeler, to wear a
protective headgear. Lives of women where as precious as the lives of men and should

90
not be exposed to avoidable risk and, regardless of any opposition helmets for women,
whether pillion riders or drivers, should be made mandatory as far as possible.
(c) statistical upgradation in report as latest data are available.
(d) definite time-frame with regard to filing of FIR, including compulsory registration of
the FIR, and enquiry and filing of charge-sheet within six months to meet the ends
of justice.
** *
2.3 * * *
2.4 The Chairman then directed the secretariat to incorporate the suggestions in the reports The
Committee, thereafter, adopted the 176
th Report on the functioning of Delhi Police, and (ii) 177 th
Report on the Coastal Security Scheme with the above modifications.
[The Chairman then invited the witnesses]
3.0-4.2 * * *
5.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.17 P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

91
ANNEXURES

93
ANNEXURE -I
Press Release
Standing Committee on Home Affairs Invites
Suggestions on Functioning of Delhi Police
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, headed by Shri M.
Venkaiah Naidu, M.P. Rajya Sabha is presently examining the subject “Functioning of Delhi
Police” for detailed examination and report.
2. The Committee has decided to invite written memoranda containing suggestions/views/
comments of individuals/associations/NGOs and/various stakeholders on the above mentioned
subject.
3. The memoranda which are submitted to the Committee, would form part of its records and
would be treated as confidential and, therefore, should not be printed, circulated or publicized by
anyone, as such an act would constitute a breach of privilege of the Committee. In this regard,
it is worthwhile to mention that the memoranda so submitted should be on general functioning of
Delhi Police including suggestions on improving its functioning and, therefore, no personal
complaints should form part of the Memoranda as the same will not be entertained. Those who
are desirous of appearing before the Committee may give their willingness in writing for the same.
4. Those desirous of submitting memoranda to the Committee may send the same to
Shri D.K.  Mishra, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 142, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001 {Tele: 23035410 (O) and 23012007 (fax)} latest
by 24
th August, 2012. Memoranda may also be e-mailed to rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

94
94
ANNEXURE -II
Suggestions received from individuals/organizations/associations etc. on the
functioning of Delhi Police
Memorandum
No.
1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Received from
2
Shri Dhan Shyam Dutt Bhardwaj
Shri Ramashankar Shah,
Praabhari Delhi Pradesh, (ACC)
Anti Corruption Committee
Shri V .S. Laroya, Commodore
(Retd.), Indian Navy
Shri Gurdip Singh, President
Shri Hari Ram (Sindhi)
Shri Kailash C. Bahl
Shri R.N. Prabhakar, Advocate,
High Court and Supreme Court
Advocate Rajesh Sonthalia
Address
3
15/824, Baba Kharak Singh Marg,
New Delhi-110001
C-3/138B, Nangli Vihar X, Barpola,
New Delhi-43
Redg. Office: Kamini Niwas, Pandurang
Wadi, Mira, Thane-401104, Mumbai
Branch Office: 239, Vipin Garden, Near
Kakrola More, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi-110059
D-48, Malcha Marg, Chanakya Puri,
New Delhi-110021
Krishna Market, Pahar Ganj, Residents and
Shopkeepers Welfare Society (Regd.)
S-46103, Member Bhagidari – Government
of NCT of Delhi, 5147, Pahar Ganj,
Krishna Market, New Delhi-110055
House No. 2938, Kalra Niwas (Ground
Floor), Khalsa Gali, Sindhi Dahi Bhale Wala,
Katra (Aanganwadi Mohalla), Near Sindhi
Gurdwara and Indian Career Academy,
Arya Pura, Old Subzi Mandi, Delhi-110007
K-18, Lajpat Nagar 3
rd (First Floor),
New Delhi-110024
Off-cum-Residence: 204, Gali No.7, Faiz
Road (Joshi Road), Karol Bagh,
New. Delhi-110005
Residence and Office: DDA, MIG-496,
Pocket-2, Sector-A10, Narela, Delhi-110040

95
1
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
2
Shri Rajinder Prasad Singhal,
Mahamantri- Bharat Mata Kalyan
Pranayas
Bharat Wakhlu, General Secretary,
Foundation for Restoration of
National Values
Dr. Anil Kumar Sharma
All Delhi Police Members
Shri Baljeet Singh Singhmar
Dr. K.L. Madhok
Anonymous
Pt. Gautam Kaul (Asiad Jyoti),
IPS Retd., President-Delhi Police
Retired Gazetted Officers
Association (Redg.)
Shri Surender Gupta, Chairman,
Licensing and Tehbazari
Committee, North Delhi
Municipal Corporation
Shri Mahender P. Vaid, Valmiki
Dharm Samaj-NGO
Aap and Hum
Shri S.C. Nanhorya, Commandant
B.S.F. (Retd.)
Shri K.K. Swami
Shri Prem Singh Bisht
3
Residence: K.N. 312, Agrasen Market,
Bawana Road, In front of State Bank,
Narela, Delhi-110040
M-75, Greater Kailash, Part I,
New Delhi-110048
B-22, ST. No.4, Opposite Post Office Arjun
Mohalla, Maujpur, Delhi-110053
Anonymous
332  Dr. Aunchandi,Bawana Delhi-110039
D-122, Ridgewood Estate, DLF City,
Phase-IV , Near Galleria Market,
Gurgaon - 122009 (Haryana)
Anonymous (Diary No. 175)
162, Vasant Enclave, DDA Flats,
New Delhi-ll0057
—
B-250, Hanuman Mandir Chowk, Kusumpur
Village, New Delhi-110057
Camp Office Address: A-13, Sahyog Vihar,
(Near Matiala Village), Sector 3, Dwarka,
New Delhi-110075
North Delhi and East Delhi
A3/230, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi-ll0063
51, Samrat Enclave, Pitampura, Delhi-110034
Office of Special Commissioner of Police,
Vigilance, 6
th Floor, Delhi Police Hear
Quarter, ITO, Delhi

96
1
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
2
Shri Prasanta Kumar Dash, State
Programme Manager
Anonymous
Shri Dilawar Singh
Shri Ramesh Sharma
Shri Sushil Kumar, President
Shri Ashish Bedi
Dr. O.P. Rao
Col. S.P. Kottai, Retd.
Wg. Cdr. P.K. Roy Chowdhury
(Retd.)
Shri Deepak Raj Singh, President,
ISA (India)
Shri Avinash Kumar
Shri P.K. Mishra
Shri Atma Ram Kejariwal
Shri Jeevan Kumar Mittal
Shri Sunder Singh
Shri S. Gopal
Shri Insp. Binay Singh
3
R/O F-84, Gali No.3, East Vinod Nagar,
Delhi-110091
Save the Children, Bal Raksha, Bharat,
Delhi State Programme Office, First Floor,
G-31, Main Road, Kalkaji, New Delhi-
110019
Anonymous
Diary No. 189,30/8/2012
Village and Post Office: Nuna Majra, Tehsil
Bahadurgarh, Distt jhajjar
Dwarka Forum (Regd.), 720, Pocket-I,
Sector-14, Dwarka, New Delhi-110078
—
Gurgaon
F 7/72, Sugan Vihar, Vidhyadhar Nagar,
Jaipur-302023
pkroychow@yahoo.co.in
—
—
—
Flat-4, Sector-I, Pocket-2, Dwarka,
New Delhi-110075
Moti Nagar-110015
—
E-340A, Greater Kailash, Part 1, New
Delhi-110048
P.S.H.N. Din, New Delhi

97
1
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
2
Shri S.S. Minhas, Principal
Lt. Col Ravindranath CV (Retd.)
Shri Daljeet Singh
Shri S.K. Goyal
Shri R.R. Grover
Shri Surjit Singh
Shri Rahul Gul
Shri Debadas Ray
Shri Kapil Chawla
Pt. Nand Kishore Mishra, Hindu
Mahasabha
Dr. Kumar Bijoy
Shri Seemant Paul
Shri R.N. Prabhakar, Advocate,
High Court and Supreme Court
3
Guru Harkrishan Public School, Vasnat
Vihar, New Delhi
B 806, Sheetal Vihar Apartment, Plot No.
10, Dwaraka, New Delhi-110077
House No. 573, First Floor, Khera Khurd
Delhi-110082
W-12/69, Sainik Farm, New Delhi-110062
5, Nilgiri Apartments, Alaknanda,
New Delhi-110019
1710, G.T.B. Nagar, Kingsway Camp, Delhi
—
2nd-in-Command (Retd.) BSF
—
Maheswar Ashram Gole Market, New Delhi
Chartered Financial Analyst,
Secretary-Laxmi Vihar, RW A, De1hi-110084
—
204, Gali No.7, Faiz Road (Joshi Road)
Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005

98
98
ANNEXURE -III
List of Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs
Report Title of the Report
No.
12
1
st On Demand Nos. 42 and 44 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs
for the year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
12th The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment Bill, 1995
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994

99
12
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill, 1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
29th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
30
th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
31
st The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32
nd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill, 1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill, 1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998

100
12
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi
High Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
68
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixtieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
69
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
70
th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Personnel.Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999

101
12
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
and Kashmir
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme
97th The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Home Affairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi
Bill,2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003

102
12
109th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
111th Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third
Report of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of Administration’ of Union Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, Control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred and Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
125th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
126th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in One
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report on DFG (2007-08) of the Ministry of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Home Affairs
133rd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of Indo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants

103
12
138th The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in One
Hundred Thirty-second Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-third Report on DFG (2008-09) of the Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration
143rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Home Affairs
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
149th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the
country
153rd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects along Indo-
Pak Borders
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-second Report on Implementations of Central Scheme of Modernisation of
Prison Administration.
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Home Affairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o  DoNER
163rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth Amendment) Bill, 2012

104
12
165th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Sixty-first Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Home Affairs
166
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its One
Hundred and Sixty second Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
167
th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Sixty-third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy, Hyderabad.
173
rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
175
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176
th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
l77th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union Territories (Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Chandigarh)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.