5·3 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
IMMIGRATION (CARRIERS' LIABILITY) BILL, 1998 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 11TH _MARCH, 1999) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 11TH MARCH, 1999) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 1999/FALGUNA, 1920 (SAKA) 
J 

C.S. (H.A)-95 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPAltTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMl\1ITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
t\11\HGRATIO~ (CARRIERS' LIABILITY) BILL, 1998 
t PIU: SE~ l"EO TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 11TH MARCH, 1999) 
tL\ID JN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 11TH MARCH, 1999) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 1999/FALGUNA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. COM POSIT ION OF T H E COMMITTEE 
2. R EPORT 
3. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING S OF THE COMMITTEE 
4. ANNEXURE 
.... 
IMM IGRAT IO N ( CARR IERS' LIABILITY) BILL, 1998 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
1-9 
11-15 
17-22 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansruj Bhurdwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Puchouri 
4. Shri H. Hunumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Raj Nuth Singh 
7. Shri Prafull Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
*14. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
*15. Shri Yiduthalai Yirumbi 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19. Shri Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Pushpudan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrimati Meira Kumar 
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
31. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shri Motilal Yora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
34. Shri Sudhir Giri 
• Nominated w.e.f. the 11th June, 1998. 
•• Nominated w.c.f. the lith August, 1998. 
761 RS F-2-A 
(i) 

(ii) 
35. Shri Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
39. Shri Lalu Prasad 
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
43. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
44. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
@45. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
@Nominated w.e.f. the 26th June, 1998. 
761 RS F-2·B 

I 
REPORT 
1, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this Fifty-third Report of the Committe~. The Report is on the Immigration 
(Carriers' Liability) Bill, 1998. • 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
referred** the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Bill, 1998 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha 
on the 23rd December, 1998 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and 
report. 
3. The Bill intends to make the carriers liable in respect of passengers brought by them 
into India in contrav entio n of the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act , 1920, 
and the Passport (Entry into India) Rules, 1950. The said Act and the 'rules made. 
thereunder prescribe the conditions for the entry of a person' coming from any place outside 
India by water, land or air. Under these rules, foreign nationals are required to be in 
possession of a valid passport and a visa. An Indian national must be in possession of a valid 1 
passport. The Immigration authorities posted at various checkposts covering land checkposts, 
seaports and airport s are required to do a thorough checking of the persons coming by 
different mpdes of transport. 
4. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Background Note on the Bill has stated that it 
has been observed in recent years that a large number of passengers at the four major 
Internat ional airports at Delhi, Bombay , Calcutta and Madras manage to come without any 
valid documents, creat ing problems for the immigration authorities. Airlines do not exercise 
proper check of travel documents before allowing passengers to board the plane. It has, 
therefore, become nece~sary that stat utory responsibility is cast on the airlines/ship carriers 
bringing such passengers by imposing financial liability on them, states, the Ministry in their 
Note.· 
5. International air travel is governed by the guidelines adopted at the Convention on 
Internatinal Civil Aviation signed at Chicago on December 7, 1944, known as the Chicago 
Convention. It has various annexures finalised over a period of time during the last 50 years. 
Ann exure 9 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation deals with "Fac ilitation " and 
incorpo rates recomm ended practices in this area, para 3.35 of this Ann exure, requir es the 
public author ity of a contract ing state to accept the passengers and crew for examination as 
to their admissibility in the country without unreasonably delay. The ope rator has been 
made responsible for the custody and care of the passenge rs until they are accepted after 
such examination . The operator is responsible for the custody of passengers and crew 
between aircraft and the terminal builiding and within the transit area of the terminal 
builiding . However, it has been left to the contracting authorities to relieve any operator 
from any of these responsib ilities. 
*Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated the 23rd December, 1998. For a 
copy of the Bill, plca~cs sec Annexure. 
**RajyCJ SabhCJ Pi1rliamcntary Bulleti n PCJrt II No. 37176 dated the 30th December , 1998. 
1 

2 
6. Para 3.36 of the aforementioned Annexure to the Chicago Convention states that a 
person found inadmissible is transferred back into the custody of the operator who will be 
responsible for his prompt removal to the point where the person commenced his journey or 
to any other place where the person is admissible. An inadmissible person is defined as a 
person who is refused admission to a State by its authorities. The public authorities are 
required to inform, without delay, the operators when a person is found inadmissible. 
7. Para 3.37 of the said Annexure casts responsibility on the operator to take 
precautions at the point of embarkation to the end that passengers are in possession of 
necessary control documents prescribed by the contracting States. It has been further stated 
that the contracting State shall not fine operators in the event that passengers are found 
inadmissible unless there is evidence to suggest that the carrier was negligent in taking 
precautions to the end that the passengers complied with the documentary requirements for 
entry into the receiving States. 
8. The Ministry has informed the Committee that India is a party to the Chicago 
Cenvention and, ordinarily, it would not have been desirable to make provision through a 
domestic enactment imposing a financial liability on the carrier/operator to pay certain 
amount for carrying a passenger who does not have a valid passport, visa or other travel 
documents. In this connection, the Ministry has informed the Committee that over the 
course of time, a number of countries have deviated from the standards laid down in the 
Annexure to the Convention and have enacted legislations by which they seek to cast 
financial liability on the carrier/operator to pay a certain amount for every passenger carried 
without a travel document. The USA, U.K., Canada, Saudi Arabia, Singapore and Australia 
are some of the couq.tries who have enacted such legislation. It has been noticed, for 
example, that the U.K. Government has enacted Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act, 1987. 
A duty has been cast through this Act on the owners or agents of the ship or aircraft to pay 
an amount of Pounds 1,000.00 (One thousand Pound Sterling) which has been amended to 
pounds 2000.00 in 1991 for every carrier who carries a person without proper documents, the 
Ministry has stated in their Background Note .. 
9. The Ministry has further stated that the US Nationality and Immigration Act 
provides for imposition of penalty of a sum of $ 1,000.00 payable by the owner, master, 
commanding officer, agent, charterer, or consignee of any vessel or aircraft for every alien 
who is brought to the U.S.A. without a valid visa. In addition, they have to pay a sum equal 
to that paid by such alien for his transportation from the initial point of his embarkation. 
According to the information given by Directorate General of Civil Aviation, U.S.A. has 
not filed differences with respect to para 3.37.1 of Annexure to the Convention on 
International Civil Aviation (Chicago Convention). 
10. The Ministry has also inform ed the Committee that besides traffic through airlines , 
there are shipping lines also which control traffic from outside India. Some inadmissible 
foreigners enter thro4$h sea-routes also. International sea travel is governed by the 
Convention for Facilitation of International Martime Traffic, London (April, 1965) to which 
India is also a signatory. Para 3.15 of the said Convention provides that the public 
authorities shall not impose any penalty upon ship owners in the event that any control 
document in possession of a passenger is found by public authorities to be inadequate or if, 
for that reason, the passenger is found to be inadmissible. 
11. The Committee has been further informed that the Ministry of Surface Transport 
who were consulted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, have opined that the Government of 
India has to file "differences" in respect of para 3.15 of the Convention for Facilitation of 

3 
International Maritime Traffic, 1965 after the enactment of the proposed legislation. The 
Committee has been apprised that action will be taken for this purpose after the legislation 
has been enacted . 
12. The Committee has then been apprised by the Ministry that the carriers bringing 
passengers by road etc. have not been included in the proposed legislation because in case of 
passengers coming by road or other land transport, the person is physically in the territory of 
the neighbouring country until he is admitted into Indian territory through the immigration 
check-post. If found inadmissible, he is not allowed entry into India at all. Whereas in the 
case of airlines passengers or the passengers brought by ship, the carrier as well as the 
passenges have already entered Indian territory except for the ,technicality of having to pass 
through the immigration and customs barriers. If such passengers are . found to be 
inadmissible for any reason, the authorities are faced with the problem of ensuring their 
removal from Indian territory. 
12.1 The Committee has been informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs consulted the 
Ministry of External Affairs on the point dealt with in the preceeding para and the stand 
taken by the Home Ministry is in accordance with the advice tendered by the latter Ministry. 
13. The salient features of the new legislation are as follows:-
(i) Owners of any carrier would be liable to pay a monetary penalty where the 
competent authority at the point of entry finds that the carrier has brought into 
India any passenger without valid documents for entry. The valid documents 
would be: 
(a) a valid passport with photograph or some other document satisfactorily 
establishing the identity and nationality I citizenship of the passenger; and 
(b) a valid visa, where required, under the relevant immigration laws. 
(ii) The penalty will be a sum of Rs. one lakh for every passenger brought by it 
without relevant documents to be paid to an authority notified by the Central 
Government for the purpose. Provided that the order issued by the competent 
authority imposing financial liability shall be passed after giving the carrier an 
opportunity of being heard. 
(iii) bn failure to pay the penalty the amount may by recovered by seizing, 
detaining or selling:-
(a) the aircraft or the ship; or 
(b) any goods on the ship or aircraft belonging to the carrier. 
(iv) These provisions of the proposed legislation will be without prejudice to the 
liability of the carrier to take back the inadmissible passengers to the point of 
origin or to any other point. The provisions of the proposed legislation will be 
in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of the Registration of 
Foreigners Act, 1939, the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, Foreigners 
Act, 1946 and of any other enac~ment for the time being in force dealing with 
entry into India of persons without valid travel documents. 
14. The Ministry of Home Affairs has declared in their background Note that once the 
aforesaid proposal is approved and the legislation is enacted, the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
would be requested to file differences with the International Civil Aviation Organisation 
with respect to ~ant 3.37.1 of Annexure 9 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil 
761 RS F-3·A 

4 
Aviation as required under Article 38 of the said Convention. Similarly, the Minsitry of 
Surface Transport would be requested to file differences with the International Maritime 
Organisation with respect to p~ra 3.15 of the Convention of Facilitation of International 
Maritime Traffic, 1965. 
15. The Committee considered the Bill in its sitting held on 19th February, 1999. The 
Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs made a presentation on the Bill. The 
Committee was informed that in recent years, it had come to the notice of the Central 
Government that large number of passengers had been coming to India without any valid 
travel document. It has also been observed that airlines did not exercise proper check of the 
travel documents of the foreigners coming to India at the time of commencement of the 
journey. That resulted in arrival of passengers fn contravent:on of the provisions of the 
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the rules made thereunder. In order to tackle that 
problem, It had become necessary in the national interest to impose a statutory obligation 
on the carriers to properly scrutinise travel documents of the persons before bringing them 
to India, the Special Secretary informed the Committee. 
15.1 With that end in view the Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 23th 
December, 1998. The subject matter of the Bill falls within the purview of Entry 19 of List-! 
Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, namely, "Admission into, and 
emigration and expulsion from India; passport and visas", the Committee was informed by 
the representative of the Ministry. 
15.2 The Special Secretary then went on to state that the Passport (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 had five sections only. Section 3 of the Act provided that the Central Government 
may make rules requiring that persons entering into India shall be in possession of passports 
and for all matters ancilliary or incidental to that purpose. Sub-section (2) of this Section 
provided inter alia that withoblt prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules 
may Prohibit the entry into India or any part thereof of any person who has not in his 
possession a passport issued to him. The 'said sub-section (2) also provided for the exemption 
either absolutely or on any condition of any person or class of persons from any provision of 
such rule. The Act further provided that the rules made under Section 3 may provide that 
any contravention thereof or of any order issued under the authority of any such rule shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine 
or with both. In this context, the representative of the Minsitry informed the Committee that 
a proposal to amend the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 was under the consideration 
of the Ministry. It was proposed to make the punishment under this Act more rigorous. 
15.3 The representative of the Ministry also informed the Committee that there were 65 
immigration checkposts; 30 of them were land checkposts; 17 at the airports; and 18 
checkposts were located at seaports. 
15.4 The representative of the Ministry further informed the Committee that the 
present Bill related only to those inadmissible passengers who come by air or sea and it did 
not cover passengers coming by land i.e., by road or other modes of transport. 
15.5 The Special Secretary went on to inform the Committee that 1n the year 1997, the 
country had received as many as 24.92 lakhs foreign visitors. 82.91% of these visitors had 
come to India by air, i.e. roughly 83% ; 15.5% visitors came by land route; and only 1.5% 
visitors came by sea routes. He then apprised the Committee . of the statistics for the years 
1997 and 1998 of inadmissible passengers detected at th~ five international airports at Delhi, 
Mumbai, Calcutta, Chennai and Thiruvananthapuram: 
15.6 The Special Secretary apprised the Committee that it had been proposed .to impose 
761 RS F-3-B 

, 
5 
a penalty of Rs. one lakh per person on the carrier who failed to pedorm the statutory 
obligation imposed on it under the proposed legislation. He further informed that the power 
to impose penalty was proposed to be given to the concerned Civil Authority appointed 
under the Foreigners Order, 1948, made under the Foreigners, Act, 1946, or any other 
officer notified by the Central Government. The representative of the Ministry added that 
an appeal against the order of the Civil Authority or any other officer notified would lie to 
the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs responsible for dealing with the 
foreigners. The Bill further provided that in the event of failure to pay the penalty, the 
amount would be recovered by seizing, detaining or selling the aircraft or ship, or any goods 
on the ship or aircraft belonging to the carrier, the representative of the Ministry informed 
the Committee. . 
16. Members raised I made the following issues I queries to the representatives of the 
Ministry:-
(a) Figures of the last five years, year-wise, airport-wise and seaport-wise Of the 
number of inadmissible passengers who had managed to come through all the 
airports and seaports in the country having immegration counters. 
(b) Modus operandi of the persons who had entered the country without valid 
documents through the airports and seaports and their nationaJitie!t', year-wise.-
(c) Names of the airliners and sealiners involved in bringing inadmissible persons 
during the last five years. 
(d) Expenditure incurred by the Government during the last five years on account 
of such inadmissible persons who had entered the COl,lntry. 
(e) Inadequacy of the penalty proposed to be imposed on the carriers and the ne~d 
for enhancing the same. 
(f) Need for bringing the road carriers within the purview of the Bill and made 
liable like air carriers and ship carriers. 
(g) Mandatory checking of travel du-:uments by all the airliners and shipliners 
before allowing the passengers to board the aircrafts or the ships. 
(h) Need for comprehensively and explicitly defining 'Carriers' in Clause 2 so as to 
cover the chartered aircrafts I ~hips and the carriers owned by the State in 
order to determine the onus of liability in case of a dispute. 
17. The representative of the Mnistry replied ~o some of th~ issues I queries. The chair 
also clarified the position in regard to the issues/ queries. As regards the queries at (a) to 
(d) supra the Committee directed the representative oi the Ministry _ to furnish written 
responses thereto. · 
18. With regard to the issue raised about inclusion of road carriers within the ambit of 
the Bill, it was explained to the committee that in the scheme of the present Bill it would not 
be feasible to make the road carriers liable in respect of passengers brought. by them into 
India in contravention of the provisions of the relevant Jaws and · rules or orders made 
thereunder. After· some discussion, the committee decided that while the present Bill may be 
cleared, it may recommend to the Government to bring in a separate Bill to make the road 
carriers liable in respect of passengers brought by them into India in contravention of the 
relevant laws and rules or orders made thereunder, with a view to put an effective check on 
infiltration through the various land routes. 

6 
19. During the course of evidence of the Special Secretary of Ministry of liome Affairs 
before the Committee on 19th February, 1999 certain specific questions were posed to him 
for written replies. The Ministry vide their communications dated 23rd and 26th February, 
1999, has furnished the replies thereto. The questions and Ministry's replies thereto are 
reproduced below: 
Question: 
(a) figures of the last five yc;trs, year-wise, airport-wise and seaport-wise of the number 
of inadmissibl e passengers who had managed to come through all the airports and seaports 
in the country having immigration counters, may be furnished. 
Ministry's reply: 
A statement showing details . of foreigners who came to india without visa during the last 
five years thr.ough Delhi, Mumba"i, Calcutta, Chennai and Thiruvananthapuram airports is 
enclose<.t.' Passenger traffic through seaports is negligible. By and large only ship crew/ 
seamen enter through seaports and hence figures for seaports in this regard are not relevent. 
PORT-WISE DETAILS OF FOREIGNERS WHO CAME TO INDIA WITHOUT VISA 
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 
Delhi 5920 5674 4877 5006 3527 
Mumbai 865 702 1418 1093 1084 
Calcutta 464 515 545 436 505 
Chennai 520 405 261 313 445 
Thi1:uvana t ha pura 111 64 66 497 439 506 
TOTAL: :?833 7362 7598 7287 6067 
• 
Question: 
(b) What have been modus operandi of the persons who have entered the country 
without valid dGcuments through the airports and seaports and their nationalities, _year-wise? 
Ministry's reply: / 
foreigners manage to en ter into the country without valid travel documents due to 
negligentl<..:areless attitude of the airlines as they do not check the trave documents properly. 
As a result of this foreigners land at airports on expired passports/visa or even without visa. 
N :.~t ionality-wise brea k up is' 110t 'available. 
Question: 
(c) Which are the airlines and sealiners involved in bringing inadmissible pe.rsons during 
the last' five years? 

7 
l\1instry's reply: 
As per information available, almost all the scheduled airlines operating in India have 
been noticed in bringing such inadmissible persons in the past. 
Question: 
(d) What expenditure has been incurred by the Government during the last five years 
on account of such inadmissible persons who had entered the country? 
Ministry's reply: 
As regards expenditure incurred on account of such inadmissible foreigners, concerned 
airlines are required to takL: such foreigners out of the country by the first available flight 
and also to look aftt:r them during the period they remain at the airport till the passengers 
leaves the countrv. 
20. from an analysis of the replies received from the Ministry, the following points 
emerge: 
20.1 The figures of inadmissible passengers who had managed to come through all the 
airports having immigration counters were sought. The Special Secretary in the Ministry 
informed the Committee during his evidence that there were seventeen immigration 
checkposts located at the airports, but figures of only five international airports have been 
furn'ished. Although the total number of inadmissible foreigners who came to India through 
the five international airports have shown a decline in 1998 as compared to the previous four 
years, it has been noticed that the figures of inadmissible foreigners detected at 
Thiruvananthapuram Airport has sharply increased during the last three years as compared 
to the previous two years. It has also been observed that Delhi Airport tops the•list with 25004 
foreigners who came to India during the last five years without valid travel documents 
followed by 1\tumbai (5162), Calcutta (2-!65), Chennai (1944), and Thiruvananthapuram 
(1572). 
20.2 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that foreigners managed to enter into 
the country without valid travel documents due to negligent/careless attitude of the airlines. 
The Committee also takes serious note of the fact that foreigners land at the airports on 
expired passport/visa or even without visa. In this context the Committee further notes all the 
scheduled aidines operatil1g in India have been br·inging such inadmissible passengers. 
20.3 The figur·cs of inadmissible passengers who had entered the country through the five 
international airports during the last live years are quite high. However, the figures of 
undttected inadmissible passengers are not known. The Ministry has also not explained the 
cxm:t modus op£•mndi of the passengers in their bid to enter the country without valid 
documents. Further, the countries of the origin from where the major chunck of the 
inadmissible for·eigners came, have also not been told to the Committee. 
20.4 Be that as it may, the total scenario is disquieting aud the problem is quite 
alarming. 
20.5 In question (d) supnl a pointed query was made as to the expenditure incurred by 
the Govenunent on inmlmissihlc pussengers who had entered the country. However, on a 
perusal of the 1\tinistry's reply, it may be presumed that the Government does not incur any 
expenditure in this regard. However, attention may be drawn to the statement of Objects and 
Reasor1s appended to the Bill wherein it has intd :1/i:J been stated that arrival of inadmissible 
passengers causes not only harassment to the passengers but also unnecessary burden on the 
Government which can be easily avoided. 
761 RS F--4· 

8 
20.6 In this context, the Committee observes that the objt·ctive behind seeking specific 
information on certain items is to have an insight into the various dimensions and magnitude 
of the problem of illegal immigration into the country and also to suggest certain preventive 
and remedial measures. However, complete information on all counts has not been furnished 
by the Mini stry to the Committee. 
21. Having considered the matter in all its aspects, the Committee recommends ' hat as a 
first step, the present Bill may be passed with some amendments as suggested in succeeding 
paras. At the same time, in the light of the O\'erwhelming view in the Committee to make the 
road carriers liable in respect of passengers brought by them into India in contravention of 
the provi sions of the relevant Jaws and rules or orders made thereunder, it strongly 
recommends to Government to come forward with a separate llill at the earliest making the 
road carriers liable in respect of inadmissible passengers brought by them, with a view to put 
an effe<:tive check on infiltration through the various land rules. 
22. The Committee in its sitting held on 19th February, 1999, took up clause by clause 
consideration of the Bill. 
23. The Committee considered and adopted the report in its sitting held on 9th March , 
1999. 
24. The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in 
the Bill are given below: 
Clause 4 
24.1 Clause 4 provides that an appeal shall lie against the orders made under Clause 3 
to the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
authorised in this behalf by that Government. Under this clause every appeal shall be 
preferred within 30 days from the date of the order appealed against. As per the proviso 
thereto, an appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days, permit the 
appellant to prefer the appeal within a further period of thirty days. 
24.2 The Committee cliscussecl about the rationale for permitting an additional period of 
thirty days to the appellant for preferring an appeal to the appellate authority. The 
Committee is of the view that the original period of thirty days for preferring an appeal 
against the order of the competent authority is reasonable and sufficient and as such there is 
no necessity for pro viding an additional period of thirt y days for preferring the appeal. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the proviso to sub-clause (2) of Clause 4 may be 
deleted. 
24.3 The Clause is adopted as amended. 
Clause 10 
24.4 Clause 10 provides that if may difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
the Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such 
provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Sub-clause (2) of Clause 10 stipulates 
that every rule (sic) made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
24.5 Clause 10 relates to issue of orders by the Central Government to remove the 
difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act but sub-clause (2) of the clause uses 
the word 'rule' which appears to be an error and should read as 'order'. Accordinglyt the 

9 
Com.111itte~ recommends that in suh-dause (2), the word 'rule' may be substituted by the word 
'order'. 
24.6 The Clause is adopted as amended. 
24.7 Clause 2. 3, 5 , 6, 7, 8 and 9 are adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title 
24.8 Clause 1, the Enacting Fornwla and the Title are adopted with some changes which 
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely, "1998" and "Forty-ninth" to be substituted 
by "1999" and "Fiftieth" respectively. 
25. The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the 
amendments suggested by it. 
Nr:w D ELHI; 
March 9, 1999 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE 
Chairman 
Committee on Home Affairs 

RELE\tANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
•xxvn 
TWENTY -SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A..M. on Friday, the 19th February, 1999 in Committee 
Room 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj - in the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
3, Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
5. Dr. (Ms.j P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri La! Bihari Tiwari 
9. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
10. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khancluri 
11. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
12. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
13. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Shri Motilal Yora 
15. Shri Samar Choudhury 
16. Shri Mohan Singh 
17. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
18. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
Shri R.D. Kapur, Special Secretary 
Shri Gurcharan Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ambuj Sharma, Director 
Slui P.N. Dixit, Deputy Director 
,. 
*Minute~ of the First to Twenty-sixth meetings of the Committee relate to some other matters discussed by the 
Committee. 
11 

12 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
Shri S.R. Dayal, Joint Secretary 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj was voted to be in the Chair. 
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardw~j who was in the Chair, informed the Committee that the 
Home Secretary had sent a written request to the Chairman seeking exemption of his 
personal appearance before it due to his pre-occupation with urgent Government business 
and had proposed the name of Shri R.D. Kapur, Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for making a presentation on the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Bill, 1998. The 
Chair then informed the Committee that the request of the Home Secretary had been 
granted and the Special Secretary permitted to appear before it. · 
4. Tthe Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs then made a presentation on 
the Bill. He informed the Committee that in recent years, it had come to the notice of the 
Central Government that large number of passengers had been coming to India without any 
valid travel document. It had also been observed that airlines did not exercise proper check 
of the travel documents of the foreigners coming to India at the time of commencement of 
the journey. That resulted in arrival of passengers in contravention of the provisions of the 
Passport (Entry into India) ~ct, 1920 and the rules made thereunder which casued not only 
harassment to the passengers but also unnecessary burden on the Government which could 
be easily avoided. · 
In order to tackle that problem, it had become necessary to impose a statutory 
obligation on the carriers to properly scrutinise travel documents of the persons before 
bringing them to India. The Special Secretary apprised the Committee that it had been 
proposed to imposed a penalty of Rs. 1 Jakh per person on the carrier who failed to perform 
the statutory obligation imposed on it under the proposed tegislation. He further informed 
that the power to impose penalty was proposed to be given to the concerned Civil Authority 
appointed under the Foreigners Order, 1948 made under the Foreigners Act, 1946 or any 
other officer notified by the Central Government. The representative of the Ministry added 
that an appeal against the order of the Civil Authority or any other offi.cer notified wot.~ld lie 
to the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs responsible· for dealing with the 
foreigners. The Bill further provided that in the event of failure to pay the penalty, the 
amount would be recovered by seizing, detaining or selling the aircraft or ship, or any goods 
on the ship or aircraft belonging to the carrier, the representative of the Ministry informed 
the Committee. 
5. Members raisecl/made the following issues/queries to the representative of the 
Ministry:-
( a) Figures of the last five years, year-wise, airport-wise and seaport-wise of the 
number of inadmissible passengers who had managed to come through all the 
airports and seaports in the country having immigration counters. 
(b) Modus operandi of the persons who had entered the country without valid 
documents through the airports and seaports and their nationalities, year-wise. 
(c) Names of the airlines and sealiners involved in bringing inadmissible perso -ns 
during the last five years . 
(d) Expenditure incurred by the Government during the last five years on account of 
such_ inadmissible persons who had entered the country. 

13 
(e) Inadequacy of the penalty proposed to be impo~ed on the carriers and the need 
for enhancing the same. 
(f) Need ' for bringing the road carriers within the purview of the Bill and made 
liable like air carriers and ship carriers. 
(g) Mandatory checking of travel documents by all the airlines and shipliners before 
allowing the passengers to qoard the aircrafts or the ships. 
(h) Need for comprehensively and explicitly defining 'Carriers' in Clause 2 so as to 
cover the chartered aircr.aftS'Ships and the carriers owned by the State in order 
to determine the onus of liability in case of a dispute. 
6. The representative of the Ministry replied to some of the issues/queries. The Chair 
also clarified the position in regard to the issues/queries. 
7. With regard to the issue raised about inclusion of road carriers within the ambit of 
the Bill, it was explained to the Committee that in the scheme of the Bill it would not be 
feasible to make the road carriers liable in respect of passehgers brought by them into India 
in contravention of the provisions of the relevant laws and rules or or-ders made thereunder. 
After some discussion, the Committee decided that while the present Bill· may be cleared, it 
may recommend to the Government to bring in a sepatate Bill to make the road carriers 
liable in respect of passengers brought by them into India in contravention of the relevant 
laws and the rules or orders made thereunder, with a view to put an effective · check on 
infiltration throogh the various land routes. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
9. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 
Clauses 2 & 3 
9.1 Clauses 2 & 3 were adopted without any change. 
Clause 4 
' 
9.2 Clause 4 provides that an appeal shall lie against the orders made under Clause 3 to 
the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs authorised 
in this behalf by that Government. Under this clause every appeal shall be preferred within 
30 days from the date of the order appealed against. As pyr the proviso thereto, an 
appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days, permit the appellant to 
prefer the appeal within a further. period of thirty <;lays. 
9.3 The Committee discussed about the rationale for permitting an additional period of 
thirty days to the appellant for preferring an . appeal to the appellate authority. The 
Committee was of the view that the original period of thirty days for preferring an appeal 
against the order of the competent authority was reasonable and sufficient and as such there 
was no necessity for providing an additional period of thirty days for preferring the appeal. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommended that the proviso to sub-clause (2) of Clause 4 
may be cletect~d. · 
9.4 The Clause was adopted as amended. 
Clauses 5 to 9 
9.5 Clauses 5, 6, 1, 8 and 9 were adopted without any change. 

14 
Clause 10 ·' 
9.6 Clause 10 provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such 
provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Sub-clause (2) of Clause 10 stipulates 
that every rule (sic) made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
9.7 Clause 10 relates to issue of orders by the Central Government to remove the 
difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act but sub-clause (2) of the Clause uses 
the word 'rule' which appears to be an error and should read as 'order'. Accordingly, the 
Committee re~ommended that in sub-clause (2), the word 'rule' may be substituted by the 
word 'order'. 
9.8 The Clause was adopted as amended. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title 
9.9. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes 
which were of consequential or drafting nature, namely, "1998" and "Forty-ninth" to be 
substituted "1999" and "Fiftieth" respectively . 
10. • * * 
11. • * • 
12. • * • 
13. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
... 
... Omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 

XXVIII 
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 9th March, 1999, in Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
l\1EI\1HERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
3. Shri Prafull Goradia 
4. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
6. Slui Lal Bihari Tiwari 
7. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
8. Maj. Gen. B. C. Khancluri 
~- Smt. Meira Kumar 
10. Shri Mufti Moha mmed Sayeed 
11. Shri Nedurumali Janarclhana Reddy 
12. Shri Ishvarbbai Khoclabhai Chavda 
13. Shri Motilal Vora 
14. Shri Mohan Singh 
15. Shri A. F. Golam Osmani 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, D eputy Secretary 
Shri Mah es h C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
2. 
.... .). 
* 
* 
4. The Committee, then, took up consideration of the draft Fifty-third Report on 
the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Bill, 1998. After some discussion, it adopted the Report 
without any change. 
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report in the Rajya Sabha/Lok 
Sabha on Thursday, the 11th March, 1999. It authorised its Chairman and in his absence 
Shri M . Venkaiah Naidu to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Motilal Vora 
and in his absence Shri Satya Pal Jain to lay the same in the Lok Sabha. 
6. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.10 P.M. 
**•Omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 
15 

31 of 1946. 
ANNEXURE 
(See Para 1 of the Report) 
As INTRODUCE D lN TilE itAJYA SAIIIIA 
23 DECEMBER, 1998 
Bill No. XL VI of 1998 
THE IMMIGRATION (CARRIERS' LIABILITY) BILL, 1998 
A 
BILL 
to make the curriers liable in respect of passengers brought by 
them into India in contravention of the provisions of the 
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the rules made 
thereunder and matters connected therewith. 
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of 
the Republic of India as follows:-
1. (J) This Act may be called the Immigration (Carriers' Short title and 
Liability) Act, 1998. extent. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. (J) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "carrier" means a person who is engaged in the business 
of transporting passengers by water or air and includes any 
association of persons, whether incorporated or not, by whom 
th e aircraft or the ship is owned or chartered; 
(b) ··competent Authority" means the civil authority 
appointed under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 2 of the 
Foreigners Order, 1948 made under the Foreigners Act, 1946 or 
any other officer notified by the Cental Government in this 
behalf; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
(2) Words and expressions not defined in this Act but 
defined in the Foreigners Act, 1946 or the Passport (Entry into 31 of 1946. 
India) Act, 1920 shall have the meanings respectively assigned 34 of 1920. 
to them in those Acts. 
17 

/ 
Liability of 
carriers for 
passengers 
brought into 
India. 
Appeals. 
Recovery of 
penalty due to 
Government. 
Bar of legal 
proceedings. 
Application of 
Acts !6 of 1939. 
34 of 1920 and 31 
of 1946 not 
barred. 
Power to make 
rules. 
18 
3. Where the Competent Authority is of the opm10n that 
any carrier has brought a person in contravention of the 
provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and rules 34 of 1920. 
made thereunder into India, he may be order impose a penalty 
of rupees one lakh on such carrier: 
Provided that no order shall be passed without giving the 
carrier an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
4. (1) An appeal shall lie against the order made under 
section 3 of this Act to the Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs authorised in this 
behalf by that Government. 
(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred within thirty days 
from the date of the order appealed against: 
Provided that the appellate authority may, if it is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days, 
permit the appellant to prefer the appeal within a further period 
of thirty days. 
(3) On receipt of any such appeal, the appellate authority 
shall, after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard and after making such inquiry as it deems proper, make 
such order, as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or 
reversing the order appealed against. 
(4) Every appeal shall be preferred on payment of such fees 
as may be prescribed. 
5. Where any penalty imposed under this Act is not paid, 
the Competent Authority may recover the penalty so payable by 
seizing, detaining or selling-
(a) the aircraft or the ship; or 
(b) any goods on the ship or aircraft, belonging to 
the carrier. 
6. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or the Competent 
Authority or any officer of the Central Government or any 
other person exercising any powers or discharging any functions 
or performing any duty under this Act for anything in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder. 
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder 
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the 
Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Passport (Entry into 
India) Act, 1920 and the Foreigners Act, 1946 or the rules or 
orders made thereunder. ·• 
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official G51zette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 

19 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the fees which shall be paid for appeals under sub­
section ( 4) of section 4; 
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
9. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as Rules to be laid 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while before 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may Parliament. 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any soch 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the Power to 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, remove 
do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for the difficulties. 
purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
LS::- , t_ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Passport (Ent ry into India) Rules, 1950 made under the Passport (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 inter alia, prov ides that no person proceeding from any place outside India shall 
enter, or attempt to enter, Indi a by water, land or air unless such person is in possession of 
valid passport confirming to the cond ition s provided in rule 5 of the said rules. In recent 
years, it has come to the notice of the Central Government that large number of p~ssengers 
come to Indi a without any valid travel document. It has also been observed that airlines do 
not exercise proper check of the travel docum ents of the foreigners coming to India at the 
time of commencement of the journey . This result in arrival of passengers in contravention 
of the provi sions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the rules made thereunder 
which causes not only harassment to the passengers but also unnecessary burden on the 
Government which can be easily avoided. In order to tackle this problem, it has become 
necessary to impose a statuto ry obligation on the carriers to properly scrutinise travel 
documents of the persons before bringing them..to India. It is proposed to impose a penalty 
of Rs. 1 lttkh per person on the carrier who fails to perform the statutory obligation imposed 
on it under the proposed legislation. Further, the power to impose penalty is proposed to be 
given to the concerned Civil Authority appo inted under the Foreigners Order , 1948 made 
under the Foreigners Act, 1946 or any other officer notified by the Central Government. An 
appeal against the order of the Civil Authority or any other officer notified shall lie to the 
Joint Secretary in the Ministry of H ome Affairs responsible for dealing with the foreigners. 
In the even t of failure to pay the penalty, the amount will be recovered by seizing, detaining 
or selling the aircraft or ship, or any goods on the ship or aircraft belonging to the carrier. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object. 
N~::w 0t:.LHt; 
The 17th December, 1998 
20 
I' 
/ 
L.K. ADV ANI. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (4) of clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to prescribe fcc on payment of which an appeal 
may be preferred. 
2. The matter in respect of which rules arc to be made are 
generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is 
not . practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation of legislative procedure is, therefore, normal in 
character. 
. 21 

RAJY A SAI3HA 
A 
DILL 
Ill make the l".ltril'rs liabk in rl'spcct of p.tssengcrs brought by them into lndiJ 111 
contravention ot the provisivns of the Pas~purt (Entry into InJia) Act. LIJ20 and the 
rules made tlh.'rl'undcr and matter connc~:tcd thcrc\\oith. 
(Shri L K. Advani, Minis/a of Home Affairs) 
22 