,,f-1A 718/RS 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE LOKPAL BILL, 1996 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 9th May, 1997) 
(Laid in the Lok Sabha on the 9th l\lay, 1997) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May 1997Naisakha 1919 (Saka) 
C.S. (H4.) - 69 

F-18 718/AS 
• 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMllTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. REPORT 1-11 
3. APPENDICES 
I. List of individuals from whom memoranda on the Bill were received 12-16 
' 
II. Gist of Comments/Suggestions received on the Lokpal Bill, 1996 from 17-111 
various organisations/associations/individuals. 
III. List of witnesses who appeared before the Committee. 112 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMIITEE. 113-133 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee .· 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
* 11. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Sushil Olandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Goel 
23. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
27. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri Idris Ali 
31. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh. 
'*33. Shri Rajesh Pilot 
34. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Y adav 
36. Shri Taslimuddin 
*Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. the 21st April, 1997 consequent on expiration of his term of 
office as Member, Rajya Sabha and again nominated to the Committee w.e.f. the 24th April, 1997 consequent 
on his being re-elected to Rajya Sabha. 
**Nominated w.c.f. the 8th October, 1996 vice Shri Tara Chand Baghora, M.P. 
(i) 

37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
39. Shri N.S. V. Chitthan 
40. Shri N. Dennis 
41. Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
42. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, ·Committee Officer 
I ' 
(ii) 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Fortieth Report of the 
Committee, relating to the Lokpal Bill, 1996*. 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
referred** the Lokpal Bill, 1996, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 13th September, 
1996 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and Report. 
3. The institution of Lokpal, as the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the 
Bill says, has been sought to be established on the basis of the recommendations of the 
Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) contained in its interim Report on the 
"Problem of Redress of Citizens' Grievances". This Report of the ARC was submitted in 
1966 and the earlier attempts at legislation for setting up such an institution could not 
fructify in 1968, 1971, 1977, 1985 and 1989 for various reasons. The current Bill, as the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons goes on to say, seeks to carry out the object and purpose 
of the recommendations 'of ARC for enabling the citizens to have recourse to a convenient 
and effective forum for determination of complaints and thereby save him from pursuing his 
remedy through the process of Courts, which may prove to be expertsive or dilatory and may 
not facilitate speedy determination. 
4. The concept of having an institution like the Lokpal arises from the need for 
redressal of citizens' grievances. The term Lokpal is akin to the English term 'Ombudsman' 
which has been described in Chamber's Dictionary as a 'grievance man'. Ombudsman means 
an official who is appointed to investigate complaints against the administration. In other 
woi'Qs, Ombudsman is an officer who investigates complaints of citizens of unfair treatment 
meted out to them by Government Departments and suggests remedy thereof, if he finds 
that a complaint is justified. The institution of Ombudsman came into being in 1713 in 
Sweden when Chancellor of justice was appointed by the King to act as an invigilator to look 
into the functioning of the war time Government. In the year 1809, provision was made for 
the appointment of Ombudsman by the legislature. The institution remained mainly confined 
to the Scandinavian countries such as Finland and Denmark, In 1962 New Zealand also 
adopted the system of Ombudsman. Great Britain also did not lag behind and a slightly 
modified version of the institution in the form of the office of Parliamentary Commissioner 
came into being through an Act of Parliament in 1967. This was followed by other countries 
such . as Canada, Australia, U.S.A., France and several newly independent countries of 
Africa and Asia. 
5. A study of the system of Ombudsman or similar institutions in Sweden, United 
Kingdom, Zambia and Nigeria brings into focus the fact that mainly complaints of mal­
administration are looked into by the Ombudsman there and Ministers etc. do not seem to 
*Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-11, Section 2, dated the 13th September, 1996 . 
.. Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-ll dated the 25th September, 1996. 
1 

I ' 
2 
have been brought within their purview. However, in Denmark all administrative matters 
concerning all units of State administration including Ministers and in Norway administrative 
aspects of acts of Ministers have been brought within the purview of Ombudsman. In 
Tanzania and Uganda the areas of jurisdiction for the institutions which are known as Anti 
Corruption Squad and Inspector General of Government, respectively, are mainly targetted 
at corruption and abuse of public office. The thrust of the system of Ombudsman as 
obtaining in these countries is mainly on redressal of public grievances arising mainly out of 
their complaints of mal-administration. 
6. In so far as India is concerned animated discussions both inside Parliament as well as 
outside took place preceding examination of the issue by the Administrative Reforms 
Commission, on the need for setting up an Ombudsman like institution to investigate and 
report on complaints pertaining to corruption. Coupled with this was the felt necessity for 
the establishment of an independent authority for the redressal of public grievances. The 
idea, however, could not be formalised till the Administrative Reforms Commission in its 
interim Report submitted in 1966 suggested that: 
"The special circumstances relating to our country can be fully met by providing 
for two special institutions for the redress of citizens' grievances. There should be 
one authority dealing with complaints against the administrative acts of Ministers 
or Secretaries to Government at the Centre and in the States. There should be 
another authority in each State and at the Centre for dealing with complaints 
against the administrative acts of other officials... The setting up of these 
authorities should not, however, be taken to be a complete answer to the problem 
of redress of citizens' grievances. They ·only provide the ultimate set-up for such 
redress as has not been available through the normal departmental or 
governmental machinery and do not absolve the department from fulfilling its 
obligations to the citize9: for administering its affairs without generating, as far as 
possible, any legitimate .sense· of grievance. Thus, the administration itself must 
play the major role in reducing the area of grievances and providing remedies 
wherever necessary and feasible ... When this machinery (in-built departmental 
machinery) functions effectively, the number of cases which will have to go to an 
authority outside the Ministry or the Department should be comparatively smail in 
number." 
7. The Administrative Reforms Commission thus contemplated a very limited role for 
the proposed creation of an institution like the Lokpal which would only inquire into 
complaints against a specified category of persons and not be a forum to deal with all 
complaints of citizens' grievances. As the Administrative Reforms Commission itself 
emphasised that 'the responsibility of the Departments to deal adequately with public 
grievances must squarely be faced by them', the· institution of Lokpal was thought of 
something in the nature of a set up for redress as has not been available through the normal 
departmental or governmental machinery. The Administrative Reforms Commission also 
underscored an important point when it referred to the special circumstances relating to our 
country's vastness and enormous size of population which would virtually make it quite 
stupendous, if not impossible, for a single agency to deal with the vast magnitude of 
complaints of public grievances and provide a remedy therefor. The proposed Lokpal Bill, 
there{ore, has mainly been devised to provide a forum to the citizens to make complaints of 
corruption against public functionaries who have been defined to mean persons who hold or 
have held the office of the Prime Minister, Minister of State or Deputy Minister of the 
Union and are or have been Members of either House of Parliament. 

3 
8. The Committee held twelve sittings in all to consider and finalise its report on this 
Bill. 
9. In its first sitting held on October 8, 1996 the Committee discussed the Bill in general 
and having regard to the special importance of th~ Bill which sought to . establish an 
institution of this kind at the national level, the Committee decided to invite memoranda 
from the individuals/organisations/institutions etc. interested in the subject matter of the 
Bill. The Committee also decided to issue a Press communique in this behalf fixing 
November 18, 1996 as the last date for the receipt of memoranda. On the lOth October, 
1996 the Director General, Doordarshan and All India Radio were also requested to 
telecast/broadcast the matter repeatedly to give it wide publicity so as to elicit public 
opinion on the Bill. 
10. In all 110 memoranda containing comments and suggestions· on the provisions of the 
Bill were received by the Committee from various organisations, associations and individuals 
etc. (see list of organisations/individuals, etc. at Appendix-!). At its sitting held on February 
6, 1997 the Committee heard the Secretary of the administrative Ministry concerned with the 
Bill, namely the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the Bill. At its 
sittings held on the 19th February and 3rd,4th,l7th,18th,19th and 20th March, 1997, the 
Committee heard the views of some former bureaucrats, joumalists and represent~tives of 
various political parties and institutions and organisations on the subject (vide list at 
Appendix-III). The Committee wishes to express its thanks to all the persons who either 
appeared before it or sent their valuable suggestions/views on the provisions of the Bill for 
the benefit of the Committee. 
11. The Committee considered various papers and memoranda placed before it and also 
the views expressed by the witnesses on the Bill. 
12. At its sittings held on the 29th April and 1st May, 1997 the Committee took up 
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 
13. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on the 6tb 
May, 1997. 
14. The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in 
the Bill are given below:-
Clause 3 
The Committee is of the view that sub-clause (b) of clause 3(2) be substituted to read as 
follows:-
"two Members who are, or have been, judges of the Supreme Court or the Chief 
Justices of the High Courts" 
Clause 4 
The Committee notes that the seven Member Committee, which has been proposed for 
recommending the names for appointment as Chairman and Members of the Lokpal, seems 
to be heavily loaded in favour of the party/parties in Government, giving excessive leverage 
. . 
Gist or suggestions/comments received on the Lokpal Bill, 1996 from various organisations/associations/ 
individuals at Appendix-H. 

I ' 
4 
to the ruling party/combine in the appointment process, and as such it would not inspire 
public confidence. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the first proviso to clause 
4(1) be substituted to read as follows:-
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall be made after 
obtaining the recommendations of a Committee consisting of-
(a) the Vice-President of India 
(b) the Prime Minister 
-. Chairman; 
-member; 
(c) Speaker of the House of the People - member; 
(d) Leader of the Opposition in the House of the - member; 
People 
(e) Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States- member. 
Clause 6 
The Members of the Lokpal have been ensured a fixed tenure of 5 years. The 
Committee feels that no mechanism has been envisaged in the Bill to evaluate the 
performance of the Lokpal and in that context the fixed tenure of 5 years appears to be 
rather too long. Besides, in case the retired Chief Justice or judges of the Supreme Court 
are appointed as. the Chairman/Members of the Lokpal well past the age of 65 years, their 
continuance upts> the age of 70 years would perhaps be a factor to reckon with. The 
Committee, therefore,. recommends that the term of office of the Members of the Lokpal be 
reduced to 3 years and Clause 6 be amended accordingly. 
Clause 7 
The Committee has noted that under this Clause a member of the Lokpal can be 
removed from his office only by an order made by thePresident on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour of incapacity after an inquiry made by the Chief Justice of India or as the case 
may be, by such other judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of India may 
nominate in this behalf. Clause 3(2)(a) stipulates that the Chairman of the Lokpal shall be a 
person who is or has been a Chief Justice or judge of the Supreme Court. Similarly, Clause 
3(2)(b) prescribes that the members ofthe Lokpal shall be persons who are or have been or 
are qualified to be a judge of the Supreme Court (recommended by the Committee to be 
amended). The existing procedure for removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts as laid down under Articles 124 (4) and (5) read with Article 218 of the Constitution 
is by an order of the President on an Address being presented to him by requisite number of 
members of each House of Parliament. The Committee feels that the status of Chairman and 
the members of the Lokpal as envisaged under the scheme of the Bill is akin to the Chief 
Justice/judges of the Supreme Court and hence the procedure for their removal should be 
more stringent if not analogous to the one as laid down in the Constitution. The Committee, 
accordingly, is of the view that the inquiry against a member of the Lokpal as contemplated 
under Clause 7 for his removal should be made by the Chief Justice of India and the two 
senior-most judges of the Supreme Court. Clause 7 may be amended accordingly. 
Clause 8 
The Committee has noted that the Lokpal has inter-alia beerl empowered vide Clause 
8(2)(i) to secure the services of any officer or employee or investigating agency of the 
Central Government or the State Government with the concurrence of that Government for 
the purpose of dealing with any complaints or any classes of complaints. Similarly, it has 
been ensured vide Clause 8(2)(ii) that the Lokpal does not suffer in any way in the 
F-28 718/R 
' 

5 
investigation of the complaints made to it and for that purpose, if need be, tt can secure the 
services of any other person or agency which implies even private persons or agencies. The 
Committee expressed the apprehension that ·the p{ovision relating to seeking the 
concurrence of concerned Governments for securing services of any officer may delay the 
investigation. Hence the Committee is of the view that in order to remove any 
apprehensions on this score, steps may be taken to ensure that the services of officers, etc. 
to the Lokpal are provided with due promptness and necessary procedure in this regard may 
be provided in the rules to be framed under this Act. 
Clause 9 
The Committee feels that the amplitude of the discretionary power vested in the Lokpal 
under Clause 9(1) by the usage of the words 'the Lokpal may' is far too large. The 
Committee is accordingly of the view that subject to thl- other provisions of this Act the 
Lokpal should be under a mandatory obligation to inquire into the subject matter of the 
complaint. The word "may" in sub-clause (1) of this clause may be substituted by the word 
"shall". The Committee also feels that when the complaints about allegations of corruption 
against public functionaries are sought to be brought within the purview of the Lokpal, there 
is no reason for such complaints being taken up at any other forum such as the Commissions 
of Inquiry. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the amount of discretion 
conferred on the Lokpal vide sub-clause (3) of clause 9 in the matter of referring any 
complaint for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, is not desirable and the 
words 'except on the r~commendfition, or with the concurrence, of the Lokpal' occuring 
therein be deleted. Clause 9 may be amended accordingiy. 
Clause 10 
In view of the recommendation made by the Committee for omitting the discretionary 
aspect of Lokpal from sub-clause (3) of clause 9, sub-clause (2) of clause 10 becomes 
redundant and hence it may be deleted. 
In terms of sub clause (3) of clause 10, the jurisdiction of Lokpal is restricted to 
inquiring into complaints in respect of offences which are alleged to have been· committed 
during the previous five years. The Committee has, however, noted that some times 
information about corruption cases of immense proportions surfaces very late and national 
interest demands that truth must come out and the guilty be brought to book. Besides, the 
Committee is given to understand that in some of the Lok Ayukta Acts in force in some of 
the States, the provision exists for inquiry into complaints in respect of offences alleged to 
have been committed upto ten years earlier. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion 
that the period of five years occurring in sub-clause (3) of clause 10 be substituted to read as 
ten years. 
Clause 11 
The Committee has noted that under sub-clause (3) of clause 11, it is enjoined upon the 
complainant to make a deposit of a sum of rupees one thousand but the manner of making 
this deposit and the authority or agency with which the deposit is to be made are left to be 
prescribed in the rules to be framed under clause 32. The Committee is of the opinion that if 
a fixed amount is prescribed in the Act itself, the concerned authority will have to come " 
before Parliament every time they wish to enhance/modify the fee which very often becomes 
essential because of the changing value of money. Hence, the Committee is of the opinion 
that this can be taken care of in the rules. The Committee feels, that this provision should 
be amended accordingly. 

I ' 
6 
Clause 12 
In view of the change proposed by the Committee in sub-clause (3) of clause 10 for 
raising the period of limitation for complaints from 5 years 'o 10 years, consequential change 
should be made in clause 12(1)(a) and the period of 5 years mentioned therein be 
·substituted to read as 10 years. Likewise, since the Committee has recommended deletion of 
sub-dause (2) of clause 10 consequential change in clause 12(1)(b) should also be effected. 
The Committee is of the view that the wording of sub-clauses (c) and (d) of clause 12(1) 
coRfers unguided and arbitrary powers of in-limine rejection of complaints on the Lokpal. It 
is in public interest that the complaints should be properly investigated and disposed of 
rather than nipped in the bud. Sub-~lause. (1)(c) should accordingly be reworded to read 
'that the complaint is manifestly false and vexatious' and sub-clause (1)(d) should be deleted 
in toto. 
Clause 13 
Sub-clause (2) of clause 13 stipulates that every inquiry shall be conducted in camera by 
the Chairman and the Members of the Lokpal sitting jointly. The Committee feels that this 
is not in consonance with the system of open court hearings currently prevalent in our 
country. One of the essential ingredients of democratic functioning of Government is 
increased participation of people in the governance of the country and their right to 
information. The very nature of conducting proceedings or trials by the judicial or quasi­
judicial organs in camera leads one to believe that truth is being shrouded in mystery. The 
Committee, therefore, feels that people of the country have a right to know about the acts 
of the public functionaries and accordingly they should have access to the inquiries being 
conducted by the Lokpal. The Committee, then!fore, recommends that sub-clause (2) of 
clause 13 be amended and the words in camera be substituted by the words in open and a 
proviso be added thereto as foJlows: 
"Provided that the Chairman and the Members of the Lokpal may conduct an 
inquiry in camera in exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in 
writing." 
Clause 14 
The Committee has noted that by the powers conferred under clause 14, the Lokpal can 
stop investigations being pursued by the Polic_e Qfficials under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, solely on the ground that such investigations might prejudicially affect the 
conduct of inquiry in respect of complaints made to it. The. Committee feels that it will not 
be proper to allow the Lokpal, whose jurisdiction is restricted to making inquiry into 
allegations of corruption, to hamper investigations being conducted under the normal 
criminal law of the country. The Committee is accordingly of the opinion that clause 14 be 
omitted from the Bill. 
Clause 15 
The Committee has noted that under sub-clause (4) of clause 15, information as may be 
relevant or useful· to the conduct of an inquiry by the Lokpal can be withheld on various 
grounds as mentioned thereunder so much so that the Secretary to the Government of India 
or Chief Secretary of the State Government have been given extensive powers to refuse to 
make available necessary information to the Lokpal. The Committee is of the opinion that 
sub-clause ( 4) is inconsistent with the nature of the proceedings before the Lokpal. Denial of 

7 
such information will reduce the institution of Lokpal to a mockery and will create doubts in 
the public mind. Therefore, sub-clause (4) nf clause 15 should be deleted. In view of this 
recommendation of the Committee, sub-clause (3~ of clause 15 should also be 
consequentially amended. 
Clause 16 
The Committee feels that the powers conferred on the Lokpal under the provisions of 
clause 16(1) and (2) for purposes of search and seizure of documents, which may be useful 
for or relevant to any inquiry being conducted by it, are quite adequate. The proviso may, 
however, be modified to read as follows: 
"Provided that in cases where such documents are required to be returned, the 
Lokpal shall return the documents after retaining copies thereof with due 
authentication." 
The Explanation added after the proviso appears to be unnecessary to the Committee 
and hence it should be deleted. 
Clause 17 
The Committee has noted that sub-clause (a) of clause 11 {1) confers power on the 
Lokpal to close the cases in the event of the allegations made in the complaint not being 
substantiated either wholly or partly. Sub-clause (b) of clause 17(1), on the other hand, 
enjoins upon it to make a Report in writing to the competent authority in case all or any of 
the allegations made in the complaint have or has been substantiated either wholly or partly. 
The Committee feels that after inquiry, whether the offences alleged in the complaint are 
found to have been substantiated or not, either wholly or partly it should be incum~ent upon 
the Lokpal to make a Report of its findings to the competent authority and in~lmate the 
complainant "nd the public functionary abou~ its having made the Report. 
The Committee is also of the view that the Lokpal should, while communicating its 
findings and recommendations in its Report to the competent authority, clearly specify the 
action to be taken against the public functionary against whom the offence alleged in the 
complaint has been found to be substantiated, either wholly or partly. Rather, the 
functioning of the Lokpal should be made more transparent and its pronouncements should 
be made public and under no circumstances it should be empowered to record a finding, 
closing the case which can at best be confined tu stating tllat, upon inquiry the offences 
alleged in the complaint have not been substantiated, either wholly or partly. In this manner 
the public functionary would get due justice. The Committee,· accordingly, recommends that 
sub-claus·es (a) and (b) of clause 17(1) inay be combined into one clause to read as 
follows:-
"At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Lokpal shall determine whether all or any of 
the offences alleged in the complaints have or has been proved to its satisfaction. 
The Lokpal shall. report its findings to the complainant, the public functionary and 
the competent authority." 
Consequential amendment in this clause be made accordingly to re-number it as 17(1) 
instead of 17(1)(a) and (b). 
The Committee has noted that in terms of sub-clause 17(2), the examination of a 
Report in respect of Prime Minister received from the Lokpal by the competent authority 
and communication of a decision th~reon to the Lokpal within the prescribed period seems 
to have been precluded. The matter is left vide sub-clause (3) of clause 17 to the discretion 

I_' t 
8 
of the House of the People or the Council of States to which the Prime Minister belongs 
merely by the laying of the Report. The Committee feels that the Act has to be uniformly 
applicable to all the public functionaries including the Prime Minster and accordingly 
recommends that the words "other than the Prime Minister" occurring in sub-clause (2) of 
clause 17 should be deleted. The Committee is also of the opinion that the period of 90 days 
prescribed under sub:..clause (3) for laying of the Report of the Lokpal before the House of 
. the People or the Council of States, as the case may be, read with the Explanation appended 
, thereto, is quite upreasonable and it should be omitted from the clause along with the 
Explanation. Instead sub-clause (3) may be amended to provide for laying of the Report 
· after its receipt before the House of the people or the Council of States, as the case may be, 
· within the first week on their. assembling for a Session. The Committee feels that since sub­
. clause (3) of clause 17 relates to the laying of Reports in respect of complaints against public 
. functionaries received from the Lokpal 1 it should have precedence for chronological reasons 
over sub-clause (2) and accordingly, sub-clause (3), as amended, be re-numbered as sub­
clause (2) and sub-clause (2) be re-numbered as sub-clause (3) 
Clause 18 
In the view of the Committee, clause-18 which provides for declaration of assets by the 
Members of Parliament, before the Lokpal every year, should be amended to provide for 
furnishing of return by the members within a period of 90 days on· their becoming members 
and annually thereafter, within 90 days . of commencement of each Financial Year. An 
explanation should also be added to the clause to define the family as including both the 
·spouse and dependent children. 
The Committee has also noted that clause-18 is too general in nature and does not refer 
to the consequences as may flow in case the members of parliament either do not furnish a 
return of assets to the Lokpal or furnish incomplete or false return. The Committee 
accordingly recommends that a provision be made in the Bill to include, that the details of 
the returns filed by the Members of Parliament will be reported by the Lokpal to the 
Chairpersons of the .House of the People and the Council of States. A deterrent clause may 
also be inserted to deal with cases of non-filing or delayed filing of returns by the Members 
of Parliament or their filing them in an incomplete or falsified manner. 
C/ause-19 
The Committee feels that the 1language of clause-19 be slightly modified in the interest 
of clarity to substitute the words "the Members"· with the words "the Chairman and the 
Members of the Lokpal". 
C/ause-20 
This clause provides for secrecy of information and evidence collected during any 
inquiry by the Lokpal. Even courts also cannot have any access to this evidence. The 
Committee feels that this clause negates the concept of transparency in the fun~ioning of 
the institution of Lokpal. There is no denying the fact that the evidence collected by the 
Lokpal will be at tremendous cost of men and material and keeping in view the fact that 
Lokpal under the proposed scheme of the Bill will not be the prosecuting or punishing 
authority against public functionaries held guilty, the bar placed on the use of evidence by 
the courts is not justified. On the contrary, allowing the Courts to have access to the 
evidence or information collected by the Lokpal will save them considerable time and 
botheration. Taking a view in its totality about clause 20, the Committee holds that as it is 
too secretive and bars flow of information, it should be deleted. 

• 
9 
Clause-21 
The Committee is in broad agreement with the provisions of clause 21 as the dignity of. 
the office of the Lokpal is to be respected and protected. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that sub-clause (2) of Clause 21 is too wide in its language and may well be an 
unreasonable restriction on free speech. Besides, the purpose contemplated under sub-clause 
(2) is by and large achieved by sub-clauses (1) and (3) and hence there does not appear to 
be any need to retain sub-clause (2). Hence, it should be deleted. Consequentially, the 
reference to sub-clause (2) in sub-clause (3) be deleted. 
Clause-22 
This clause seeks to confer powers on the Lokpal to try certain offences summarily and 
punish the persons who tender false evidence before it. The Committee however, feels that 
provisions for summary trails for offences of this nature already exist in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and there does not appear to be any need to specifically provide 
sub-clause (1) for this purpose. Hence, it should be deleted. Likewise, the Committee feels 
that in sub-clause (2) of clause 22 reference to sections 175, 178, 179 and 180 of the Indian 
Penal Code is unnecessary and the words occurring therein from "in Section 175, ...... to the 
Indian Penal Code" be substituted by the words "in clause 21(1) of this Act". 
The Committee has noted that under sub-clause (4) of clause 22 an appeal has been 
allowed to be made to the High Court by persons convicted under clause 22 by the Lokpal. 
This, however, does not appear to be proper as the status of the Chairman and Members of 
the Lokpal is equivalent to the status of the Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court 
and accordingly, an appeal against the conviction pronounced by the Lokpal should lie to 
the Supreme Court and not to the High Court. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
sub-clause(4) may be amended to provide for appeals to the Supreme Court and the 
Explanation to this clause which consequently becomes redundant should also be deleted. 
Clauses 23, 24 and 25 
Clause 23 makes printing or publication of any information in relation to any complaint 
before the inquiry under the Act has reached its definitive stage, an offence triable 
summarily by the Lokpal. The ground on which this is based is that disclosure of information 
in such a manner causes irreparable damage to the public functionaries, particularly, in cases 
where the public functionary has been absolved of the charges against him. Similarly clause 
24 provides for the punishment which may be awarded by the Lokpal to a person making a 
complaint which is found by the Lokpal to be false. In cases, both under clauses 23 and 24 
provision for appeal against sentence of conviction pronounced by the Lokpal has been 
made to the Supreme Court. Clause 25 has been provided for the modified application of 
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure for the trial of offences under clauses 22. 
23 and 24. 
The Committee has already recommended holding of inquiries by the Lokpal in the 
open, save in exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in writing for in camera 
proceedings. The Committee has also stressed that there has to be transparency in the 
functioning of the Lokpal. Clause 23 on the contrary, seems to put unnecessary fetters on 
the right of expression and freedom of speech of the people by making the proceedings of 
the Lokpal too secretive and conferring extensive powers on it to punish the persons who 
may be adjudged guilty. Similarly, clause 24 is too severe. The Committee feels that the 
Lokpal should not convert itself into a criminal court except for the purposes of punishing 
ex-facie cases of contempt under clause 21(1). It sounds logical that if the Lokpal h.as no 

I 'I 
10 
power to punish a guilty public functionary, he should have no power to prosecute and 
punish the complainant or any witness. Such persons may be left to be prosecuted under the 
Indian Penal Code in the normal course. Therefore, in view of the recommendation of the 
Committee for open inquiry by the Lokpal and the fact that the sweep of the penal 
· provisions under clauses 23 and 24 is too wide, the Committee recommends that clauses 23 
and 24 may be dropped. As the Committee has recommended dropping of clauses 23 and 
24, clause 25 consequentially becomes redundant and it may also be dropped. 1 
Clause 26 
Clau~e 26 places a bar on prosecution in respect of allegations not proved or not 
substantiated before the Lokpal. This clause appears to be too draconian in nature and 
substance as it makes the Lokpal or the competent authority the final arbiters in determining 
the complaints of corruption against public functionaries. It is well known that even under 
the ordinary law of the land appeals have been provided at various stages in the courts and 
here, under this clause, the complainants who may not be satisfied with the decision of the 
Lokpal have been left high and dry as they cannot approach any court against the decision 
of the Lokpal or the competent authority. The Committee, therefore, feels that this clause in 
not in consonance with the judicial system of a democratic polity and it may be dropped 
altogether. It should be left to the complainants to approach the courts against the decision 
of the Lokpallcompetent authority to seek appropriate remedies. 
Clause 27 
Clause 27 requires the Lokpal to inquire .into any ·allegation as may be the subject 
matter of a complaint under this Act on an order being issued by the President and subject 
to such conditions or limitations as may be specified therein notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Act. The implication of the wording of this clause is perhaps that the only 
limitation of this Act which applies to the order issued by the President is that the alfegation 
which is referred to the Lokpal for inquiry has to be only in respect of which a complaint 
may be made and no other provisions of the Act seem to apply while determining the 
truthfulness or otherwise of the allegation. It may perhaps be that the allegation cited h the 
complaint may relate to a matter more than 10 years old. The Committee is, therefore, of 
the view that the words "notwithstanding anything contained in this Act" occurring in clfluse 
27 be substituted by the words "subject to the provisions of clause 12". 
Clauses 28 and 29 
Clause 28 provides for the disposal of deposits made by the complainants and clause 29 
provides for compensation or reward or both, pa'yable to complainant in the event of all or 
any of the allegations made in a complaint being substantiated. The Committee feels that the 
areas covered by clauses 28 and 29 are somewhat inter-linked and it will be more 
appropriate if both these clauses are combined into one and provision is made for the 
amount of compensation/reward or punishment to be decided by the Lokpal while 
concluding its findings. The Committee is also of the view that the words occurring at the 
end of clause 29. (which may be· combined with clause 28 in appropriate form) viz. "and the 
Central Government shall pay, the amount or amounts so determined, to the complainant" 
be substituted by the words "and the Lokpal shall determine the person by whom the said 
compensation or award shall be paid after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard". 

11 
aause 30 
The Committee has noted that sub-clause (2) of clause 30 bars court's jurisdiction on the 
proceedings or decisions of the Lokpal. The Commi1:tee understands that the Supreme Court 
under Article 32 and the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution have inherent 
writ jurisdiction and aggrieved citizens can always approach these courts in matters where 
their rights have been encroached upon. Viewed in that context and in view of the fact that 
the Committee has already .reconunended deletion of clause 26, sub-clause (2) of clause 30 
may be dropped. 
Clause 11 
The Committee feels that in view of the recommendation made by it for dropping sub­
clause (1) of clause 22 and clauses 23 and 24, consequential changes may be made in clause 
31. 
Clause 33 
Sub-clause (b) of clause 33 bars any inquiry suo-motu by the Lokpal into cases of 
corruption by public functionaries corning to his notice through media or otherwise. The 
Committee feels that the basic objective of the creation of an institution of Lokpal is to 
cleanse public life from the scourge of corruption and, therefore, the Lokpal should not be 
fettered in being barred from jurisdiction to make inquiry upon its own knowledge and 
information. It should be given powers to take suo-motu notice of cases of corruption by 
public functionaries and accordingly sub-clause (b) of clause 33 may be deleted. 
Clause 35 
The Committee feels that clause 35 be suitably amended to take care of the amendment 
suggested by it in sub-clause (3) of clause 9. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title 
The Committee is of the view that the consequential changes in respect of Clause 1, the 
Enacting Formula and the Title with reference to the year of enactment as indicated therein 
may also be carried out. 
15. The Committee agrees with the provisions contained in the remaining clauses of the 
Bill. 
16. In view of the above recommendations/observations some necessary changes of 
consequential or drafting nature may also have to be carried out in the Bill and some of the 
clauses may also have to be renumbered. 
17. The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the 
amendments suggested by it. 
NEW DELHI; 
May 6, 1997 
F-3A 71BIAS 
SOM PAL 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs 

I ' 
APPENDIX- I 
(See Para' 10 of the .\teport) 
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS FROM WHOM MRMORANDA ON THH BILL WERE 
RECEIVED 
1. Shri K.C. Bhardwaj, Convenor, Social Action Group, C-99, Inderpu~ 
New Delhi - 12. 
2. Shri D.N. Bhargava, Controller 0ef)era1 (Retd.), C-4'6, Medical Campus .. 
Post Box No. 8, P.O. Kal'amsad, Gujarat-388325. 
3. Shri Santi Ranjan Mukherji, Advocate, Mukherji Villa, Officers Colony, 
Burdwan - 713103. 
4. Shri Ashutosh Kr. Agarwal, B-4010, Double Storey, Ramesh. Nagar, 
New Delhi-15. 
5. Dr. J.J. Bennett, President, Indian CitizeBS Forum, "Jobitham" No. 9, 
VGP Murphy Square, G.S.T. Road, St. Thomas Mount, Madras - 16. ~· 
6. Honorary Executive Secy., National Consumer Protection Coone~ F/4, Premkunj 
Society, Opp. Mirambica School, Naranpura, Ahmedabad, Pin-380013. 
7. Shri S.D. Sharma, Working Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh, Lajpat Bhawan; Lajpat 
Nagar, New Delhi-24. 
8. Dr. A. Kanthamani, F.f'ofessor of Philosophy, C7, Calicut University Campus, 
Kerala-673635. 
9. Shri Prakash Shivappa Khot, At./P - Vasagade,. Tal - Talgaon, Distt. Sangli, 
Maharashtra - 416416. 
10. Dr. Ajaya Kumar Mishra, Chairman, Sankal'p, B~59.5·, Safdarjung Enclave, 
New Delhi-29. 
11. Shri L.B. Ambarkbme, Advocate, Jatharpath, Shankar Nagar~ Akola, Maharashtra-
444001. 
12. Shri Godfrey Gonsalves,.. Ws Chowgle & Co. Ltd., Personnel and Administration, 
Mormugao Harbour, Go& 
13. Shri Moses P. Manohar; Secretary, The National Council of Churches in India, 
Aikya House, N-21, Greater Kailash-1, ~w Delhi-48. 
14. Shri T. U. Mehta, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, "Siddhartlla'", 3, Dada Rokadnath 
. Society, Paldi, Ahmedabad - 380007. ' 
15. Shri S.S. Jagatap, Advocate, "Vijayashree", lslampur, Tai-Walwa, 
Distt. - Sangli, Pin - 415409 {M.S.). 
1~. Shri Yatish Jain, President, Prakriti Mitra, Paryavaran Samiti, Staff Qr. No. 3, 
Kendriya Vidyalaya No. 1, Campus, G.C.F. Estate, Jabalpur (M.P~} 482011. 
17. Shri Harish Kr. Sharma, Advocate, Secretary, Indian Citizen's, Welfare and 
12 
F-38 718/RS 

13 
Crime Preventive Association, Vivekanand Nagar, Aligarh Margh, Hathras, Distt.-Aligarh 
(U.P.) 
18. Sbri Milap Chandra Chorasia, 2734, Kutcha 'Chellan, New Delhi- 2. 
19. Shri Prakash Chaube, Advocat-e, Vill - Nawada, P.O. Gobindganj, Distt. East 
Cllau:tparaa, Bihar. 
20. Sbri J.R. Mohaptra, Manc,tgar {F&A) -LIC of India, Divisional Office, Shahdol 
(M.P.), Pin - 484001. 
21. Shri I.U. Gehani, 18-2 Lajpatnagar Chowk, Lucknow (U.P.)-226003. 
22. Shri Neeraj Srivastava, 117!N531 (C) Saketpuri Kaka Deo, Kanpur (U.P.) 208025. 
23. Col. (Dr.) Pratap Singh (Retd.), Ex. Commissioner Cabinet Sectt., Pratap House, 
38, Defence Colony, Hisar (Haryana)--125001. 
24. Shri V.K. Mabeswari, H.J.S., Addl. Distt. and Session Judge Dehradun - _248001. 
25. Shri H.R.S. Goel, I.E.S. (Retd.), G-i26, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi. 
26. Shri M.B. Lobo, 473, Jagadishnagar, New Tipsandra Post, Bangalore-560075. 
27. Smt. Chanchal Behn, Secretary, Moral Education Foundation C-4/81, Yamuna 
Vihar, Delhi-53. 
' 
28. Shri D.P. Agrawal, H.I.G. Flat No. H-13-fi, H.B. Colony, Chandrashekharpur, 
Bhubaneswar (Orissa)-751016. 
29. Dr. Bijoy Chand, Nutanganj (Opp. SBI Regional Office), Burdwan (West Bengal), 
Pin - 713102. 
30. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, Senior Scientist (Agril. Economics) Central Potato 
Research Institute, Shimla (Himachal Pradesh) Pin - 171001. 
31. Shri S.P. Paramasivaiah, Advocate, Sompura, Koratagare Taluk, 
Karnataka, Pin - 572121. 
Distt. Tumkur, 
32. Shri Nath Sonkatri, Rural Surveyor, Kawardha, Chattishgarh, M.P. - 491995. 
33. Shri Wadgane T.S., Librarian, College of Agriculture, Kothapur 
(Maharashtra) 416004. 
34. Shri R.Y. Kausadikar, 169, Shastri Nagar, Garkheda Road, Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra 431005. 
35. Shri Suresh Chandra Agrawal, Tahsil - Vasadi, Distt. - Dholpur, Rajasthan. 
36. Shri Kailash Nath Pande, Vill. & Post - Baracha, Distt. - Pratapgarh (U.P.) -
230403. 
37. Shri Lakshmi Chand Tiwari, Bhaylapura,' Hindon City, Distt.-Sawai Madhopur 
(Rajasthan) Pin - 322230. 
38. Shri Rajendra Chandrakant Rakshe, Yaswant Nagar, Satara, Maharashtra. 
39. Shri M.B. Gorade, Kagal, Kolhapur (Maharashtra). 
40. Shri J.N. Kokate, Babhali, Taluka - Daryapur, Distt.-Amarawati, Maharashtra. 
41. Shri Pawan Kr. Jha, clo Ajanta Tubes Ltd., Post- Jain Industrial Estate, Ghaziabad 
(U.P.) - 201313. 

I ' 
14 
42. Chandrawati, Cbarkhi Dadli, Distt.-Bhi.WaJii,. Haryana. 
43. Shri B.B. Ratbo, Sr. Advocate President, High Court Bar Association, 
Orissa, Kanika Road, Cuttack - 753008. 
44. Sbri Ganga Charal) Rajput, MP (Lok Sabha) 143, South Avenuo, 
New Delhi :. 11. 
45. Sbri Karan Singh ShadiJ?uria, Vill. & Post - Hastasal, New Delhi - 59. 
46. Sbri Arvind Chaturvedi, National General Secretary, J anata l?arty, 5, Pandit 
Pant Marg, New Delhi - 1. 
47. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, Associate Professor of Law, and Shri Siddhartha 
Raja, National Law School of India Univeristy, Nagarbhavi, Post Bag No. 7201, 
Bangalore-560072. 
48. Shri Saroj Kr. Jena, Lecturer' in Political Science, Adivasi College, 
Balliguda, 'Distt-Kandhmal (Orissa)-762103. 
49. Shri S.P. Dey, F-80, Mahavir Enclave Extn. Pa-rt-III, New Delhi' - 110059. 
50. Shri V. Ramesh Babu, A-3, Adichini Village, Srj Aurobindo Marg, 
New Delhi-17 . .. 
51. Sbri C.J.M. Mathew, Sector - 17, No. 1245, Faridab~, Haryana-121002. 
52. Shri Samir J. Roy, Plot No. 48&2, Sector-12, Gandhinagar, 
. Guja~:at - 382012. 
53. Shri D.K. Mohapatra, IPS, l.G. of Police & C.V.O., Airports Authority o! 
India, National Airports Division, Rajiv Gandhi Bhavan, Safdarjung Airport, 
New Delhi - 3-. 
54. Dr; Hari Sharan Saxena, MF-1, Saras""ati Nagar, Bhopal (M.P.) - 462003. 
55. Shri Subhajit Chakraborty, Bira Banti Para, P.O. - Bira Ballav Para, 
Distt. - 24 Parganas (North), West Benga) - 743234.;. 
56. Sbri Kewal Khanna, Journali~t, 543, St . .No. 6, Raja Park, Jaipur - 302004. 
57. Shri G.R. Andanimath, Advocate. "Annapurna", Vidyanagar, Hub~i - 580031 
(Karnataka). 
58. Shri G. Venkatadri Ra(), Advocate, Flat No. 8_, Plot No. 49, Balaji Kalyan 
Apartments, Kalyannagar - 1, Hyderabad - 500038. 
59. . Shri D.C. Hardenia, E-10, Bapu Nagar, Senthi Chittorgarh 
(Rajasthan) - 312025. 
60: Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, l?rofessor afld Head-Department of Law, University of 
Kerala-, Kariavattom, Thiruvanantbapuram. Pin-69-5.581. 
61. Dr. U.K. Jha, Lecturer, Department of Political Science, DPBS (P.G.} 
College, Anupshahr (Bullandshahr) (U.V.}. 
62. Shri R.K. Tiwari, .&3, B.N. Railway Colony, Bareilly (U.P.). 
63. Shri J.C. Wankhede, 36, Sarva Seva Sangh Layout, Manganwadi, 
Wardha-442001. 

15 
64. Shri Rakesh Sharma, 647.6, Layafpur Basti, Near Bombay House, 
Kurukshetra-136118. 
65. Shri Kalyana Kr. Mohanty, President, Utkalmani Seva Sangha, At Biridi, P.O. -
Biridi Road,. Distt.Jagatsinghpur, Orissa. 
66. Dr. D.R. Bagalkoti, Prof. and Head of Department of Physics, 23, HIG Flats 
Hudco Colony, Barnimantap New Extn., Mysore-570015. 
67. Shri Dharam Pal, 89-H, sector 4, Pushpa Vihar, New Delhi-110017. 
68. Shri Himadri Paul, P.O. - Sahapur, Distt.-Malda, West Bengal-732142. 
69. Shri Sunil Mukherjee, 4A, Rajendra Nath Banerjee Road, Behala, Calcutta 
(W.B.)-700034. 
' 
70. Dr. D.B. Sharma, Lecturer (Engg.), 08, Teacher's Quarter, Government Inter-
College Campus, North Malaka, Allahabad (U.P.)-211001. 
71. Shri Naveen Panwar, O'o Shri Preetam Singh, P.O.-Gandhi Colony, Mob. 
Devpuram, Muzaffer Nagar (U.P.). 
72. Sbri Pradeep Singh, N-896, Sangam Vihar, New Delhi-61. 
73. Shri PaFitosb Mruviya, B-31121, Lanka-Varanasi, (U.P.)-221005. 
74. Shri Sohan Lal Aggarwal, do Shri Vivek Garg, 2475'84, Hargolal Road, Ambala 
Cantt-133001. 
75. Shri R.B. Sharma, Associate Director, Indira Gandhi Agricultural University, Zonal 
Agricultural Research Station, Kumharawand, Jagdalpur, Bastar, M.P.-494005. 
76. Shri B.S. Ch~uhan, (Retd.) ADHS, 34 UIT, Pratap Nagar, Jodhpur 
(Rajasthan)-342004. 
77. Shri B.V. Setty, No. 241, lst Floor, Sradhananda Bhavan Road, V.V. Puram, 
Bangalore-560004. 
78. Shri Prakash Bapat, Balaghat Road, Gonda-441614. 
79. Shri Surendra Kumar Sinha, Dy. Collector (Retd.) Ill A/4/3, Nehru Nagar, 
Ghaziabad (U.P.). 
80. Shri Anil Kr. Shukla, Behind Telephone Exchange, Bilaspur (M.P.). 
81. Shri P.A. Shrinivasa Rao, H.No. 12-1-2, Old Mallapally, Seetarambagh, 
Hyderabad-500001. 
82. Shri Surendar Kumar Purohit, 2117, SamkhjJ.ter Bazar Mandi, Mandi (H.P.). 
83. Shri Pr"'deep Kr., Student, Government Senior Secondary Boys School, Gurgaon 
(Haryana )-122001. 
84. Shri Ashutosh Mishra, 'Mandai Rail Prabandhak Karyalaya', Muradabad 
(U. P. )-244001. 
85. Shri Satyapal, Vill-lslampur Sahu, P.O.-Chitavar, Distt.-Bijnaur (U.P.,)-246731. 
86. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal, Advocate, C-2, Sarvodya Colony, (Near Jail Chungi) 
Meerut City (U.P.). 

I ' 
16 
87. · Shri K.K. Pande, Supreme Court Advocate, Juniline, Bilaspur (M.P.)-495001. 
88. Shri R.A. Deshpande, Jt. Director (Statistics) (Retd.), No. 142, Housing Board 
Quarters, Byrasandra, Jayanagar, Ist Block East, 6th Main Road, Bangalore-560011. 
89. Shri Hrudananda Panda, Advocate, Village & P.O. Derunia, Via-Lataharan 
(Kakatpur), Distt.-Puri, Orissa-752119. 
90. Shri P. Guha, Dr. Zakir Hussain Hall of Residence, (3-203), I.I.T., Kharagpur 
(W.B.). 
91. Justice R.K. Manisana Singh (Retd.), Keishampat Leimajam Leikei, Sega Road, 
Imphal-795001. 
92. Shri S.P. Mukerji, I.A.S. (Retd.) J-1984, Chittaranjan Park, New Delhi, Pin-110019. 
93. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex. S.G., Lok Sabha, A-2, Shalimar Apptts., NOSE Part II, 
New Delhi-110049. 
94. Dr. S.J. Kamble, 57, Empress Mills Colony, Nagpur, Pin-440027. 
95. Shri A.T. Patil, Advocate, Supreme Court, Ex. M.P. (Lok Sabha) 1, Circle House, 
King's Circle, Bombay,-400019. 
96. Students-Teachers Front Against 'Corruption' 6 Warden Flats, Brahamputra Hostel, 
JNU, New Delhi-67. 
97. Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, Former Judge Patna High Court and Former 
Chairman, National Commission for Backward Classes, Sahana Villa, E/20, Peoples Co­
operative Colony, Near Old Water Tower, Kankarbagh, Patna-20. 
98. Shri Surendra Nath, lAS, C-I.lt34, Moti Bagh-I, New Delhi-21. 
99. Shri A. Sowrirajan, 981.5, Sector-!, Pushpa Vihar, M.B. Road, New Delhi-17. 
100. Justice K.L. Sharma (Retd.), 12 Awas Vikas Colony, Mall Avenue, 
Lucknow-226001. 
101. Shri Dushyant Prasad Arya, Vill.-Saguna, Post-Danapur Cantt. Distt. Patna 
(Bihar). 
102. Justice R.N. Thakur, President, Illegal Migrants (Determination) Appellate 
Tribunal, Assam, Uzanbazar, Nowjan Road, Guwahati-781001. 
103. Shri R. Anbarasu, Ex-M.P. (Lok Sabha), 6, Appadurai Street, Vanviyar 
Taynampet, Madras-600018. 
104. Justice P.B. Sawant, Chairman, Press Council of India, Faridkot House, 
Copernicus Marg, New Delhi-110001. 
105. Shri Dharma Vira, 54, Anand Lok, New Delhi-110049. 
106. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, Upalokayukta, Karnataka. 
107. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, 41, Buena Vista, Gen. J. Bhosale Marg, Mumbai-400021. 
108. The Madras Bar Association, High Court Buildings, Madras. 
109. Centre for Policy Research, Dharma Marg, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi-110021. 
110. The Bar Council of India, 21, Rouse Avenue, Institutional Area, Near Bal 
Bhawan, New Delhi-110002. 

APPENDIX-II 
GIST OF COMMENTS/SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED ON THE LOKPAL BILL, 1996 FROM 
VARIOUS ORGANISATIONS/ ASSOCIATIONSIINDMDUALS 
Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Shri B.B. Ratho 
Orissa 
Memo No. 43 
2. Dr. D.R. Bagalkoti, 
Mysore, 
Memo No. 66 
3. Shri Sunil Mukherjee, 
West Bengal, 
Memo No. 69 
4. Centre for Policy Research 
New Delhi, 
Memo No. 109 
1. Dr. J.J. Bennett, 
President, Indian Citizen Forum 
"Jobitham" 
Memo No. 5 
2. Honorary Executive Secretary, 
Clause 1 
Clause 2 
National Consumer Protection Council, 
Ahmedabad. 
Memo No. 6 
17 
Suggestion 
In clause 1 (2) after the word 'appoint' 
add the following: "but not later than 90 
(ninety) days from the date on which the 
assent of the President is given to the 
Bill. 
State-wise Lokayuktas to be incorpo­
.rated. 
Bill to be called "Public Vigilance Act". 
Under clause 1(2) a time limit of three 
months from the date of the President's 
assent for the issue of a Notification by 
the Government bringing the Act into 
effect, should be prescribed. 
The Office of the Prime Minister 
should be included in the Act. 
Definition of complaint under 2( c) 
should include any of the laws for the 
time being in force in India including the 
prevention of corruption Act, 1988. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Sh. S.D. Sharma, Chairman, 
Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
4. Dr. A. Kanthamani, 
Professor of Philosophy, Kerala, 
Memo. No. 8 
5. Shri Prakash Shivappa Khat, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 9 
6. Shri T.V. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14. 
7. Shri I. U. Gehani, 
Lucknow (U.P.), 
Memo. No. 21 
18 
Suggestion 
(~) Under sub clause 2(c), the definition 
of "complaint" should be widened so 
as to cover other economic offences 
such as smuggling, breach of foreign 
exchange laws, custom laws, income 
tax laws, failure to pay dues etc. 
(ii) Under sub clause 2(g), the definition 
of "public functionary" needs to be 
widened so as to include within its 
ambit Governors also. The Chief 
Ministers of States should also be 
included in this definition in cases 
where the State Lok Ayuktas acts 
have left them out of their purview. 
Vice-Chancellors of Central and State 
Universities should also come under the 
purview of this Act. 
Bureaucrats, Industrialists, businessman 
should also come under the purview of 
this Bill. 
. (i) Definition of complaint should be 
broadened to cover other econontic 
offenc:es such as smuggling, breach 
of foreign laws, custom laws, excise 
laws and income tax laws etc. 
(ii) "Public functionary" should include 
Chief Ministers, Ministers and MLAs 
of every State. 
From the definition of public functionary 
"Prime Minister" should be deleted. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
8. Shri V.K. Maheswari, 
Addl. Distt. & Session Judge, 
Deharadun, 
Memo. No. 24 
9. Shri D.P. Agarwal, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 28 
10. Shri S.P. Paramasivaiah, 
Advocate, 
Karn:;ttaka, 
Memo. No. 31 
11. Shri T.S. Wadgane, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 33 
12. Shri B.B. Ratho, 
Senior Advocate, 
Cuttack, 
Memo. No. 43 
13. Shri O.K. Mohapatra, IPS 
I.G. of Police & C.V.O., 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 53 
F-4A 718/RS 
19 
Suggestion 
(i) Clause 2(c)-the term offence 
(complaint) should be defined 
clearly and it should not be left on 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
(ii) All the definition should be given in 
clause (2) while part of 
Establishment, procedure, findings 
should be brought together. 
(iii) There is no provtston in the 
proposed Act to deal with a person, 
in case, he is found guilty of 
corruption, without which the Act 
will be without any use. 
In clause 2(g)-'public functionary' 
should be-
(i) Prime Minister and Deputy Prime 
Minister(s), (ii) Chief Ministers and 
Deputy Chief Ministers, 
(iii) Speakers and Deputy Speakers, 
(iv) Governors and Lt. Governors, 
(v) President and vice President and 
(vi) Chief Justice and Judges of High 
Courts, Supreme Court and Lokpals. 
( i) Clause 2( c) should include-bribery, 
nepotism undue influence, abuse of 
Powers. 
(ii) Clause 2(g)-should include judiciary 
and executive. 
In clause 2( d)-the world "Lokpal" 
should be known as 'Rashtrapal". 
In clause 2(c) at the end add the 
following "or any other law in force in 
India". 
Clause 2(c) should include offences 
under I.P.C. also. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
14. Shri G. Venkatadri Rao, 
Advocate, Hyderabad, 
Memo. No. 58 
15. Shri D.C. Hardenia 
Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 59 
16. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
17. Shri J.C. Wankhade, 
Wardha, 
Memo. No. 63 
18. Shri Rakesh Sharma, 
Kurukshetra, 
Memo. No. 64 
19. Dr. D.R. Bajalkoti, 
Mysore, 
Memo. No. 66 
20. Shri Dharam Pal, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 67 
20 
I ' 
Suggestion 
(i) In clause 2(b)(i) and (ii) the 
competent authority should be the 
President. 
(ii) In clause 2(b X iii) the competent 
authority should be the Speaker in 
the case of Lok Sabha and the 
Chainnan in the case of Rajya 
Sabha, assisted by two other 
independent members known for 
their integrity and honesty and 
having sufficient legal knowledge. 
In clause 2(g) the public functionary 
should include Chairman of Public Sector 
Corporation/Companies, etc. 
In clause 2(g) the public functionary 
should include Chief Executives of 
Corporate Sector and top level 
Bureaucrats., 
In clause 2(g) public functionary should 
exclude the Prime Minister. 
In clause 2(g) public functioRary should . 
·include MLAs, Ministers of State 
Governments, Senior officers of State 
Governments, Board, corporation, local 
bodies under· Union and State 
Governments. 
In clause 2(g) public functionary should 
include Chief Ministers, Dy. Chief 
Ministers, Dy. Prime Minister, 
Governors, Mayors, Panchayat Officials, 
Bank Managers, Industrialists, Public 
Sector heads, Railway Department, 
PurchCtse Officers, Finance Offenders. 
(i) In clause 2(a) the word "Chairman" 
be substituted by the word 
"Lokpal". 
(ii) In clause 2(g) all public servants to 
be brought under the Act. 
F-48 718/RS 

Sl. Source 
No. 
21. Shri Sunil Mukherjee, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 69 
22. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal 
Meerut City, U.P. 
Memo. No. 86 
23. Shri R.K. Manisana Singh (Retd.) 
Imphal, 
Memo. No. 91 
24. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
2i 
Suggestion 
In clause 2(g) public functionary should 
include "Ministers of State Governments, 
top office bearers of National as well as 
State ·level political parties; Top officials 
of Central and State Government; 
officials of Banks and Financial 
Institutions; Electricity Undertakings; 
Municipal and Panchayat Bodies". 
In sub clause (g), the public functionary 
should include the Governors, the Chief 
Ministers, the Chief Justices and Judges 
of State High Courts. 
In sub clause (c), definition of complaint 
should include maladministration. 
(i) In sub clause (b), competent 
authority should be defined in 
relation to Secretaries and Heads of 
Departments; for constitutional 
authorities, the competent authority 
is to be speaker. 
(ii) In sub clause (c), complaint should 
include allegation of 
maladministration. 
(iii) In sub clause (g), 
functionaries should 
Secretaries and Heads 
Departments/Offices. 
public 
cover 
of 

SJ. Source 
No. 
25. Shri C.K. Jain, 
Ex S.G. (Lok Sabha), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
26. Shri A. Sowrirajan, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99 
27. Justice P.B. Sawant, 
Chairman, Press Council of India, 
Memo. No. 104 
22 
l ' 
Suggestion 
(i) Sub clause (b )(i) be substituted with 
"the Prime Minister, means the 
House of the People if the Prime 
Minister is a Member of that House, 
or the Council of States if the Prime 
Minister is a Member · \ of the 
Council." 
(ii) New sub-clauses (b)(ii) and (iii) to 
be added-
(ii) the speaker and Deputy 
Speaker, means the House of the 
People. 
(iii) the Deputy Chairperson, means 
the Council of States". 
(iii) In sub clause (c) the term complaint 
should include cases involving (i) 
abuse of authority; (ii) arbitrary or 
non-judicious exercise of authority 
or discretion; and (iii) neglect or 
indifference in the discharge of 
duties. 
In sub clause (c), complaint should wver 
offences under not only the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988 but also other 
laws existing in the country. 
(i) The definition of 'public functionary' 
in clause 2(g) should be expanded to 
include also "all government 
employees'. 
(ii) Corresponding the definition of 
'complaint' in clause 2 (c) should 
also be expanded to include 
arbitrary actions and decisions and 
wilful negligence on the part of the 
·'public functionary'. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
23 
28. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, Upalokayukta, 
(Kamataka), 
Memo. No. 106 
29. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, lAS (Retd.) 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 107 
30. Madras Bar Association, 
Madras-600104, 
Memo. No. 108 
31. Bar Council of India, 
Memo. No. 110 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub-clause 2(b), the competent 
authority in relation to the Prime 
Minister and Ministers should be the 
President of India. 
(ii) In sub-clause 2(c), the scope of 
complaint should be extended to 
offences other than those under the 
Prevention and Corruption Act, if 
related to corruption and also to 
grievances for reasons mentioned 
above. 
(iii) In sub-clause 2(g), the expression 
'Public functionary' should be 
enlarged to include public servants 
consisting of Secretaries of all ranks 
of Government. 
Public functionaries should cover senior 
civil servants i.e. Additional Secretaries 
and above. 
Clause 2{b) requires modification. The 
distinction made between a Member of 
Council of Ministers and a Member of 
Parliament and the corresponding 
competent authority is not warranted. As 
in the case of a Member of Parliament, 
the competent authority for a Member of 
Council if Ministers should be the 
Council of States, in case the Minister 
happens to be a Member of that Council 
and the House of the People in case the 
Minister happens to be a Member of that 
House. In any case, the Prime Minister 
sb.ould not be the competent authority in 
respect of a member of Council of 
Ministers as party considerations will 
weigh in deciding the matters arising 
under the Act. 
The competent authority as envisaged in 
section 2(b) should be the Lokpal 
himself. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Shri K.C. Bhardwaj, 
Convener, 
Social Action Group (Regd.) 
Delhi, 
Memo. No; 1 
2. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd.) 
Mines, Gujarat, 
Memo. No.2 
3. Shri Santi Ranjan Mukherji, 
Advocate, Burdwan, 
Memo. No.3 
4. Shri Ashutosh Kumar Agarwal, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No.4 
5. Honorary Executive Secretary, 
National Consumer Protection 
Council, Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 6 
6. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
7. Shri Yatish Jain, 
President, Prakriti Mitra, 
Paryav.aran Samiti, 
Jabalpur, 
Memo. No. 16 
24 
Clause 3 
-- --~----~--
Suggestion 
N,o serving Chief Justice or Judge of the 
Supreme Court be made C~airman or 
Member of the Lokpal in order to avoid 
any inducement to the serving Chief 
Justice or Judge of Supreme Court. Chief 
Justice or Judges retired 2-3 years back 
only be made eligible for these posts. 
'rhe Chairman may be from the Judiciary 
as proposed in the Bill, but the other two 
members should be from two other 
professions namely (i) Administration 
and (ii) Audit and Accounts. 
In clause 3, the following should be 
inserted after sub clause (2)(b): 
"(c) The Chairman and members of the 
Lokpal shall not be appointed for more 
than two consecutive terms of five years 
each". 
It is not necessary that all three members 
of the · Lokpal should be from the 
Judiciary. While the Chairman may be 
from the Judiciary as proposed, the other 
members may be persons of 
unquestioned probity with proven merit 
and experience of public affairs, not 
however belonging to any political party. 
The two members (besides the 
Chairman) shall be the sitting or retired 
judges of the Supreme Court. 
The member of Lokpal should be a 
citizen of eminence not belonging to any 
political party. 
The Chairman of Lokpal should be a 
judge other than the Chief Justice of 
India. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
8 . Shri Harish Kumar Sharma, 
Advocate, 
Secretary, Indian Citizen's 
Welfare and Crime 
Prevention Association, 
Vivekanand Nagar, Aligarh, 
Memo. No. 17 · 
9 . Dr. Bijay Chand, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 29 
10. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, 
Himachal Prade~}.l, 
Memo. No. 30 · 
11. Shri Nath Sonkatri 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 32 
12. Shri R.Y. Kansadikar, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 34 
13. Shri Suresh Chandra Agarwal 
Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 35 
14. Shri Lakshmi Chand Tiwari, 
Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 37 
15. Shri J.N. Kokate, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 40 
16. Ms. Chandrawati, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 42 
17. Shri Bipin Behari Ratho, 
Freedom Fighter, Sr. Advocate 
25 
& President of High Court Bar 
Association, Orissa, Cuttack, 
Memo. No. 43 
Suggestion 
In sub clause 2(b) one of the two 
members should be from Judiciary while 
the other should be from a recognized 
voluntary organisation, social 
organisation or from the Administrative 
field. 
Institution of Lokpal should be single 
membered instead of three membered. 
It should be made a constitutional 
authority. 
It should be multi membered like High 
CourttSupreme Court and hearing should 
be by the bench of Lokpals like judges. 
It should be at four levels viz. union, 
State, Distt. and lower levels. 
It should be at three levels viz. Union, 
State and Distt. levels. 
Lokpal should also be established upto 
district levels. 
Lokpal should be five membered. 
State Governments should also pass a 
legislation on the line of the proposed 
Lokpal Bill, 1996. 
3(2)(a)-delete the words "or have been"; 
3(2)(b)-delete the words "or have been, 
or" and also the word "a" appearing 
between the "to be" and "judge". 

Sl. Source 
No. 
18. Shri Arvind Chaturvedi, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 46 
19. Shri Subhajit Chakraborty, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 55 
20. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
21. Shri Kalyana Kr. Mohanty, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 65 
22. Dr. D.R. Bagalkoti, 
Mysore, 
Memo. No. 66 
23. Shri Sunil Mukherjee, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 69 
24. Shri D.B. Sharma, 
Allahabad/U.P. 
Memo. No. 71 
26 
Suggestion 
Sub-section (2)-The previous experience 
of working as a member or Chairman of 
'Lokayukta' in a State or an UT for a 
minimum of two years, should be added 
as a qualification. 
In sub-section 2(b) Members of Lokpal 
should have served a~ administrators. 
(i) In sub-section 2(a) the words ''Who is" 
to be ommitted. 
(ii) New sub-clause (2)(c) to be added to 
include persons of exemplary character 
dedicated to social service. 
(iii) New sub-clause (3) to be added to 
provide for a detailed enquiry into the 
previous character and conduct of those 
persons who are to be appointed. 
Chairman should be either a judge or ,a 
lawyer with no political or financial axe 
to grind. 
Lokpal should have more than 5 
members with at least two senior 
citizens. 
Vice-President of India to be the 
Chairman of Lokpal. 
(i) Three tier structures of the proposed 
Lokpal is suggested:-
( a) A Commissioner level Lokpal in 
every Commissionerate. 
(b) A Lokpal for every State & Union 
Territory. 
(c) A Lokpal at the apex of this 
Structure, to be located in the national 
capital. 
(ii) For appointment as Lokpal, a person 
should at least be 45 years old & should 
not be more than 70 years old~ 70 years 
should be the age of retirement. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
25. Shri Paritosh Malviya, 
Varanasi, U.P. 
Memo. No. 73 
26. Shri Sohanlal Aggarwal, 
Ambala Cantt. 
Memo. No. 74 
27. Shri B.S. Chauhan, 
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 76 
28. Shri Parkash Bapat, 
Gonda, 
Memo. No. 78 
F-5A 718/RS 
27 
Suggestion 
Lokpal should have two tiered 
structure:-
(a) Central Lokpal should have three 
members as follows: 
1. Retired Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court, 2. Retired General of Army and 
3. A renowned Social Worker. 
(b) State level Lokpal-should have 
three members as follows: 
1. Retired Chief Justice of Supreme 
Court or of any High Court, 2. Retired 
Senior Officer of the Army and 3. A 
renowned Social Worker. 
The Lokpal should have a minimum of 
ten members, with a provision to revise 
the number of members, if there is a felt 
need for the same. 
The Committee to make 
recommendation for appointment of 
Chairman & Members of the Lokpal 
should include:-
(a) Chief Justice of India, as the 
Chairman. 
(b) Speaker, Lok Sabha-member. 
(c) Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha­
member. 
(d) Deputy Chairperson, Rajya Sabha­
member. 
(e) Three more members from amongst 
retired judges & civil servants. 
Lokpal should be a part of the Supreme 
Court. A three member bench, consisting 
of sitting judges of the Apex court should 
handle the complaints against public 
functionaries. This Lokpal bench should 
also be subject to normal roster changes 
as are applicable to other benches. This 
arrangement should be extended to the 
State levels with sitting judges of the 
High Court working as presiding officers. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
29. Shri Surendra Kr. Sinha, 
Ghaziabad, U.P. 
Memo. No. 79 
30. Shri Anil Kr. Shukla, 
Bilaspur, M.P., 
Memo. No. 80 
31. Shri P.A. Shrinivasa Rao, 
Hyderabad, 
Memo. No. 81 
32. Shri Surender Kr. Purohit, 
Mandi, H.P., 
Memo. No. 82 
33. Shri Pradeep Kr., 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 83 
34. Shri Satyapal, 
Bijnaur, U.P., 
Memo. No. 85 
35. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal, 
Meerut City, U.P., 
Memo. No. 86 
36. Shri R.A. Deshpande, 
Byra, 
Memo. No. 88 
37. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
38. Shri A. Sowrirajan 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99. 
28 
Suggestion 
Lokpal should be sitting Supreme Court 
judge. 
The members of Lokpal should be drawn 
from the executive, the judiciary, the 
legislature(s) & press. 
Those who are in active service only 
should be appointed as Chairman & 
Member(s) of the Lokpal &'no extension 
should be given. 
No person, who has affiliations with any 
political party or who has been 
recommended by the Chief Minister or 
who belongs to the Civil Services, should 
be eligible for appointment as Lokpal. 
To the extent possible, the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court should be the 
Chairman of Lokpal. There should be 
two more members of Lokpal, who 
should have the requisite qualifications to 
be appointed as judges of the Supreme 
Court. 
There should be five members in the 
proposed Lokpal. 
In Section 2(a), the words "reputed for 
impartial, irrepresible working", be 
added after the word 'court'. 
The maximum age limit for the post of 
Chairman & the members should not be 
more than seventy years. 
Lokpal should consist of Chairman, Vice-
Chairman, and Members and 
qualification to include Cabinet 
Secretary/Secretary to the Government 
of India. 
In sub-clause (2)(b), one of the members 
of Lokpal should be from administrative 
side. 
F-58 716/F 

Sl. Source 
No. 
39. Shri A. T. Patil, Advocate, 
Supreme Court, Bombay. 
Memo. No. 95 
40. Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, 
Patna, 
Memo. No. 97 
41. Justice K.L. Sharma (Retd.) 
Lucknow, (U.P.) 
Memo. No. 100 
42. Shri Dushyant Prasad Arya 
Patna Bihar, 
Memo. No. 101 
29 
Suggestion 
Appointment of a retired judge or a 
retired public servant should be 
scrupulously avoided. 
(i) The functions and duties of the Lokpal 
require expertise in criminal law. Hence 
persons who have achieved distinction in 
this field may be appointed. 
(ii) In clause 3(2)(b), for the words "or 
qualified to be judge of the Supreme 
Court" the words "or are or were 
qualified to be a judge of the Supreme 
Court" may be put in. 
Persons to be eligible for appointment to 
Lokpal should be only judges of the 
Supreme Court and High Courts, having 
unassailable reputation of impeccable 
integrity, impartiality and ability. 
There should be five members in the 
Lokpal whose qualifications should be as 
under: 
~i) Chairman. Lokpal should be the semor 
most (retired) Judge of the Supreme 
Court. 
(ii) Lokpal member should be an ex-Indian 
representative on the bench of 
International Court of Justice, Hague. 
(iii) Lokpal member should be chosen from 
among senior advocates of the Supreme 
Court. 
(iv) Lokpal member should be chosen from 
among retired senior civil servants. 
(v) Lokpal member should be chosen from 
among members of Parliament (Lok 
Sabha), who are, or have been senior 
advocates in the Supreme Court. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
43. Shri R. Anbarasu, Ex M.P. 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 103 
44. Shri Balakrishnan, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 104 
45. Justice P.B. Sawant, Chairman, 
Press Council of India, 
Memo. No. 104. 
46. Shri Dharma Vira, 
Memo. No. 105 
47. Madras Bar Association, 
Memo. No. 108 
48. Centre for Policy Research 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 109 
49. Centre for Policy Research, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 110 
1. Shri K.C. BhDrdwaj 
Convener, Social Action 
Group (Reg d.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 1 
30 
Suggestion 
The Lokpal should be a five member 
body. In addition to the composition as 
mentioned in the bill, there should be 
"two prominent persons who are not in 
active politics, with clean track record of 
political service". 
Clause 3(2)(b) may be corrected to add 
two more judicial members. The two 
additional members should be in charge 
of two additional Committes of Civil 
Affairs & Defence matters. 
Clause 3(2)(a) should read as 'The 
Chairman who has been the Chief Justice 
or Judge of the Supreme Court'. 
It should not be made necessary that 
every member of the Lokpal should. be a 
Judge of Supreme Court, rather it should 
be left upto the President so as to find 
other people also e.g. from the 
administration wing and from amongst 
people of the society, to fit in the 
Lokpal. 
Number of members of the Lokpal 
should be increased from two to six. 
In clause 3(1)(b) the words 'or qualified 
to ·be' need to be deleted. 
The qualification of Lokpal and its 
members which st~tes 'qualifies to be' is 
to be deleted. 
Clause 4 
The Prime Minister, Home Minister or 
Minister for Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions should not be 
included in the Committee assigned to 
appoint Lokpal and his team. The Chief 
Justice of India or the Vice-President of 
India be the Chairman of Lokp<.tl. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
2. Shri Ashutosh Kr. Agarwal, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 4 
3. Dr. J.J. Bennet, President, 
Indian Citizens Forum 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 5 
4. Hon. Executive Secretary, 
National Consumer Protection 
Council, Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 6 
5. Shri S.D. Sharma, Chairman 
Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
31 
Suggestion 
Persons against whom allegations are 
made in the complaint should be 
disqualified from constituting the 
Committee for selecting the Chairman 
and members of Lokpal. 
(i) Members of Lokpal shall be appointed 
by the President in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. 
(ii) The Committee recommending the 
names for appointment of members of 
Lokpal should consists of Prime Minister, 
Speaker, Opposition leaders in the Lok 
Sabha and Rajya Sabha and Deputy 
Chairman (Rajya Sabha). 
(i) In 4(1)(a) instead of "the Prime 
Minister", it should be "The sitting Chief 
Justice of India". 
(ii) Section 4(1)(c) should be deleted. 
(iii) In Section 4(1), the existing proviso 
should be replaced by "Provided that the 
Chairman shall have a final casting 
voice". 
(iv) Sub-clause (2) should be replaced by­
"The appointment of a Chairman or a 
member shall be valid if the members 
present and consenting is not less than 4 
(four) i.e. the majority of the prescribed 
number of members constituting the 
Committee.'' 
The recommending Committee for the 
appointment ot the Chairman and other 
Members of Lokpal must include the 
Chief Justice of India. It is not necessary 
for both the Home Minister and the 
Personnel " Minister to be in the 
Committee. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
6. Dr. Ajaya Kr. Mishra, 
Chairman, Sankalp, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 10 
7. Shri Godfrey Gonsalves J .I. , 
Goa, 
Memo. No. 12 
8. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate·, 
Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
9. Shri S.S. Jagatap, Advocate, 
Sangli, 
Memo. No. 15 
10. Shri Yatish Jain, 
President, Prakriti Mitra 
Paryavaran Samiti, 
Jabalpur (M.P.) 
Memo. No. 16 
32 
Suggestion 
(i) The composition of the 
recommending appointment 
Lokpal should be-
Committee 
of the 
(a) The Vice-President of India-
Chairman. 
(b) The Chief Justice of 
India-Member. 
(c) The Speaker of the House of the 
People-Member. 
(ii) The provision under sub-clause (1) may 
also be related. 
The appointment of Lokpal and its 
members should be at par with C & AG 
of India and Election Commissioners. 
This will enable it to maintain its 
jndependence from the Legislature & 
Parliament and come under the purview 
of the Constitutional head. 
Under sub-clause (i), Chief Justice of 
India should be included in the 
Committee recommending names for 
members of Lokpal. 
There is no need for a Committee 
recommending names for appointment of 
mel'hbers of Lokpal. Appointment of 
members may be made in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India and no 
others. The provisiOn of getting 
recommendation of committee will raise 
a doubt in the minds of people of having 
political interferencf~. 
(i) The Chief Justice of India should be 
made the Chairman of the committee 
recommending names for members of 
Lokpal. 
(ii) The above committee should consists of 
representatives of all political parties and 
also members of non-political parties to 
make it more transparent. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
11. Shri Milap Chandra Choraria, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 18 
12. Shri V.K. Maheswari, H.J.S. 
Addl. Distt. & Session Judge 
DehradunJ 
Memo. No. 24 
13. Shri H.R.S. Goel, 
I.E.S. (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 25 
14. Shri Nath Sonkatri 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 32 
15. Shri Wadgane T.S. 
Librarian, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 33 
33 
Suggestion 
(i) Subclause 1(c) and 1(d) should be 
deleted. 
(ii) A new subclause as under may be 
inserted-
"(3) the committee shall made 
recommendations for appointments of 
the Chairman and members of the 
Lokpal from the panel of names 
forwarded by the Chief Justice of India 
in consultation with another judge of the 
Supreme Court, next senior Judge after 
the Chief Justice, provided that, each 
panel shall consist of three names. 
(i) The procedure for appointment of 
Chairman and the Members of the 
Lokpal should be left to the discretion of 
the President in consultation with Chief 
Justice of India. 
(ii) The powers of the Chairman and 
Members have not been defined which 
must be made clear. Any eventuality 
when there is no consensus along the 
Chairman and Members on the matter 
should also be made clear. 
(iii) The place of holding sitting of the 
Lokpal should also be made clear. 
The appointment of the Lokpal should 
be by the President in consultation with 
Chief Justice of India for its independent 
role. 
The appointment of the Members of 
Lokpal should be from amongst those 
Judges of High Court who are eligible to 
be promoted as Judges of Supeme Court 
and their status should be at par with the 
Judges of Supreme Court. 
The electoral college of Rashtrapal 
(Lokpal) should consist of members of 
Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, Legislative 
Assembly. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
16. Shri Kailash Nath Pandey, 
Pratapgarh, U.P. 
Memo. No. 36 
17. Shri Rajendra Chandrakant Rakshe, 
Satara (Maharashtra), 
Menio. No. 38 
18. Shri J.N. Kokate, 
Amarawati (Maharashtra)', 
Memo. No. 40 
19. Shri Pawan Kumar Jha, 
Ghaziabad (U.P.) 
Memo. No. 41 
34 
20. Shri Bipin Behari Ratho, Freedom 
Fighter, Sr. Advocate & President of 
High Court Bar Association, Orissa, 
Cuttack, ; 
Memo. No. 43 
21. Shri Arvind Chaturvedi, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 46 
. ,. 
Suggestion 
The appointment of Lokpal should be 
done by a Committee comprising Chief 
Justice, Vice-President, Prime Minister, 
Leaders of Opposition and veteran social 
worker. 
Lokpal should be elected directly by the 
people. 
Lokpal should be appointed by the 
Supreme Court and President. 
(i) Former PMs, Senior MPs having 
clean background may also be 
included in the Committee for 
appointing the Members of Lokpal. 
(ii) For the effective coordination among 
members of Lokpal there should be 
meeting among them once in a 
month. 
(i) In 4(1)--delete sub-clause (c) and 
(d), renumber the sub-clauses "(e), 
(f) & (g)" as "(c), (d) & (e)". 
(ii) Delete sub-clause (2) of the clause 
4. 
(1) Sub-section (1) -The appointment 
Committee should include:-
( a) Chief Justice of Supreme Court. 
(b) Chief Election Commissioner of 
India, 
(c) Comptroller & Auditor General 
of India. 
(2) If a member or Chairman of Lokpal 
resigns before the completion of his 
term or if he dies or if he is 
incapacitated, the vacancy thus 
caused shall be filled up by the same 
procedure as specified under clause 
3(1) for the remainder of term . 

Sl. Source 
No. 
22. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 47 
23. Shri Saroj Kumar Jena, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 48 
24. Shri D.K. Mohapatra, IPS, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 53 
25. Shri Subhajit Chakraborty, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 55 
26. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
Jaipur, 
Memo. No. 56 
27. Shri D.C. Hardanie, 
Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 59, 
28. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
29. Dr. U.K. Jha, Lecturer, 
U.P., 
Memo. No. 61 
35 
Suggestion 
Clause 4(1) be amended to delete 
references to the Home & personnel 
Ministers, as the Committee consisting of 
the Prime Minister, the Speaker Lok 
Sabha, the Deputy Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha & both the leaders of the 
Oppositioft. parties in the two houses, 
adequately represents the parliamentary 
will & popular choice. 
(a) Following sub section 4(1) (a) may be 
added:-
"The leaders of other political parties 
which have secured at least one-tenth of 
the total seats in the House of People". 
(b) Sub-section 4(1) (i) may be added:­
"The Chief Justice of India"- member. 
Appointment of Lokpal to be considered 
by a Committee consisting of (a) Prime 
Minister (b) Speaker of the House of the 
people (c) Leader of Opposition in the 
House of People and (d) Dy. Chairman 
of the Council of States. 
Appointment Committee to comprise of 
(a) Chief Justice of India, (b) Speaker of 
Lok Sabha (c) Chairman of Rajya Sabha 
(d) Leader of Opposition of Lok Sabha 
and Rajya Sabha. 
Appointment Committee to comprise of 
(a) Chief Justice and (b) Leader of 
Opposition in Lok Sabha. 
President to appoint Lokpal from a panel 
of Judges submitted by Chief Justice of 
India. 
Sub-section (c) & (d) should be omitted. 
Chief Justice should be a member of the 
Committee. 
Appointment Committee to consist of 
the Vice-President. Chairman, Speaker 
of Lok Sabha, Prime Minister, and 
Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha as 
Members. 

Sl. Source -
No. 
30. Shri Dharam Pal, 
New Delh~· 
Memo. No. 67 
31. _Shri Himadri Paul, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 68 
32. Dr. D.B. Sharma, 
U.P.; 
Memo. No. 70 
33. Shri Naveen Panwar, 
Muzzafar Nagar, U.P ... 
Memo. No. 71 
34. Shri Pradeep Singh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 72 
35. Shri Sohan Lal Aggarwal, 
Ambala Cantt, 
Memo. No. 74 
36. Shri R. B.. Sharma, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 75 
37. Shri Surendra Kr. Sinha, 
Ghaziabad, U.P.1 
Memo. No. 79 
36 
Suggestion 
(i) Chairman of the Selection 
Committee to be the Chief Justice of 
India. President of the Bar be made 
a member. 
(ii) Sub-clause (1) (a), (b) & (c) should 
be deleted. 
Prime Minister and Leader of Opposition 
be given veto power. 
Speaker of Lok Sabha to be Chairman of 
appointing Committee and Prime 
Minister to be member Secretary. 
Chief Justice of the High Court 
coa:erned, should be the appointing 
authority for Lokpal at the State/Union 
Territory level and at the 
Commissionerate level. Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court should be the 
appointing authority for Lokpal at the 
Union level. 
The Lokpal should be elected by 213rd 
majority of Members of Parliament, and 
should be removed by 2/3rd major:ty. 
The Chief Justice of India should be 
consulted in making the appointment of 
Lokpal. 
The Consultative Committee for 
appointing the Lokpal should have nine 
members:-
(i) three from judiciary, 
· (ii) three from legislature, 
(iii) two from executive; and 
(iv) one from press. 
Lokpal should be selected by a 
Committee comprising of; the Prime 
Minister, Leader of Opposition, Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court, Speaker, 
Lok Sabha, Chairman, Rajya Sabha. 
F-68 

Sl. Source 
No. 
38. Shri Pradeep Kr. , 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 83 
39. Shri Ashutosh Mishra, 
Moradabad, U. P., 
Memo. No. 84 
40. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal, 
Meerut City, U.P. 
Memo. No. 86 
41. Shri S. P. Mukherjee, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
37 
Suggestion 
The Committee for making 
recommendation for appointment of the 
Chairman & Members of the Lokpal 
should include the Prime Minister, 
Speaker Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairperson 
Rajya Sabha, Leader of Opposition, 
Home Minister and Minister for 
Personnel, Public Grievances & 
Pensions. 
The Committee to make 
recommendation for appointment of 
Chairman & Members of Lokpal should 
not include: 
(i) the Prime Minister, 
(ii) the Home Minister, 
(iii) the Minister for Personnel', Public 
Grievances, & Pensions, 
(iv) Leaders of Opposition in the Lok 
Sabha & the Rajya Sabha. 
The above mentioned Committee should 
consist of:-
(i) Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
(ii) Chairperson, Rajya Sabha, 
(iii) Chief Justice of India. 
(i) In clause 4(1), after the word 
"President", the words "working 
independently from Cabinet", be 
added. 
(ii) The committee to make 
recommendation for appointment of 
Chairman & Members of the Lokpal 
should consist only of:-
(i) Chairman, Rajya Sabha, 
(ii) Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
(iii) Deputy Chairperson, Rajya 
Sabha. 
The selection committee to have only 
P.M., Speaker, Chairman of Rajya 
Sabha, leaders of Opposition in both 
Houses and the Chief Justice or his 
nominee. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
38 
42. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex. S.G. (Lok Sabha), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
43. Shri A. T. Patil, 
Advocate Supreme Court, 
Ex-MP (Lok Sabha), 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 95 
44. "Students-Teachers Front Against 
Corruption" JNU, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 96 
Suggestion 
In sub-clause (1), 'the composition of the 
committee may be as follows:-
Vice-President; Chief Justice of India, 
Leader of opposition in Lok Sabha and 
Rajya Sabha, two members of Lok 
Sabha; one member of Rajya Sabha. 
The Committee shall consider the panel 
of names as may be submitted to them 
by the Prime Minister, Bar Council of 
India, and any political party recognised 
as a national party, Each panel may 
contain a maximum of three names for 
the Chairman and six names for 
members. 
The Selection Committee should consist 
of: 
(i) The Vice president 
(ii) The Speaker 
(iii) The Prime Minister 
(iv) The leaders of Opposition in Lok 
Sabha & Rajya Sabha. 
The Lokpal should either be: 
(a) elected by a electoral college 
comprising of graduates. or 
(i) The Prime Minister should choose 
one member. 
(ii) Leader of Opposition should 
choose one member. 
(iii) the third member be chosen from 
among former & present judges of 
Supreme Court or High Court. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
39 
45. Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, Former 
Judge Patna High Court & Former 
Chairman, National Commission for 
Backward Classes 
Patna, 
Memo. No. 97 
46. Shri Surendra Nath, lAS 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 98 
47. Shri A. Sowrirajan. 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99 
48. Justice K. L. Sharma (Re~d.), 
Lucknow, U.P., 
Memo. No. 100 
Suggestion 
(i) In clause 4(1) the following 
provision should be added at the 
end: 
"Provided further that if there is 
lack of unanimity among the 
members of the committee, the 
views of each member shall be 
forwarded to the President." 
(ii) In clause 4(2) the following proviso 
should be added at the end: 
"No act or proceeding of the Lokpal 
shall be invalid on the ground merely 
of the existence of any vacancy or 
defect in the constitution of Lokpal. 
In sub-clause (1), the Lokpal should be 
appointed by the President in 
consultation with the Supreme Court. 
In sub-clause (1) f1( committee to 
contain-President of India, Vice­
President, P.M., Chief Justice, Speaker, 
Leader of Opposition and Chairman of 
Central Vigilance Commission. 
Selection Committee for appointment of 
Lokpal should consist of the following 
dignitaries only: 
(i) Vice President of India-Chairman 
(ii) Speaker of Lok Sabha-Member 
(iii) Leader of Opposition in Rajya 
Sabha - Member 
(iv) Leader of Opposition in Lok 
Sabha- Member. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
49. Shri Dushyant Pd. Arya, 
Patna (Bihar); 
Memo. No. 101 
50. Shri R. Anbarasu, Ex. M.P., 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 103 
51. Justice P. B. Sawant, Chairman 
Press Council of India 
Memo. No. 104 
52. Shri Dharma Vira, 
Memo. No. 105 
53. Madras Bar Association 
Memo No. 108 
54. Centre for Policy Research 
Memo. No. 109 
1. Shri K.C. Bhardwaj, 
Convenor, 
Social Action Group (Regd.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 1 
40 
Suggestion 
The Committee for making 
recommendations for appointment of 
Chairman & members of Lokpal should 
consist of: 
(i) The President of India 
(ii) the Prime Minister 
(iii) the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court of India 
(iv) Speaker, Lok Sabha 
(v) Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha 
Parliamentary party leaders of the major 
political parties in Parliament should be 
members of Committee. 
The second proviso to clause 4(1) should 
be deleted. 
Minister in charge of the Ministry of· 
Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions should not be included as being 
superfluous. 
The Chief Justice of India and two senior 
most judges should also be included in 
the Committee to recommend the names 
to the President of India. 
·The Committee to advice the President 
on selection of Chairman and Members 
of the Lokpal should have three 
members viz. the Prime Minister, the 
Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the 
Leader of the Opposition in the Lok 
Sabha, this Committee should be 
required to give a 'unanimous' and not a 
'majority decision'. 
Clause 5 
Ex-MP also .should not be appointed 
member of Lokpal. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
2. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
3. Shri T. U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, 
Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
4. Shri S. S. Jagatap, 
Advocate, 
Sangli, 
Memo. No. 15 
5. Shri Harish Kumar Sharma, 
Advocate, 
Secretary, Indian Citizen's 
Welfare and Crime Preventing 
Association, 
Aligarh, 
Memo No. 17 
6. Shri Milap Chandra Choraria, 
New Delhi-2, 
Memo No. 18 
7. Shri J.R. Mahapatra, 
Manager (F&A) LIC of India 
Shahdol (M.P.), 
Memo No. 20 
8. Shri V.K. Maheshwari, H.J.S. 
Addl. Distt. & Session Judges 
Dehradun, 
Memo No. 24 
41 
Suggestion 
The words "Connected with any political 
party" are very wide and vague. They 
may be precisely defined or concept of 
membership of a political party be 
introduced. In sub-clause 5 (b), after the 
words "of trust" and the word "profit" 
the words "in Government of India or 
any State Government or Local Body" 
should be added. 
(i) The words "connected with any 
political party" are very wide and 
vague. They may be precisely defined 
or concept of membership of political 
party be introduced. 
(ii) In 5(b), after the words "of trust" 
and the word "profit", the words "in 
Government of India or any State or 
local body" be added. 
Provision of subclause 3(2) and clause 5 
are contrary. A profession except legal 
profession must be barred to. enter into 
the office of the Lokpal, as Lokpal is one 
of the highest Institution, the members 
of which must be well acquainted with 
provisions of law. 
Person connected with a political party 
should not be member of Lokpal. 
Clause 5(a) should be deleted. 
Lokpal should never have been member 
of any political party during his life time. 
The inability or absence of Chairman or 
Members in functioning or to carry out 
duties should also be clarified. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
9. Shri R. Y. Kansedikar, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo No. 34 
10. Shri Suresh Chandra Agarwal, 
Rajasthan, 
Memo No. 35 
11. Shri C.J .M. Mathew, 
Haryana, 
Memo No. 51 
12. Shri Himadri Paul, 
West Bengal, 
Memo No. 68 
13. Dr. D.B. Sharma, 
U.P. 
Memo. No. 70 
14. Shri Ashutosh Mishra, 
Muradabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 84 
15. Shri Satyapal, 
Bijnaur, U.P., 
Memo No. 85 
16. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal, 
Meerut City, U.P., 
Memo No. 86 
17. Centre for Policy Research, 
Memo No. 110 
42 
Suggestion 
The Members of the Lokpal should be a 
good administrator rather than a retired 
judge. 
Members of the Lokpal should be retired 
judges. 
Members of Lokpal should not have had 
any political affiliation. 
Members of Lokpal should not have 
involved in political activity in past five 
years. 
Members should have no- political 
connections. 
Members of Parliament, Members of 
Legislative Assemblies, and persons 
affiliated with political parties should be 
debarred from being appointed as 
Chairman & Members of the ~okp:~l. 
The Chairman & Members of the Lokpal 
should be required to give information 
about their family members and 
relatives, who are affiliated with any 
political party or are higher level 
functionaries in the Civil Service. 
Substitute, "within three years of his 
c.tppointment" for "before he enters upon 
his office". 
This clause provides that politicians can 
also become members of Lokpal. This 
would defeat the very purpose of such an 
institution like Lokpal. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Shri S.S. Jagatap, 
Advocate, Islampur, 
Sangli, 
Memo No. 15 
2. Shri Milap Chandra Choraria, 
New Delhi-2, · 
Memo No. 18 
3. Shri J.R. Mahapatra, 
Manager (F&A) LIC of India 
Shahdol (MP), 
Memo No. 20 
4. Shri Neeraj Srivastava, 
Kanpur, U.P., 
Memo No. 22 
5. Shri Bipin Behari Ratho, 
Sr. Advocate, 
President of High Court Bar 
Association, Orissa, 
Cuttack, 
Memo No. 43 
6. Shri Saroj Kumar Jena, 
Kandhmal, 
Orissa, 
Memo No. 48 
F-7A 718/RS ---._ 
43 
Suggestion 
Clause 6 
Sub-clause (3) (i)-As The Supreme 
Court of India is the apex judicial 
institution, there must be variance in 
between the salary of Chairman of the 
Lokpal. If existing Chief Justice agrees to 
be a Lokpal, then be must get the equal 
salary as that of the Chief Justice of 
India, but in other cases the salary must 
be less than that of the Chief Justice of 
India. 
(i) In Sub-clause (1), after the words "office 
for a term of' and before the words "five 
years" word "maximum" should be 
inserted. 
(ii) In Sub-clause (3), a new point should be 
inserted as follows:- "on the date of 
retirement the age of Chairman and any 
member shall not exceed 65· (sixty five) 
years." 
Office of the Lokpal should not be more 
than three years and extension or second 
term should not be granted. 
The term or appointment of Lokpal 
should be for a period of three years. 
In Clause 6(1)--delete the word "five" 
and substitute it by "three". 
Clause 6(1) requires to be amended in 
the following way:-
"Every member shall hold his office for a 
term of five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office which 
may be extended for another term only 
with the recommendations of the Lokpal 
sub-committee". 

Sl. Source 
No. 
7. Dr. Hari Sharan Saxena, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo No. 54 
8. Shri Subhajit Chakraborty, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 55 
9. Shri Paritosh Malviya, 
Varanasi, U.P., 
Memo. No. 73 
10. Shri Sohan Lal Aggarwal 
Ambala Cantt., 
Memo. No. 74 
11. Shri Surendra Kr. Sinha, 
Ghaziabad, U.P., 
Memo No. 79 
12. Shri Surender Kr. Purohit, 
Mandi. H.P., 
Memo No. 82 
13. Shri Pradeep Kumar, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 83 
14. Shri .Anand Prakash Singhal, 
Meerut city, U.P., 
Memo No. 86 
15. Justice R.K.M. Singh (Retd.) 
Imphal, 
Memo No. 91 
44 
Suggestion 
In Sub-clause (1) add "or upto the time 
when new incumbent joins the office". 
(i) Under Sub-clause (1) the Chairman 
should have a tenure of 5 years 
extendable by 6 months; members to 
have a tenure of 3 .years extendable by 6 
months. 
(ii) Under Sub-clause (3)(1) the 
remuneration of Chairman should be as 
that of a Judge of Supreme Court. 
(iii) Under Sub-clause (3)(2) the 
remuneration of Member should be as 
that of a Judge of a High Court. 
The tenure of Lokpal should not be 
more than four years. 
The tenure of Lokpal should be three 
years and not five years. 
The tenure of Lokpal should be for five 
years or till he attains 68 years of age, 
whichever is earlier. 
Tenure of the Chairman & Members of 
the Lokpal should be six years. 
The Lokpal should have a tenure of five 
years. 
The words "Unless removed earlier for 
misconduct and partisanship" be added 
after the words "upon his office". 
New Clause 6A be added as follows: 
6A(l)-ln the event of the occurance of 
any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairman by reasons of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, the President 
may, by notification, authorise one of the 
Members to act as the Chairman until 
F-76 718/RS 

Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Dr. 1.1. Bennett 
President, 
Indian Citizens Forum, 
Madras, 
Memo No. 5 
2. Shri H.R.S. Goel, I.E.S. (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 25 
3. Shri Rajendra Chandrakant Rakshe 
Satna, (Maharashtra), 
Memo. No. 38 
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Jha 
Ghaziabad, (U.P.), 
Memo. No. 41 
45 
Clause 7 
Suggestion 
the appointment of a new Chairman to 
fill such vacancy . 
.. 
6A(2)-when the Chairman is unable to 
discharge his functions to absence on 
leav~ or otherwise, such one· of the 
Members as the President may, by 
notification, authorise in this behalf, shall 
discharge the functions of the Chairman 
until the date on which the Chairman 
resumes his duties. 
6A (3)-No act or proceeding of the 
Lokpal shall be invalid by reason merely 
of any vacancy, or absence of any 
member. 
"The quorum necessary for the 
transaction of business, or for the joint 
sitting for the purposes of inquiry or 
investigation, shall be two (the Chairman 
and a Member)". 
A proviso may be added as follows 
"Provided that all the members of the 
Lokpal will be removed from their office 
if they fail to perform their functicns as 
laid down in the Lokpal Act." 
Removal of Chairman and Members 
should be mentioned in the clause 
instead of member only. 
Removal of Lokpal should be done with 
the 60% votes of the people in the 
States.· 
Chief Justice of Supreme Court should 
have powers to review the working of 
Lokpal from time to time and can 
remove the Lokpal, if required, in 
consultation with the President. 

Sl. Source 
'No. 
5. Shri Bfpin Behari Ratho 
Orissa, Cuttack, 
Memo. No. 43 
-. 
6. Dr. V. Vijay K'llmar, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 47 
7. Shri D.K. Mohapatra, IPS, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 53 
8. Shri Subhajit Chakraborty, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 55 
• 
9. Shri G. Venkatadri Rao, Advocate 
Hyderabad, 
Memo. No. 58 
10. Shri Naveen Panwer, 
Muzaffarnagar, U .P., 
Memo. No. 11 
11. Shri R.B. Sharma, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 75 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 83 .• 
13. Shri Hrud~nanda Panda, 
Puri, Orissa, 
Memo. No. 89 
14. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex.S.G. (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
46 
Suggestion 
From the 3rd and 4th lines of clause 
7--delete the words-"<>r, as the case 
may be, by such other Judge of the 
Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of 
India may nominate in this behalf' and 
substitute the same by the words "a 
Comminee consisting of the Chief Justice 
of India and two seniormost judges of 
the Supreme Court". 
The members <>f the Lokpal, including 
the Chairperson, shall not be removed 
except in like manner and on like 
grounds as a JuQge ofthe Supreme Court 
under Article 1:24(5)' of the Constitution 
of India. 
Impeachment of the Lokpal should be as 
provided for a Judge of the Supreme 
Court. 
Removal of the Lokpal should be in the 
manner of Supreme Court Judges. 
Competent authority to appoint an 
enquiry officer who is Superior in rank to 
the charged officer. 
Lokpal(s) can be removed, if they are 
found guilty by the concerned High 
Court and/or the Supreme Court. 
Provisions should be made for 
impeachment of the Lok.pal. 
The Lokpal could be removed only by 
the President of India, when a report is 
submitted to him by the Chief Justice of 
India after conducting an inquiry. 
After the words "by such other judge" 
add "or judges". 
Removal of Chairman and Members of 
Lokpal to be in the same manner as 
provided for a judge of the Supreme 
Court. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
15. Justice K.L. Sharma (Retd.) 
Lucknow, U.P. 
Memo. No. 100 
16. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
17. Centre for Policy Research 
Memo. No. 109 
1. Dr. 1.1. Bennett 
President 
Indian Citizens Forum 
Madras. 
Memo. No. 5 
2. Dr. Bijoy Chand, 
West Bengal, · 
Memo. No. 29 
47 
Clause 8 
Suggestion 
Removal of Lokpal should be in the 
same manner as provided in the case of 
Supreme Court Judges. 
The procedure prescribed under clauses 4 
and 5 of Article 124 of Constitution may 
be incorporated. 
As the Chairman and the Members of 
Lokpal are to be of the rank of a Judge 
of the Supreme Court, the procedure for 
their removal should be as prescribed for 
the Chief Election Commissioner/ 
Comptroller and Auditor General. 
(i) In Sub-clause (1) instead of " ..... 
employees as the President may 
determine ...... " there should be 
" ..... employees as the Chairman 
of the Lokpal may determine, 
from time to time, in consultation 
with the C&AG of India". 
(ii) In sub-cluse ~elete "without 
prejudice to the provisions of 
subsection (1)". 
(iii) In line 5-{j of sub-clause (3 J for 
" as the President may 
determine ..... ", replace "...... as 
the Chairman or the Lokpal may 
determine, from time to time in 
consultation with the C&AG of 
India provided that the budget for 
the functioning of the Lokpal is 
not exceeded". 
(iv) In sub-clause (4), add "the 
expenses incurred by the Lokpal 
is subject to audit by C&AG". 
It should have its own 
investigating agency. 
,, 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 30 
4. Shri Nath Sonkatri, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 32 
5. Shri Kailash Nath Pandey 
Pratapgarh (U.P.) 
Memo. No. 36 
6. Shri Rajendra Chandrakant Rakshe 
Satna, Maharashtra) 
Memo. No. 38 
7. Shri J.N. KakoL: 
Amarawati, (Maharashtra) 
Memo. No. 40 
8. Ms. Chandrawati 
Bhiwani j (Haryana) 
Memo. No. 42 
48 
Suggestion 
(i) It should have an independent 
investigating agency, however it 
may be empowered to take 
assistance of other investigative 
and police organisations. 
(ii) The Secretary of the Lokpal shall 
be an officer equivalent to the 
rank of the I.G.P. from the CBI, 
assisted by two Dy. Secretaries of 
the rank of S.Ps, from the CBI. 
The subordinate staff shall be 
D.S.Ps, Inspectors, Sis, and 
constabulary. Some of the 
Technical ·experts in the field of 
Agriculture, Engineering, 
Doctors, Auditors and other 
experts to obtain the proper 
opinion. 
(iii) There should also be a provision 
for "upa-Lokpal" in every state 
under the Administrative control 
of Lokpal. 
(i) There should be Lokpal at the 
central level only. 
(ii) It should have its own 
independent investigating agency. 
It should have its own 
independent investigating agency. 
Lokpal should have powers to 
supervise the functioning of CBI 
and lB. 
Lokpal must have powers to set. 
up an enquiry commission or 
order for enquiry through CBI 
and lB. 
Staff of Lokpal should be efficient 
so as to complete any work within 
three months. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
9. Shri Karan Singh 
Shadipur, New Delhi. 
Memo. No. 45 
10. Dr. V. Vijay Kumar, 
Bangalore. 
Memo. No. 47 
11. Shri V. Ramesh Babu, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 50 
12. Shri D.K. Mohapatra, IPS 
I. G. of Police & C. V.O. 
New Delhi, 
' Memo. No. 53 
13 .. Dr. N .K. Jayakumar. 
Thiruvananthapuntm, 
Memo. No. (,() 
49 
Suggestion 
Any administrative or executive 
officer should not be included in 
the staff of Lokpal. 
Following proviso may be added 
in clause 8(2)(i):-
"which shall within a period of 
three months from the date of 
such requisition, place such 
officer, employee or investigating 
agency at the full and complete 
disposal of the Lokpal". 
Clause 8(1) may be rewritten as 
follows:-
"Secretary"-to be appointed 
from lAS Cadre; 
"Officers" - to be appointed 
from and amongst staff of 
Supreme Court of India/High 
Courts as far as judicial nature 
post like Court Master/Private 
Secretary/Stenographer etc.; 
"Officers & Other Employees"­
Section Officers and Assistants of 
CSS Cadre, UDC, LDC also 
from CSCS Cadre and their 
services should be obtained 
through DOPT. 
FBO Accounts Officer/ Accounts 
Clerk be drawn from the 
Departmental Pay and Accounts 
Offices on deputation basis. 
Group "D" through Employment 
Exchange. 
Insert 'Director General 
lnve-;tigation' alongwith 
investigative staff under 
clause (1). 
of 
the 
Sub-
In Sub-clause (2) (i) the 
requirement of concurrence of 
Government before securing the 
services of Government employee 
should be removed. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
14. Shri Dharam Pal 
New Delhi{ 
Memo. No. 67 
15. Shri Sunil Mukherjee, 
West Bengal. 
Memo. No. 69 
16. Dr. D.B. Sharma, 
U.P.j 
Memo. No. 70 
17. Shri Soh an Lal Aggarwal, 
Ambala Cantt. 
Memo, No. 74 
18. Shri B.V. Setty, 
BangaloreJ 
Memo. No. 77 
19. Shri Prakash Bapat, 
Gonda~ . 
Memo. No. 78 
20. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal, 
Meerut City, U.P., 
Memo. No. 86 
50 
Suggestion 
Lokpal be authorised to create 
the required posts under Sub­
clause (1). 
(i) Concurrence of Central or State 
Government should not be 
required for utilising services of 
their investigating agency. 
(ii) There should be . Lokpal 
Secretariat with high ranking 
police officials under Sub-clause 
(1). 
Officers and staff Employees of 
Central or State Government 
working for Lokpal must get 
protection from executive 
harassment on being posted back 
to their parent cadre. 
Lokpal should have the powers to 
constitute as special investigation 
agency. 
· Investigating agency should be a 
separate body, having enough 
authority or a CBI wing, which 
should not be under control of 
the Prime Minister or any other 
Minister. 
The Lokpal bench must have a 
separate investigative agency to 
investigate all the matters of 
which the Lokpal has taken 
cognizance of. The Supreme 
Court should have complete 
control over this investigative 
agency in personnel & 
administrative matter. 
(i) In clause 8(1) the Lokpal be 
authorized to form investigative 
agency also. 
(ii) In clause 8(2) the word "secure" 
and paras (i) & (ii) be deleted & 
the words "appoint from amongst 
senior investigative police. 

Sl. Source 
No .. 
21. Shri K.K. Pande, 
Bilaspur, M.P., 
Memo. No. 87 
22. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
23. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex. SO. (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
24. Dr. S.J. Kamble, 
Nagpur, 
Memo. No. 94 
25. Shri A. Sowrirajan, 
Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99. 
26. Justice K.L. Sharma, 
=-sA 718/RS 
12 Awas Vikas Colony, 
Mall Avenue 
Lucknow, 
Memo. No. 100 
51 
Suggestion 
In paras (i) & (ii) of the sub­
clause (2) the words "the Central 
Government or a State 
Government with the concurrence 
of that Government or (ii) the 
services of any other person or 
agency" be substituted after 
"investigating agency of ", by 
"the Lokpal shall be independent 
of the Executive control & 
pressure, and technologically well 
equipped". 
Staff of Lokpal should be selected 
and appointed by the Lokpal. 
Power to appoint Secretary and 
other staff of the Lokpal should 
vest exclusively with the Lokpal. 
In sub-clause (2)(1), 50% of 
investigating officers should 
belong to the category of SC/ST. 
(i) Lokpal should be entrusted with 
powers to recruit its own staff. 
(ii) Lokpal should be provided with 
own investigation agency and 
should have direct access to 
INTERPOL, etc. 
(i) Investigative agency of Lokpal 
should be independent of 
government and be under the 
exclusive control and 
superintendence of the Lokpal 
only. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
27. R. Anbarasu, Ex. M.P., 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 103 
28. Justice P. B. Sawant, Chairman 
Press Council of India, 
Memo. No. 104 
29. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, lAS (Retd.) 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 107 
30. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
52 
Suggestion 
(ii) Make a statutory provision that 
all the administrative work 
relating to the establishment, 
Budgets, creation of post, staff, 
furniture, equipment, vehicles, 
building, financial & 
administrative powers of Lokpal, 
follow-up action on the reports & 
decisions of Lokpal should be 
entrusted to Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat under the control and 
superintendence of the Vice­
President of India, instead of any 
Ministry of the Union 
Government. 
Delete the word "concurrence" 
from clause 8(2)(i). 
Officers having a brilliant 
record", be substituted in its 
place. 
(i) Clause 8(1)-the power to 
appoint a Secretary and other 
officers and other employees 
should vest with the Lokpal. 
(ii) Correspondingly, clause 8(3) 
should omit reference to the 
President. 
It would be desirable for the 
Lokpal to have its own 
investigating agency. 
The Lokpal shall have power to 
appoint its own police vested with 
power of investigation under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure for 
the purpose of investigation as 
ordered by it and the police 
personnel so appointed shall 
submit their report to the Lokpal 
only and nobody else. 
F-88 718/RS 

SI. Source 
No. 
1. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, 
Lok Sevak Sangh, New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
2. Dr. Ajaya Kr. Mishra, 
Chairman, Sankalp, 
Delhi, 
Memo. No. 10 
3. Shri Moses P. Manohar, 
Secretary, 
The National Council of 
Churches in India. 
New Delhi-48. 
Memo. No. 13 
4. Shri Harish Kumar Sharma, 
Advocate, 
India Citizen's Welfare & 
Crime Preventive Association 
Aligarh, U.P. 
Memo. No. 17 
53 
Suggestion 
Clause 9 
The Sections should be amended to 
empower the Lokpal to make enquiry 
into any matter, even though not subject 
matter of a complaint, if the Lokpal is 
satisfied from the knowledge or from 
information otherwise received by it that 
such an enquiry is necessary. 
The existing sub-clause (3) may be read 
as sub-clause ( 4) and an New additional 
sub-clause (3) as under may be added­
"The Lokpal may inquire any matter 
involved as arising from, or connected 
with allegations of corruption against 
public functionnaires on its own initiative 
and may inquire into any act or conduct 
of any person other than a public 
functionary in so far as it considers it 
necessary so to do for the purpose of its 
inquiry, provided that the Lokpal shall 
give such person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and to 
produce evidence in his defence". 
Relevant features or provisions of the 
Swedish ombudsman for Civil Affairs 
could be suitably adopted for the 
purpose. 
In sub-clause 9(2) the words" other than 
a public functionary" be deleted, the 
office of Prime Minister and Ministers be 
brought under its purview. 
Words "other than a public functionary" 
should be deleted from sub-clause (2). 

Sl. Source 
No. 
5. Shri V.K. Maheshwari, 
Addl. Distt. & Session Judge, 
Dehradun, 
Memo. No. 24 
6. Shri H.R.S. Goel, I.E.S, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 25 
. 7. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 30 
8. Shri R.Y. Kansedikar, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 34 
I 
9. Shri Suresh Chandra Agrawal,· 
Rajasthan, 
Memo .. No. 35 
10, Shri Kailash Nath Pandey, 
Pratapgarh (U.P.), 
Memo. No. 36 
,, 
11. Shri Lakshmi Char.d Tiwari, 
Sawaimadhopur (Rajasthan), 
Memo. No. 37 
54 
Suggestion 
In clause 9 (2) public functionary should 
not be excluded because clause 9 (2) is, 
in. the existing Bill, contradictary to 
sections (c) & (g) of clause 2. 
In clause 9 (2) public Functionary should 
not be exchkled because clause 9 (2) is, 
in the existing Bill, contradictary to 
sections (c) & (g) of clause 2. 
(i) It should have the authority to 
take cognizances of corruption 
cases on Suo Motto basis as well. 
(ii) The Bill should contain provision 
to check corrupt practices among 
public sector undertakings, banks 
factories, co-operative societies, 
public servants and public offices 
under Section 2 (17) of the code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
(i) 
(ii) 
All the 
besides 
should 
government servants 
public functionaries 
be brought under its 
j~risdiction. 
All government servants and 
public functionaries should be 
brought under its jurisdiction. 
All· types of corruption should be 
brought under Lokpal. 
PM, Vice President, Minister, 
Memberli of parliament, MLAs, 
Governors, Judges (excepting 
Judges of Supreme Court) should 
be brought under the jurisdiction 
of Lokpal. 
Public sector undertakings, 
Corporations, Boards, Share 
Companies, Banks should be 
brought under its jurisdiction. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
12. Shri Rajendra Chandrakant Rakshe, 
Satara, Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 38 
13. Shri M.B. Gorade, 
Kolhapur (Maharashtra), 
Memo. No. 39 
14. Shri J.N. Kokate, 
Amarawati, Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 40 
15. Ms. Chandrawati, 
Bhiwani (Haryana), 
Memo. No. 42 
16. Shri B.B. Ratho, Sr. Advocate, 
President, High Court Bar 
Association, Orissa, 
Memo. No. 43 
17. Shri Ganga Charan Rajpute, 
MP (Lok Sabha) 
South Avenue, New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 44 
55 
Suggestion 
Government servants should be 
brought under its jurisdiction. 
Lokpal should be empowered to 
conduct an enquiry into 
functioning of Prime Minister, 
Cabinets and other Ministers and 
M.Ps. 
Any person failing to get justice 
from the Government can go to 
Lokpal, before going to Court. 
(i) PM, Union Ministers, MPs, 
MLAs, Presiding Officers of Lok 
Sabha, Rajya Sabha and State 
Legislative Assemblies, President, 
Judges and Cbief Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts, 
Civil and Police Officials of 
CentraVStates Governments, 
Chairman and Members of UPSC 
and Provincial sel"vi.ces 
Commission Officers of 
Government/Semi Government 
Corporations, Companies should 
be brought under its jurisdiction. 
(ii) recovery of money acquired by 
the misuse of powers, whether 
deposited in foreign Banks or 
otherwise, should be brought 
under its jurisdiction. 
In Clause 9(2) add the following: 
"The person so prosecuted may 
be defended by an advocate of his 
choice. 
(i) Judges of Supreme Court, High 
Courts and all the Officers of 
Judiciary should be brought under 
its jurisdiction. 
(ii) Officers of IASj IPS, IFS and 
Military should also be brought 
under its jurisdiction. 

Sl. Source .. 
No. 
18. Shri Karan Singh Shadipuria, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 45 
19. Shri Arvind Chaturvedi, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 46 
20. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 47 
21. Dr. Hari Sharan Saxena, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 54 
22. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
Jaipur, 
Memo. No. 56 
23. Shri Naveen Panwar, 
Mu~ffer Nagar, U.P., 
Memo. No. 71 
56 
Suggestion 
All the Officers/public functionaries who 
are capable of influencing the enquiry, 
should bebtought under the Lokpal. 
If Lokayukta of any State is enquiring 
into any complaint against the Chief 
Minister, Minister or an MLA in the 
State, and if the person being enquired 
against, becomes an Member of 
Parliament or Minister in the Union or 
Prime Minister, the cases will be 
transfered to Lokpal. 
Clause 9(3) be restructured as follows:­
"No matter in respect of which a 
complaint may be made under this Act, 
shall be referred for inquiry under the 
Commissions of Inquiry Act., 1952". 
(Consequently Clause 10(2) & clause 35 
will also stand deleted & no amendment 
is therefore necessary to the 
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.) 
Substitute the word "including" in place 
of "other than" in Sub-clause (2). 
Public servant as public functionary need 
to be covered under the jurisdiction of 
Lokpal Bill in Sub-clause (2). 
The jurisdiction of the Lokpal should 
also etend to the judges of the Supreme 
Court & Hight Court including the chief 
Justice(s). 

SI. Source 
No. 
24. Shri Pradeep Singh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 72 
25. Shri Paritosh Malviya, 
Varanasi, U.P., 
Memo. No. 73 
26. Shri R.B. Sharma, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 75 
27. Shri Prakash Bapat, 
Gonda, 
Memo. No. 78 
28. Shri Surendra Kr. Sinha, 
Ghaziabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 79 
57 
Suggestion 
(i) The office of the Lokpal should 
perform the work of coordinating the 
efforts of investigating agencies like 
CBI, CID, & financial scam 
investigating agency. (if ever 
constituted) etc. along with doing 
independent investigation. 
(ii) The office of the Lokpal should start 
the process of investigation on the 
following conditions:-
(a) on the orders of government, 
(b) on the order of court, 
(c) on the appeal from public, 
(d) on its own provided it feels the 
necessity to do so. 
All policy decisions and economic 
decisions of the government should be 
countersigned by the Lokpal. 
(i) Jurisdiction of Lokpal should extend to 
not only complaints about corruption, 
but also those related to nepotism, abuse 
& misus~ of !'owers, gross misconduct, 
maladministration to cause harassment to 
citizens & any other matter which 
gravely affects the interest of common 
masses. 
(ii) The Lokpal must be provided with some 
executive powers like ordering the 
vacation of office & launching of 
prosecution against those found guilty. 
Its jurisdiction should met, however, be 
exclusive of judicial process, i.e. primary 
of judiciary should be maintained. 
The Comptroller & Auditor General 
should be made to send a copy of all the 
Audit reports to the Lokpal. He should 
also be made to give his report about any 
financial irregularities & malpractices to 
the Lokpal in normal course. 
The jurisdiction of Lokpal should include 
the Prime Minister, the Chief Minister(s) 
& their respective Council of Ministers, 
Governments & the personnel of all 
India Services. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
29. Shri .Surender Kr. Purohit, 
Mandi, H.P., 
Memo. No. 82 
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, 
Memo. No. 83 
31. Shri S.P. Mukerji, IAS(Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
32. Justice K.L. Sharma, (Retd.) 
Lucknow, U.P., 
Memo. No.lOO 
58 
Suggestion 
The Supreme Court, High Court and all 
the lower Courts should be brought 
under the jurisdiction of Lokpal. The 
Judicial Protection Act, 1935 should be 
repealed. 
The jurisdiction of Lokpal should not 
extend to:-
(i) President of India, 
(ii) Vice President, 
(iii) Chief Justice or other judges of 
Supreme Court, 
(iv) Comptroller & Auditor General of 
India, 
(v) Chief Election Commissioner, 
(vi) Chairman & Members of the 
Union Public Service 
Commission. 
The jurisdiction of Lokpal should cover 
complaints and requests for redressal of 
citizen's grievances. 
Lokpal should have all powers to take 
action suo-mota or on any information or 
complaint received by him against the 
Prime Minister, any other Minister, 
Member of Parliament, any public 
servant having the status of the above 
class I service of the Union Government 
or Office bearer of any Central 
Government organisation or of 
recognised political party. 

Sl. Source 
No. ·" ~t.-
33. Shri Dushyant Pd. Arya, 
Patna, Bihar, 
Memo. No. 101 
34. Centre for Policy Research 
Memo. No. 109 
35. Bar Association of In~ia 
Memo No. 110 
1. Shri K.C. Bhardwaj, Convenor, 
Social Action Group (Regd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo No. 1 
2. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd.) 
Gujarat, 
Memo No. 2 
3. Shri Santi Ranjan Mukherjee, 
Advocate, 
Burdwan, 
Memo. No. 3 
9A 718/RS 
59 
Suggestion 
The jurisdiction of Lokpal should extend 
to: 
(i) President of India, 
(ii) Vice-President, 
(iii) the Prime Minister, 
(iv) the Council of Ministers, 
· (v) Diplomats, 
(vi) Members of Parliament 
(vii) Governers & Chief Ministers of 
various States & their respective 
Council of Ministers. 
(viii) Chairman of PSUs 
(ix) Chief Justice & other judges of 
Supreme Court & the High 
Court. 
(x) Chief Election Commissioner & 
other Election Commissioners 
(xi) Chairman & Members of Union 
Public Service Commission. 
Lokpal should have the powers to 'suo­
motu' initiate an investigation. 
Sub-clause (2) should be read as 'Lokpal 
may inquire into any act or conduct of 
any person other than a public 
functionary in so far as it considers 
necessary'. 
Clause 10 
There should not be a restriction of time­
limit of 5 years for probing matters by 
the Lokpal. 
The members of Lokpal being persons of 
high integrity, if any member has any 
bias in respect of any matter or any 
person, he should himself inform the 
Chairman in this regard and obtain his 
approval to keep away from the 
particular enquiry and the other two 
members may proceed with the matter. 
The limitation period of five years from 
the date of commission of offence should 
be extended to at least ten years. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
4. Shri Ashutosh Kumar Agarwal, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 4 
S. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, 
Lok Sevak·Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
6. Dr. Ajaya Kumar Mishra, 
Chairman, Sankalp, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 10 
7. ·shri Moses P. Manohar, 
60 
Secretary, The National Council of 
Churches in India, New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 13 
8. Sbri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad. 
Memo. No. 14. 
9. Shri H.R.S. Goel, I.E.S. (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo No. 25 
10. Shri B.B. Ratho, Sr. Advocate 
President, High Court Bar Association, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 43 
11': Shri O.K. Mohapata, IPS, New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 53 
12. Shri G.R. Andanimath, Advocate, 
Karnataka, 
Memo. No. 57 
13. Shri J.C. Wankhade, 
Wardha, 
Memo. No. 63 
Suggestion 
The Lokpal should be vested with the 
right to revision in respect of the 
proceedings before any other 
Commission/Tribunal referred to it with 
the Lokpal's prior permission. 
In sub-clause (3), the words "ten years" 
should be substituted in place of "five· 
years". 
Sub-clause (3) may be dropped. 
Sub-clause 10(3) should be deleted. 
(i) In sub-clause (1) the words "any bias" 
are vague. They may be replaced by 
"any existing prejudice". 
(ii) In sub-clause (3), "ten years" be 
substituted in place of "five years". 
In clause 10(3), the period should be 10 
years instead of 5 years. 
In 10(3)-in the 2nd line delete the word 
"five" and substitute the word "ten" 
Sub-clause (3) needs to be deleted. 
Limitation prescribed may be removed 
from sub-clause (3). 
Period should be reduced to one year in 
sub-clause (3). 
F·9B 718/ 

Sl. Source 
No. 
14. Shri Rakesh Sharma, 
Kurukshetra, 
Memo. No. 64 
15. Shri Himadri Paul, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 68 
16. Dr. D.B. Sharma, 
Allahabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 70 
17. Shri B.S. Chauhan, 
Jodhpur, 
Memo. No. 76 
18. Shri Ashutosh Mishra, 
Muradabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 84 
19. Shri Anand Prakash S!nghal, 
Meerut City, U.P., 
Memo. No. 86 
20. Shri P. Guha, 
Kharagpur. WB 
Memo. No. 90 
21. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.) 
New Delhi. 
Memo. No. 92 
22. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex.SG (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
61 
Suggestion 
Time bar/limit must be removed in sub­
clause (3). 
Period be changed to 10 years m sub­
clause (3). 
Sub-clause (3) should be deleted. 
Lokpal should take cognizance of 
complaints upto 7 years from the date on 
which the offence has been committed. 
In clause 10(3) the stipulation of the limit 
of five years within which the complaint 
be made is unreasonable, so this clause 
be deleted. 
Clause 10(1) be redrafted as follows:­
"No member or Chairman of the Lokpal 
shall participate into any enquiry, 
investigation or sign report in any case 
concerning any person with whom he has 
a bias or past or present relationship of 
any sort". 
In sub-clause (3), the period of 5 years is 
to be removed. 
(i) In sub-clause(!), in case any member 
has any bias, the jurisdiction should 
be extinguished only in respect of that 
Member of Lokpal. 
(ii)' In sub-clause (3), the limitation of 
five years should be made relaxable. 
(i) In Sub-clause (1), in case if any 
member has a bias, only that 
member may abstain from the 
proceedings. 
(ii) Sub-clau~e (3) may be deleted. 

Sl. Source 
No; 
23. Shri A. Sowrirajan, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99 
24. Justice P.B: Sawant, Chairman, 
Press Council of India, 
Memo. No. 104 
25. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
26. Centre for Policy Research, 
Memo. No. 109 
27. Bar Council of India 
Memo. No. 110 
1. Shri D.N. Bhargava, · .. 
Controller General(Retd.) ... 
India Bureau of Mines, 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No.2 
62 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub-clause (1), President should 
not interfc;re. 
(ii) Sub-clause (2) may lead to 
postponment of a decision m a 
matter. 
(iii) Sub-clause (3) may lead to a 
situation where no complaint might 
be lodged. 
(i) Clause 10(3)-the limitation of 5 
years should be increased at least 10 
years. 
(ii) Clause 10 should also include 
government servants required to 
furnish the return of all the assets. 
Under clause 10(3) the time period 
should be six years instead of five years. 
As is the case with the Judge or Chief 
Justice of a High Court or the Supreme 
Court, the Lokpal should be allowed to 
rescue himself/herself in a particular case 
if the circumstances warrant this, and the 
bill should not explicitly mention the 
possibility of bias on the part of the 
Lokpal. 
(i) Clause 10(1) should be deleted since it 
shall have the effect of making reckless 
allegations of bias. 
(ii.) Clause 10(3) should be amended to make 
inquiry into complaints reported within a 
period of ten years. 
Clause 11 
(i) Public servants may also be allowed 
to make a complaint under this Act, 
but relating to matters of public 
concern only and not relating to any 
personal grievance, except that of 
being pressurised into actions against 
the rules. The identity of public 
servant filing complaint, should be 
kept secret by the Lokpal or else he 
should be granted protection against 
harm from public functionary 
concerned. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
2. Shri Santi Ranjan Mukherji, 
Advocate, 
Burdwan, 
Memo. No. 3 
3. Dr. J.J. Bennett, 
President, 
Indian Citizens Forum, 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 5 
4. Honorary Executive Secretary, 
63 
National Consumer Protection, Council, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 6 
5. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
6. Shri Prakash Shivappa Khut, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No.9 
Suggestion 
(ii) Provisions for letters from persons in 
jail to be accepted by Lokpal as 
complaints is a very generous 
provision but the person should only 
be one who is in judicial custody or 
an undertrial but should not be a 
convict. 
In clause 11(1), the words "other than 
public servants" should be omitted. 
Under proviso of sub-clause (3) add 
"Registered voluntary organisation are 
exempted from payment of the deposit." 
Public servant should not be barred from 
the purview of this clause. 
(i) The words "other than a public 
servant" should be deleted. 
(ii) Sub-clause (2) constitutes an 
unnecessary restriction on the power 
and jurisdiction of the Lokpal and 
introduces an · unnecessary 
technicality of form in the 
procedure. It also imposes an 
unreasonable burden on the citizen 
who is required to make a deposit. 
Sub-clause (2) and (3) and the 
proviso of this clause should, 
therefore, be deleted; consequently 
sub-clause (4) and (5) would be 
rendered redundant, if sub-clause 
(2) is amended .. 
(iii) A new sub-clause as follows be 
added "Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the foregoing sub­
sections, the Chairman or any other 
member of Lokpal can take 'suo­
motu' notice of any of the offences 
covered by the definition of 
'complaint' committed by a public 
functionary." 
Burden of proof should be against whom 
the complaint is lodged. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
7. Dr. Aj~a Kumar Mishra, 
Chairman, Sankalp, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No.lO 
8. Shri L.B. Ambarkhaur, 
Advocate, Maharashtra, 
Memo.No.ll 
9. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
10. Shri Prakash Chaube, 
Advocate, Bihar, 
Memo. No. 19 
11. Shri H.R.S. Gael, 
I.E.S. (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 25 
12. Shri M.B. Lo'.Jo, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 26 
13. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 30 
64 
I ' 
Suggestion 
Sub-clause (5) may be modified to 
specify a time limit of one month for 
forwarding any letter addressed to the 
Lokpal or the appropriate authority in 
lieu of the present provision of "without 
delay". 
Burden of proof should be against whom 
the complaint has been made. 
(i) In sub-clause(!), words "other than a 
public servant" be deleted. 
(ii) A new sub-clause (b) as under be 
added:- "Not withstanding anything 
contained in the foregoing sub­
clauses the Chairman or any other 
member of Lokpal can take suo 
mota notice of any of the offences 
covered by the definition of 
'complaint' committed by a public 
functionary". 
Sub-clause (3) should be deleted. 
In clause 11(2), there should not any fee 
for making complaint. 
In clause 11(4), the draft Bill may be 
worded as under:-
"Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the foreg::>ing sub-sections, any 
letter written to the Lokpal or as the 
case may be, the appropriate 
authority by a person in any jail not 
connected with any case booked 
against him or under investigation or 
his being so in jail or conviction of 
any case judicially decided against 
him be treated as a complaint in 
accordance with the provisions of 
this section." 
Complaint from the public should be on 
the basis of (i) affidavit and (ii) an 
amount not exceeding the security 
deposit to be deposited by a candidate 
for seeking election to Parliament. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
14. Shri Suresh Chandra Agrawal, 
Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 35 
15. Shri Kailash Nath Pandey, 
Pratapgarh, U.P., 
Memo. No. 36 
16. Shri B.B. Ratho, 
65 
Sr. Advocate, President, High Court 
Association, Orissa, 
Memo. No. 43 
17. Shri Arvind Chaturvedi, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 46 
18. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 47 
Suggestion 
Complaints should be on plain papers by 
ordinary post. 
The name of complainant should be kept 
confidential. 
(i) In 11(1)--delete the words "other 
than a public servant" and also 
delete the word "explanation". 
(ii) In 11 (2)--delete the words "and 
shall be accompanied by fees" till 
the end of that para and substitute 
the following:-
"and shall be supported by an 
affidavit affirming on oath that the 
statement of facts and allegations 
made in the complaint are true to 
his knowledge and shall also be 
accompanied by supporting 
documents, if any. Such affidavit 
shall be at the risks of the deponent 
of being prosecuted and punished, if 
found to be not true and correct". 
The words "other than a public servant" 
should be removed from sub-section(1). 
(i) The following changes may be 
incorporated in Clause 11(1):- "Any 
person may make a complaint under 
this Act to the Lokpal 
provided that the Lokpal may initiate 
an inquiry into any case as to any 
allegation or grievance against any 
public servant upon its own 
knowledge or information. Provided 
further that the knowledge or 
information received by the Lokpal is 
such .as would constitute:-
(a) the material particulars of a 
complaint if a reasonable 
construction is placed upon the 
material or other documents upon 
which the Lokpal proposes 
to rely for initiating the 

Sl. Source 
No. 
66 
Suggestion 
procedure as to inquiry under this 
Act; or 
(b) if it were to be filed in the form of 
a written complaint a complaint as 
to the material facts constituting 
an allegation or a grievance, as the 
case may be". 
(ii) Clause 11(2):- "The complaint 
described in sub-section (1) shall set 
forth material particulars of the 
allegation or grievance as the case 
may be in as clear · and concise a 
manner as is possible given the 
circumstances under which such a 
statement of the complaint is 
received by the Lokpal. The format 
of the complaint shall be as 
prescribed by the Lokpal from time 
to time and shall without prejudice 
to the generality of the powers here­
in-above described treat the receipt 
of the following as being a complaint 
under Sec. 2( d)-
(a) any public servant, stating by means 
of a letter or any other mode of 
communication material facts as to 
an allegation or grievance alleged to 
have been committed by any other 
public servant; 
(b) any citizen stating by means of a 
letter or any other mode of 
communication whether on his own 
behalf or on behalf of others 
affected similarly or in a like manner 
by the actions of a public servant or 
on behalf of others who by reason of 
their financial inability or · social or 
other disability are unable to 
communicate their complaint to the 
Lokpal, material facts as to an 
allegation or grievance alleged to 
have been committed by any other 
public servant". 
The following clauses are suggested for 
deletion:-
(a) Clause 11(3) and consequently, 
clause 28; 
(b) Clause 33(b) must stand 

Sl. Source 
No. 
19. Shri Saroj Kr. Jena, Lecturer 
Kandhwal, Orissa~ 
Memo. No. 48 
20. Shri C.J.M. Mathew, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 51 
21. Dr. Hari Sharan Saxena, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 54 
22. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
Jaipur 7 
Memo. No. 56 
23. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram 1 
Memo. No. 60 
24. Shri Rakesh Sharma, 
Kurukshetra,; 
Memo. No. 64 
25. Shri Dharam Pal, 
New Delhi1 
Memo. No. 67 
26. Shri Himadri Paul, 
West Bengal, 
Memo. No. 68 
27. Shri Ashutosh Mishra, 
Moradabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 84 
28. Shri Anand Prakash Singhal, 
Meerut City, U.P. 1 Memo. No. 86 
F-10A 718/RS 
67 
Suggestion 
automatically deleted as a result of 
changes suggested in clause 11(1). 
The words "other than a public servant" 
should be deleted from sub-clause (1). 
Duely constituted societies, related social 
objectives, should also be eligible to 
make complaints under the Act. 
(i) In Sub-clause (1) substitute the word 
"including" in place of "other than". 
(ii) Sub-clause (3) should be deleted. 
Public servants can make complaint to 
Lokpal and their name can be kept 
secret. 
(i) Anybody can make a complaint. 
(ii) Prescribed formalities should be done 
away with in Sub-clause (2). 
(iii) Sub-clause (3) should be deleted. 
(i) Every person should have right to make 
complaint. 
(ii) Fee must not be compulsory for making 
a complaint under Sub-clause (2) and (~). 
I 
The words "other than" to be substitut~d 
by the words "including" in Sub-clause (lj. 
Any person, including public servant may 
make complaint. 
(i) The restriction on a public servant to 
make a complaint to the Lokpal is 
unreasonable and should be removed. 
(ii) The requirement of depositing Rs. l()(}(Y­
by the complainant is unreasonable and 
should be deleted. 
There is no perceptible reason why 
public servant be barred from making a 
complaint. In fact these civil servants 
should be encouraged to register such 
complaints. Relavant amendments need 
to be made in the Official Secrets Act. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
29. Shri P. Guha, 
Kharagpur {WB) 
Memo. No. 90 
30. Shri S.P. Mukherji, lAS (Retd.), 
New Delhi 
31. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex.SG. (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi} 
Memo. No. 93 
32. Shri A. Sowrirajan, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99 
33. Shri Dharama Vira. 
Memo. No. 105 
34. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, lAS (Retd.) 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 107 
35. Madras Bar Association. 
Memo. No. 108 
36. Bar Council of India 
Memo. Jl.lo. 110 
68 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub-clause (1), provision should be 
made for public servants to make a 
complaint. 
(ii) In sub-clause (3), provision of depositing 
Rs. 1000 for making a complaint should 
be removed. 
(i) In sub-clause (1), complaint can be made 
even by a public servant. 
(ii) In sub-clause (2), Lokpal may relax the 
requirement of makng complaint in the 
prescribed form. 
Sub-clause (3) may be deleted. 
(i) In sub-clause (1), public servants should 
also have right to complain. 
(ii) In sub-clause (3), the amount of deposit 
should be equivalent to that of a court 
fee payable for filing a writ petition in 
High Court. 
Clause 11(3)- the fee 
complaints should be 
considerably. 
for filing 
increased 
In the prescribed form of making a 
complaint, there should a specific item 
soliciting information whether any 
knowledge regarding the complaint made 
is with any public servant and, if so, 
name him specifically. In this way a 
public servant can have indirect access to 
the Lokpal. 
The fee as prescribed for prefering a 
complaint in clause 11(2) should be 
removed. 
Public servants should also be allowed to 
make complaints. 
F-108 718/R~ 

Sl. Source 
No. 
69 
Suggestion 
Clause 12 
1. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
2. Shri T. U. Mehta 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
3. Shri B.B. Ratho, ·Sr. Advocate 
President, High Court Bar 
Association, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 43 
4. Shri G.R. Andanimath, 
Advocate, 
Karnataka, 
Memo. No. 57 
5. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
6. Shri R.K. Tiwari, 
Bareilly, U.P., 
Memo. No. 62 
7. Dr. D.B. Sharma, 
Allahabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 70 
8. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex. S.G. (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
9. Justice P.B. Sawant, Chairman 
Press Council of India 
Memo. No. 104 
(i) In sub-clause (1)(a) "ten years" be 
substituted for "five years". 
(ii) Add to sub-clause (2)- "whenever the 
comments of public functionary are 
called for, , the same shall be furnished 
within 21 days of receipt unless time is 
extended by the Lokpal in writing giving 
reasons". 
(i) In sub-clause 12(1){a) "ten y~ars" should 
be substituted for "five years". 
(ii) In sub-clause (2), the words "whenever 
the comment of public functionary is 
called for, the same should be furnished 
within 15. days of receipt. Any extension 
of time granted by Lokpal should contain 
reasons therefor in writing" be added. 
(i) In 12{1){a)- delete the word 'five' and 
substitute it by the word 'ten'. 
(ii) In 12(1)(b)- add the following: "but 
before doing so, shall hear the 
complainant". 
To avoid full dressed enquiry the word 
"prima facie" be included before the 
words "the complaint is frivolous" in 
Sub-clause {1)(c). 
Period to be enhanced to 10 years in 
Sub-clause (1)(a). 
Machinery for verification of claim may 
be formed and provision in this regard 
may be made in the Bill in Sub-clause 
(2). 
In Sub-cluase (1)(a) period to be 
enhanced to 10 years. 
Sub-clause (1)(a) may be deleted. 
12(1)(a) should be amended to substitute 
10 years in place of 5 years. 

Sl. ·Source 
No. 
10. Bar Council of India 
Memo. No .. 110 
1. ShJi ,K.C.Bhardwaj, 
Convener- -· 
Social Action Group (Regd.)' 
New Delhi1 
Memo No . .1 
2. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd.) 
Gujarat 1 
Memo. No.2 
3. Shri Ashutosh Kumar Agarwal, 
New Delhi: 
Memo. No.4 
4. Dr. J.J. Bennett, 
President 
Indian Citizens Forum 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 5 
5. Shri S.D. Sharma; ·- .. 
~ 
Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi . • Memo. No. 7 
6. Shri L.B. Ambarkhana 
Advocate, Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 11 
70 
Suggestion 
In clause 12(1)(a) the words 'five years' 
be substituted with the words 'ten years'. 
Clause-13 
The Lokpal must submit its report within 
three months and at best within six 
months. No extension be permitted. 
Advocates should be barred from 
assisting the complainant or the public 
functionary in the course of inquiry 
before the Lokpal just as is the case in 
respect of departmental inquiries against 
charge-sheeted public servants. This will 
enable getting quickly to the heart of the 
matter and conducting the inquiry 
expeditiously. 
(i) Sub-clause (2) should be deleted. 
(ii) The institution of Lokpal should not be 
boned by the trappings of Evidence Act, 
1872. 
(iii) No party should hire a lawyer to assist it 
in proceedings before Lokpal unless 
there is a question of Law/ 
Constitutionality of any act done by the 
public functionary. 
(i) In" sub-clause (2) add-" or as decided by 
the Chairman". 
(ii) In sub-clause (3) the period of "six 
months" in both the places should be 
replaced by "three months". 
(iii) Transparency in inquiry and investigation 
is essential to- ensure effective 
accountability. 
Sub-clause (2) should be deleted. 
There should not be anything 
confidential at any level. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
7. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
8. Shri Milap Chandra Chorasia, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 18 
9. Shri I.U. Gehani, 
Lucknow, , 
Memo. No. 21 
10. Shri V.K. Maheswari, H.J.S. 
Addl. Distt. and Session Judge, 
Dehradun, 
Memo. No. 24 
11. Shri D.P. Agarwal, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 28 
12. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 30 
13. Shri B.B. Ratho 1 
Senior Advocate, 
Cuttack, 
Memo. No. 43 
14. Shri Samir J. Roy, 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No. 52 
71 
Suggestion 
Sub-clause (2) be substituted by words as 
under:-
"Every inquiry under this Act shall be 
conducted in open. But looking to the 
nature of the inquiry, if the Chairman 
and the members feel that it is not in 
public interest to conduct the inquiry in 
open, they may conduct the whole or 
part of that inquiry in camera by passing 
a written order giving reasons". 
In Sub-clause (2), the words "in camera" 
should be deleted and a provision as 
under be inserted- "provided that 
Lokpal shall ensure that inquiry shall not 
be effected by any person in any manner 
whatsoever". 
Sub-clause (2) should be deleted. 
The procedure for dealing and enquiring 
into the complaints should be more 
elaborate so a!-1 to clear doubt regarding 
the procedure. 
Influential persons should be tried by a 
bench of three to seven judges and 
majority judgement should be taken into 
account. A judge if accused or suspected 
to be so or directly or indirectly 
connected with accuse ot accused cannot 
be a member of the concerned Trial 
Bench. 
In Clause 13(2) the hearings by the 
Lokpal should be open to public as well 
as media. 
·In 13(3), add the following at the end: 
"and that shall be the maximum period". 
Lokpal should extend the period of 
enquiry for only three months. In case of 
further extension, consent of Chief 
Justice of Supreme Court should be 
obtained. 

Sl. Sou.rce 
No. 
15. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
Jaipur¥_ 
Memo. No. 56 
16. Shri G.R. Andanimath, 
Karnataka, 
Memo. No. ·57 
17. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 ·· 
18. Dr. D.B. Sharma, 
Allahabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 70 
19. Shri Sohan Lal Aggarwal, 
Ambala Cantt., 
Memo. No. 74 
20. Shri P.A. Shrinivassa Rao, 
HyderabadJ. 
Memo. No. 81 
21. Justice R.K.Manisana Singh, (Retd.) 
Imphal1 
Memo. No. 91 
22. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex-S.G. (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi 1 
Memo. No. 93 
72 
Suggestion 
Enquiry conducted in camera will not 
bring transparency. Only open trial will 
bring transparency and public will have 
greater confidence in the institution of 
Lokpal. 
Proceedings in camera will not help the 
public to know about the public 
functionaries. 
The word "in camera" to be deleted. 
Sub-clause (2) should be deleted to bring 
in tansparency. 
· Every enquiry should be completed 
within 90 days. 
(i) The complainant should invariably be 
summoned for recording his1ler detailed 
statement within one month from the 
date of receipt of complaint. 
(ii) After preliminary verification is over, all 
the material should be made available to 
. the:: complainant, excepting those relating 
to India's defence and overall security. 
In sub-clause (4), the Bill may provide 
Lokpal with powers to make regulations 
in respect of holding of sittings of Lokpal 
at places other than the place at ordinary 
sitting. 
In sub-clause (2), enquiry should 
normally be open. 
23. "Students- Teachers 
Corruption" 
Front Against There· must be a time bound enquiry for 
the guilty and the Lokpal term should 
not coincide with the term of Lok Sabha. JNU, New Delhil 
Memo. No. 96 

73 
SI. Source 
No. 
24. Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, 
Former Judge, Patna High Court and 
Former Chairman, National Commission 
for Backward Classes 
Patna 1 
Memo. No. 97 
25. Shri Surendra Nath, lAS 
New Delhi) 
Memo. No. 98 
26. Justice K.L. Sharma, (Retd.) 
Lucknow, U.P~ 1 
Memo. No. 100 
27. Shri R. Anbarasu, Ex-M.P., 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 103 
28. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, 
Upalokayukta (Karnataka)~ 
Memo. No. 106 
29. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, lAS (Retd.) 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 107 
30. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
--------------·-.-··-·~- ··--. ··-· 
Suggestion 
The following proviso may be added in 
the end of clause 13(2): 
"Provided that when there is no 
unanimity, the Lokpal shall send its 
report to the competent authority with 
the majority finding alongwith dissenting 
views of the other member and the 
majority decision shall be deemed to be 
the decision of the Lokpal". 
In sub-clause (2), proceedings of the 
Lokpal should be open. 
(i) All proceedings before the Lokpal should 
be declared as a judicial proceeding. 
(ii) Lokpal should be authorised to 
determine its own procedure for the 
conduct of investigations, enquiries and 
trials and to decide the place and manner 
of its sitting and working. 
Clause 13(2) may be restructured as 
follows:-
"The preliminary enquiry shall be 
conducted in camera. But when the 
allegations are found true then trial and 
findings must be made public". 
For expeditious disposal of cases, it. may 
be useful to have benches on appropriate 
lines of classification. 
It should be laid down that inquiry may 
be conducted in camera at the discretion 
of the Lokpal. 
(i) Under clause 13(2) provlSlons for in­
camera proceedings should be removed. 
In camera proceedings should be held 
only in very exceptional circumstances. 
(ii) Under clause 13(4) a definite procedure 
such as summons case or summary trial_ ·• 
prescribed in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure be provided for. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
31. Centre for Policy Research 
Memo. No. 109 
1. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh 
New DelhiJ 
Memo. No.7 
2. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
Ahmedabad 1 
Memo. No. 14 
3. Dr. V.Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore 1 Memo. No. 47 
74 
Suggestion 
Provisions for clause 13(2) read with 
clause 23 militates against the public's 
right to information, and the efforts 
towards ensuring 'open government' and 
'transparency'. The restrictions as 
envisaged in clause 13 and clause 23 
should be invoked in very specific 
circumstances. 
Clause 14 
In its present form, this clause is likely to 
delay the investigation and may be misused. 
The clause should therefore contain a 
provision that in case an investigation is 
pending, when the enquiry is being s~arted 
by the Lokpal, the investigation may 
continue subject to such directions as may 
be made by the Lokpal, so that the Lokpal 
would be in a position to co-ordinate the 
course of the enquiry and the investigation. 
(i) A sub-clause (3) be added as under:­
"any order passed under sub-clause (1) 
above, is liable to appeal in Supreme Cqurt 
within one month from the date of order". 
(ii) No party appearing before Lokpal in any 
inquiry or proceeding shall be entitled to 
engage an advocate to represent him unless 
the Lokpal gives such permission in writing 
with reasons. 
As a limited body whose powers are 
restricted to mere matters of inquiry alone, 
the Lokpal ought not to have the power to 
curtail investigations being carried on .under 
the general criminal law or such other 
criminal statutes granting powers to regular 
investigative agencies (such as the polic.e) to' 
investigate specific charges of corruption, 
m~ely on the ground that the same copld ,, 
hinder the proper inquiry of the Lokpal. 
Hence clause 14 in its entirety as it 
currently stands, ought to be deleted. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
4. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
JaipurJ 
Memo. No. 56 
5. Shri G. Venkatadri 
Advocate 
Hyderabad 1 
Memo. No. 58 
6. Shri R.B. Sharma, 
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 75 
75 
Rao, 
Suggestion 
This clause imposes a blanket restriction on 
the complainant seeking any recourse under 
the existing law. It is desirable to remove 
this restriction. 
If the proceedings before Lokpal are in the 
nature of a domestic enquiry, proceedings 
under Cr. P.C. can be maintained. 
Referallinvestigation of a matter to the 
Lokpal should not form the basis for 
stopping normal criminal investigation into 
offences by law enforcing agencies such as 
CBI. 
7. "Students-Teachers Front Against The Lokpal should not order the stopping 
of investigation by the other agencies, if the 
accused is summoned by such agencies. 
Corruption" 
JNU, New Delhi> 
Memo. No. 96 
8. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, 
Upalokayukta (Karnataka) 1 
Memo. No. 106 
9. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
1. Dr. J.J. Bennett 
President 
Indian Citizens ForuiJl 
Madras, 
Memo No. 5 
2. Shri S.D. Sharma. 
F-11A 718/RS 
Working Chairman 
Lok Sevak Sangh. New Delhi 1 
Memo No. 7 
Investigation by Police should nut be 
suspended and Lokpal should monitor the 
same. 
Under 14(1) provisions should be made that 
the Lokpal should suspend its enquiry in 
respect of cases where the police are 
investigating on the orders of court-any 
High Court or Supreme Court. This is 
necessary because there may be room for 
conflicting opinions. 
Clause 15 
In sub-clause (1) after (vi) add-"The 
Lokpal will arrange security and required 
immunity to those who provide evidence 
·in support of the complaint". 
Sub-clause (4) is likely to be misused and 
should be deleted, leaving it to the 
Lokpal to make such direction, as may 
be necessary, in case any information or 
answer may fall in the category 
contemplated by clauses (a) and (b) of 
sub-cla1,1se (4). 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
AhmedabadJ 
Memo No. 14 
4. Shri Milap Chandra Chorasia, 
New Delhi, 
Memo No. 18 
5. Shri B.B. Ratho, 
Senior Advocate 
Cuttack 1 
Memo No. 43 
76 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub-clause 4(a), last words "or the 
investigation . or detection of crime" 
be deleted. 
(ii) A proviso to 4(a) as under may be 
added "provided that a complaint is 
with reference to corruption or a 
deal which is prejudicial to the 
security or defence of India and the 
Lokpal considers it necessary that a 
particular information or document is 
necessary to be disclosed in public 
interest, the said information on 
document shall be furnished. 
(iii) In proviso to sub-clause (4) line 3, 
words "and clause (b)" be added 
after the words, "in clause (a)". 
(i) The words "or international relations 
of India including India's relations 
with the Government of any other 
country or with any international 
organisation should be deleted from 
sub-clause 4(a). 
(ii) The word starting from "as might 
involve" and upto the words "any 
committee of such cabinet" of sub­
clause 4(b) should be deleted. 
15(l){b){i) - the word "an" before 
the word "examining" is a misprint 
for the word "and". 
F-118718/RS 

Sl. Source 
No. 
6. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore' 
Memo No. 47 
7. Shri G. Venkatadri Rao, 
Advocate 
Hyderabad1 
Memo No. 58 
8. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar 
. Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo No. 60 
9. Shri A. Sowrirajan 
New Delhi 1 
Memo No. 99 
10. Madras Bar Association 
Memo No. 108 
1. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar 
Thiruvananthapuram 1 
Memo No. 60 
77 
Suggestion 
In clause 15(1)(a) after "produce such 
documents", add "within one months 
from the date of such requisition". 
"Provided that in the event of failure to 
so comply with the order of the Lokpal, 
the Lokpal shall proceed against the 
person concerned in like manner, as the 
circumstance admit, as a civil court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as 
regards summoning and enforcing the 
attendance of such person, or as regards 
the discovery & production of any such 
document, as the case may be". 
In sub-clause (4), the Lokpal is set-up 
with the main intention of ensuring 
probity and transparency in Public life. 
This Memo. Section should be redrafted 
by deleting the proviso and arranging the 
section without giving scope for any 
ambiguity. 
In sub-clause (4) in the proviso, for "of 
the nature specified in clause (a)" the 
words "of the nature specified in clause 
(a) or (b)" be substituted. 
In sub-clause (4), except in case of 
defence, all cabinet decisions to be 
subjected to the scrutinisation of Lokpal. 
Since the functions of the Lokpal are 
quasi judicial, the provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure should apply for 
matters enumerated under clause 15(b). 
Clause 16 
Clause (a) of explanation be modified as 
"shall be deemed to have commenced on 
the date on which complaint is made to 
the Lokpal under Section 11". 
-------------------·--··---·--

Sl. Source 
No. 
2. Shri K.K. Pande, 
Bilaspur, M.P., 
Memo No. 87 
1. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Ret d.), 
Gujarat, 
Memo No. 2 
2. Dr. J.J. Bennett, 
President 
Indian Citizens Forum 
"Jobitham" 
Madras, 
Memo No. 5 
78 
Suggestion 
In clause 16(1) after the word 
"documents", the following words be 
inserted:-
"or cash or kind, deposits, 'Shares, 
valuable considerations, moveable & 
immova~le properties & wealth 
(including benami) and entire illegally 
acquired wealth & properties". 
Clause 17 
Lokpal should be vested with authority 
of passing final order in respect of 
complaints which should be binding on 
all parties concerned. If the Lokpal were 
to remain only as an authority for 
conducting enquiry and making a report, 
the recommendations of the Lokpal 
should ordinarily be binding on the 
"Competent authority". If in any case 
the "competent authority" deviates from 
taking action as per recommendations, it 
should record reasons in writing for 
doing so and inform the Lokpal in the 
matter. 
(i) In sub-clause (1) after (b) add (c). If 
the recommendations of the Lokpal 
are not implemented to its full 
satisfaction. the Lokpal may approach 
the Supreme Court for suitable 
directions in the matter. 
(ii) ln sub-clause (4) add "The Report 
should .:;ubstantiate with date how 
the several provisions of the Act 
have been complied with". 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Honarary Executive Secretary, 
79 
National Consumer Protection Council, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo No. 6 
4. Shri S.D. Sharma 
New Delhi 1 
Memo No. 7 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub~clause (2), the words "other 
than the Prime Minister" should be 
deleted. 
(ii) After 17( 4) and before explanation, 
a new sub~dause 17(5) be added as 
given under-
"However for ensuring the 
impartial and conscientious 
jurisprudence of the institution of 
'Lokpat', if the Chairman or any 
of the members while using their 
discretion and while exerciliing 
any of their duties, rights & 
obligations in the subject matters 
of any enquiry into the complaint 
under this P.ct gives reasons to 
infer about their dercliction, 
unuse, disuse or misuse of the 
authority and power, the 
appointing authority I.e. the 
President of India or the 
Complainant shall have the right 
to appeal to the Supreme Couct 
of India or any special tribunal 
that may be constituted for this 
purpose against the remarks, 
recommendations oc the 
judgement of the Lokpal for 
rcdrcssal. 
(i) This clause should be amended so as 
to make enquiry binding on the 
Governmt:nt. The Lokpal will be 
ineffective unless it has powers to 

Sl. Source 
No. 
5. Shri Prakash Shivappa Khoot 
MaharashtraJ 
Memo No.9 
6. Shri Moses P. Manohar 
Secretary, 
The National Council of 
Churches in India; 
New Delhi, 
Memo No. 13 
80 
Suggestion 
orde~rosecution of those involved 
in cases in which the Lokpal's 
inquiries have revealed that there is 
adequate prima facie evidence of 
corruption. The courts of law can 
then decide guilt or otherwise under 
the relevant law and procedure. 
(ii) In sub-clause (2), the words "other 
than Prime Minister" should be 
deleted. 
(iii) Unless the findings and 
recommendations so made under 
sub-clause l(b) are binding on the 
competent authority, including the 
Parliament, the Government and all 
authorities of Central and State 
Governments, the Lokpal would 
remain a mere paper tiger. 
(iv) In sub-clause l(b) add the words "by 
furnishing to them a copy of the 
same". 
Those found guilty should be punished 
severely. 
The bill almost defeats its purpose as it 
leaves the Lokpal with no power to 
punish the culprit. By making the Lokpal 
merely a recommending body, the Bill 
gives scope for political manoeuvering. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
7. Shri T.U. Mehta 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
Ahmedabad1
1 
Memo No. 14 
8. Shri S.S. Jagatap, Advocate 
Distt. Sanglil 
Memo No. 15 
81 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub-clause (2), \. Jrds "other than 
Prime Minister" should be deleted. 
(ii) In sub-clause (1), following addition 
be made-
"(c) the finding and 
recommendations so made under (b) 
shall be binding on 
parliament, the Government and all 
authorities of Central and State 
Government". 
(iii) following may be added to sub­
clause (2)-
"If no action is taken or proposed to be 
taken by the competent authority on the 
basis of the said report, the Lokpal, after 
considering the reasons, if any, given for 
it may itself take action either by itself 
proceeding for that purpose or may ask 
any other central or state Government 
authority to take proper steps to 
implement its recommendations by 
resorting to due pr Jcess of law. 
(iv) In sub-clause (1) (b) add words "by 
furnishing to them a copy of the 
same" at the end. 
Under sub-clause (1) (b), when the Chief 
Justice or other judges of the Supreme 
Court as members of Lokpal are deciding 
the matters against a public functionary 
and are satisfied that all or any of the 
allegations made in the complaint have 
as has been substantiated either wholly 
or partly, then why there is no penal 
provision in this sub-clause itself. The 
report of Lokpal should be binding when 
the Lokpal is competent to punish a 
person who gives false complaint as 
provided in clause 24, the punishment for 
convicted public functionary must be 
greater than that of punishment provided 
for false complaint in clause 24. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
9. Shri Harish Kumar Sharma 
Advocate. 
Secretary, Indian Citizen's 
Welfare & Crime Preventive 
Association, 
Aligarh1 
Memo No. 17 
10. Shri Milap Chandra Chorsia 
New Delhi1 
Memo No. 18 
82 
Suggestion 
The Lokpal should have powers to pass 
orders to punish the public fuctionary 
found guilty of an offence on a complaint 
made against him. 
(i) Sub-clauses (2), (3) and (4) should be 
deleted. 
(ii) In sub-clause (1) after the words "it 
· shall by report" substitute the 
following "it shall record a finding" 
and following new points should be 
inserted-
"(c) make a complaint thereof in writing" 
(d) send it to a Magistrate of the first 
class having jurisdiction; 
(e) take sufficient security for the 
appearance of public functionary being 
the accused in the respective complaints, 
before such Magistrate: and if Lokpal 
thinks necessary so to do, send the 
accused in custody to such Magistrate. 
(f) bind over any public functionary on 
Public servants or any other person as 
case may be, to appear and give evidence 
before such Magistrate; and 
(g) complaint made under this section 
shall be signed by the Secretary of the 
Lokpal. 
(iii) A new sub-clause as under may .be 
added-
"Any persons aggrieved by any 
order passed under this section may 
with the leave of the Supreme 
Court, prefer an appeal to the 
Supreme Court within thirty days of 
such order, and save as aforesaid no 
appeal as revision shall be in any 
court against such order." 

Sl. Source 
No. 
11. Shri Prakash Chandra 
Bihar~ 
Memo No. 19 
12. Shri I. U. Gehani 
Lucknow 1 
Memo. No. 21 
.l3.. Shri Neeraj Srivastava 
Kanpur, 
Memo. No. 22 
14. Shri D.P. Agarwal 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 28 
15. Dr. Bijoy Chand 
West Bengal ) 
Memo. No. 29 
16. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya 
Himachal Pradesh 1 
Memo. No. 30 
17. Shri S. P. Paramasivaiah 
Advocate, 
Karnataka; 
Memo. No. 31 
12A 7HVRS 
83 
t' io 
Suggestion 
· After the completion of enquiry by the 
Lokpal, the President of India should 
execute the report of Lokpal in toto 
within a time bound scheme and the 
action taken by the President should be 
widely published through leading 
newspapers and a copy thereof be 
supplied to the complainant. 
Lokpal should be empowered to 
prosecute the public functionary, if found 
guilty. 
Lokpal should not be confined and 
restricted to the inquiry only and be 
empowered to deal. with any allegation 
right from the stage of inquiry to the 
final stage of judicial punishment without 
any power of judicial interference by any 
com:t. Judicial review of punishments 
awarded by Lokpal should, however, be 
incorporated at the level of the Supreme 
Court only. 
• 'Scope of punishment · may also be 
widened e.g. displacement . from the 
occupied position, house arrest, 
confiscation of property to pay fines, 
compensation & expenses; to debar from 
holding such or equivalent or higher 
ranks for limited or unlimited period; to 
make ineligible for elections for a limited 
or unlimited period. 
Lokpal should be given prosecution 
powers and its findings should be binding 
for the government. 
The Lokpal should be empowered to 
order confiscation of ill-gotten money, 
wealth and property by the political 
representatives. 
i 
It should. . be empowered to award 
punishments. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
18. Shri Kailash Nath Pandey 
Pratapgarh (U.P.) 
Memo. No. 36 
19. Shri J.N. Kokate 
Amarawati, Maharashtra 
Memo. ~o. 40 
20. Shri Pawan Kumar Jha 
Ghaziabad (U.P.) 
Memo. No. 41 
21. Ms. Chandrawati 
Bhiwani (Haryana) 1 
Memo. No. 42 
22. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar 
Bangalore) 
Memo. No. 47 
I 
84 
Suggestion 
Reports of Lokpal should be drafted in 
Rashtra Bhasha. 
(i) Lokpal should be empoweFed to take 
action against the persons found 
guilty. 
(ii) Lokpal must have power to ensure 
freedom of an individual and 
fundamental rights. 
Lokpal. should have powers to award 
severe punishment. 
Lokpal should be empowered to award 
punishment. 
Clause 17 be amended as follows:­
Clause 17(2)-"The competent authority 
shall examine the report forwarded to it 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) and 
communicate to the Lokpal within three 
months of the date of receipt of report 
the action taken or proposed to be taken 
on the basis of the report including 
specifying with reasons the time limit 
within which it expects to carry out the 
proposed action". 
Further, two new sub-clauses are 
suggested to be inserted:-
Clause 17(3)- "If the Lokpal is satisfied 
with the action taken or proposed to be 
taken on its recommendations or finding 
referred to in clause (b) of sub-clause 
(1), it shall close the case under 
information to the complainant, the 
public servant and the competent 
authority concerned; but where it is not 
so satisfied and if it considers that the 
case so deserves or if it determines that 
the competent authority has failed 
without adequate reasons, to carry out 
the proposed action on the basis of the 
report within th~ time limit it 
F-12871 8/RS 

Sl. Source 
No. 
85 
Suggestion 
had specified as per sub-clause (2), it 
may make a special report upon the case 
to the President and also inform the 
competent authority and the 
complainant, including where necessary, 
the fact of failure to take actions 
proposed. 
Provided that the competent authority 
may any time before the expiry of the 
time limit within which it ought to take 
the action proposed on the basis of the 
report as specified by it under sub-clause 
(3) communicate to the Lokpal its 
inability to so comply within time with 
the action proposed to be taken and the 
Lokpal may grant further time to the 
competent authority to take the 
necessary action proposed, within such 
extended time as it deems fit, if the 
Lokpal determines that the reasons for 
non-compliance with the specified time 
limit is adequate or beyond the control 
of the competent authority. 
Clause 17(5)- "The Lokpal may by its 
discretion make available, from time to 
time, the substance of any of the cases 
brought before it and disposed of by it, 
which may appear to it to be of general 
public academic or professional interest 
in such a manner and to such persons 
(including the general public) as it may 
deem appropriate, including if it feels it 
necessary so to do, publication of the 
same in three newspapers it deems fit 
having nationwide publication or 
circulation. 

!·. 
~1. Source 
No. 
23. Shri Saroj Kumar Jena 
Orissa) 
Memo. No. 48 
24. Shri C.J .M. Mathew 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 51 
25. Shri Subhajit Chakraborty 
West Bengal1 
Memo. No. 55 
26. Shri G.R. Anandimath 
Advocate 
Memo. No. 57 
27. Dr. N. K. Jayakumar 
Thiruvananthpuram 7 
Memo. No. 60 
28. Shri R.K. Tiwari 
Bareilly, U.P. 
Memo. No. 62 
86 
Suggestion 
A new sub-clause 17(1)(c) should be 
inserted:-
"The competent authority, after receiving 
the findings & decisions, of the Lokpal 
on the public functionary against whom a 
complaint has been made, shall pay due 
respect to the de.cisions & without 
questioning the legality of the decision, 
shall take prompt & quick steps in 
conformity with the decisions for 
ensuring the speedy disposal of the case 
as decided by the Lokpal itself. 
Additional proviso that if the 
~- , complainant is not satisfied with the 
proposed action against the guilty, party 
he should be free to take the matter up 
again in the appropriate civil court. 
The recommendations of Lokpal should 
not be binding on Government, but the 
evidence used for prosecution in terms of 
law in the Supreme Court. 
(i) In sub-clause l(a) after 'intimate the 
complainant' the words, ''in writing' 
be added. 
(ii) In sub-clause 1 (b) in line 2 after the 
words 'either wholly or partly', 'it 
shall,' be inserted and in last line, 
after the words 'public functionary 
about its having made', article 'the' 
be substituted by the word 'such'. 
(iii) In sub-clause (3) provision be made 
with regard to public functionary 
who vacates the office for any 
reason whatsoever. 
The competent authority to submit a 
report to a separate Parliamentary 
Committee to be constituted. 
In sub-clause (2) the words "proposed to 
be taken" need to be deleted. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
29. Shri Kalyana Kr. ,Mohanty, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 65 
30. Dr. D.R. Bagalkoti, 
Mysore, 
Memo. No. 66 
31. Shri Soh an Lal Aggarwal, 
Ambala Caritt. 
Memo. No. 74 
32. Shri R.B. Sharma, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo, No. 75. 
33. Shri P. Guha, 
Kharagpur (WB), 
Memo. No. 90 
34. Justice R.K. Manisana Singh 
(Retd.), 
Imphal, 
Memo. No. 91 
87 
Suggestion 
The decision of the Lokpal must be 
published in media. 
Scope of punishment of offenders to be 
specified. 
(i) The Lokpal will.present his report to 
the President or the Chief Justice of 
India in case of inquiry against the 
Prime Minister, the Cabinet 
Minister( s) and the Chief 
Minister( s). 
(ii) An appeal against the decision of 
Lokpal shall lie with the Supreme 
Court; and with the President in the 
final analysis. 
An appeal against the verdict of 
Lokpal shall lie with the Supreme 
Court. 
The manner in which the competent 
authority shall punish the corrupt 
persons should be indicated. 
In Sub-clause (i) (b), the words "as a 
remedial measure" be inserted after 
"recommendations" 
Provision be made in the Bill for 
review of decision or order of the 
Lokpal of reopening a case. 

SI. Source· 
No. 
35. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.),, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
36. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex.SG (Lok Sabha); 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
37. Dr. S.J. Kamble, 
Nagpur, 
Memo. No. 94 
38. "Students- Teachers Front 
Against corruption" 
JNU, New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 96 
39. Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, 
Former Judge Patna High Court 
& Former Chairman, National 
Commission for Backward Classes 
Patna, 
Memo. No. 97 
40. · Shri A. Sowrirajan, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99 
88 
Suggestion 
(i) In sub-clause (1) (b), the Lokpal 
should inform the complainant" 
about the substance of the report/ 
recommendations. 
(ii) In sub-clause (2), the competent 
authority should report within two 
months, the action proposed and 
should be implemented and 
reported within one month. 
(iii) In sub-clause (3), Ex-Prime 
Minister, Ex-M.Ps and Ex-Ministers ·•. 
should also be covered. 
(iv) In sub-clause (4), provision for 
special report by Lokpal be made 
where its recommendations have not 
been accepted or implemented. 
In sub-clause (4), for 'ninety days' 
substitute 'sixty days'. 
(i) In sub-clause (b), report should be 
communicated to the complainant. 
(ii) Lokpal can also, after enquiry, 
initiate court processes. 
President of India may, under 
exceptional circumstances be empowered 
to grant amnesty or pardon to those 
indicated by the Lokpal. 
There must be compulsive prov1s1on for 
taking prompt action on the report 
submitted by the Lokpal to the 
"competent authority". 
Lokpal should be given power to award 
punishment to guilty public functionary. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
41. Justice K.L. Sharma (Retd.), 
Lucknow, U.P., 
Memo. No. 100 
42. R. Anbarasu, Ex. M:P., 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 103 
43. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, lAS (Retd.), 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 107 
89 
Suggestion 
(i) The unanimous or majority 
recommendation of the Selection 
Committee should be binding on and 
acceptable to the President of India 
as the appointing Lokpal. The 
recommendation should be directly 
sent by the Vice President of India 
to the President of India and it 
should not be routed through the 
Cabinet or Prime Minister or any 
Minister. 
(ii) Actions taken, findings recorded, 
punishments and damages awarded 
by Lokpal against any person within 
its purview should be subject only to 
judicial review by the Supreme Court 
only and should not be assailable in 
any court of law in any manner 
whatsoever. 
In clause 17(b) following may be 
added:-
"There shoulc! be penal clause in the 
Lokpal Act itself .. The following penal 
clause may be added:-
If the accused is found guilty-
(i) He/She should be debarred from 
contesting any election to hold any 
office for the rest of his/her life 
period. 
(ii) If he/she has amassed wealth 
disproportionate to his/her income, 
he/she should be sentenced to 
rigorous life imprisonment. 
(iii) The disproportionate assets should 
be confiscated & credited to the 
exchequer or to the lawful owner'' 
The Report should be presented to the 
competent authority during the ongoing 
session or the next session of the 
Parliament or not later than 90 days, 
which-ever is earlier. 
~ . 

Sl. Source 
No. 
44. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
45. Bar Association of India 
Memo. No. 110 
i. Shri K. C. Bhardwaj, 
Convener, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 1 
2. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd. ), 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No.2 
90 
Suggestion 
(i) It may be specifically provided in 
clause 17 that, if the House of the 
People is dissolved after receiving 
the report from the Lokpal or while 
considering such report, the 
successor House of the People can 
take it up for consideration. 
(ii) Clause 17(1) may be modified 
as-'all or any of the allegations 
made in the complaint have or has 
been substantiated either wholly or 
partly, it shall be report in writing 
communicate its findings and 
proposed punishment to the 
competent Authority and the same 
shall be binding on the competent 
Authority. Only the quantum of 
punishment can be reduced by 
decision by two-third majority of the 
competent Authority'. 
The competent authority in relation to 
Prime Minister and Ministers should be 
the Lokpal himself. 
Clause 18 
The Cla.use should apply to only the 
member of Parliament himself or at best, 
to the dependent members of his family, 
the clause should additionally provide for 
routine random verification checks of 
assets of 20% of the members of 
Parliament every year such that 
certification of assets of all members . is 
completed over a five-year period. 
The assets and liabilities, as declared 
should be published and false declaration 
punished. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Shri Sanati Ranjan Mukharji, 
Advocate, 
Burdwan, 
Memo. No. 7 
4. Shri Moses P. Manohar, 
Secretary, 
The National Council of 
Churches in India, 
Memo. No. 13 
5. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
6. Shri Yatish Jain, 
President, Prakriti Mitra 
Paryavaran Samiti, 
Jabalpur (M.P.). 
Memo. No. 16 
91 
Suggestion 
(i) Access to the Statements of assets 
and liabilities by MPs should also be 
made available to the public and 
particularly law enforcing agencies 
in connection with inquiries which 
they might take up on their own or 
in response to complaints from the 
public. 
(ii) The word "family" should be 
·· defined so as to include married 
sons and daughters and both the 
parents even though they are living 
separately. 
(iii) Penalty should be provided for 
making false or incomplete 
declaration and also for not making 
the declaration contemplated under 
this clause. 
(iv) The first return of assets and 
liabilities should be filed soon after 
becoming on M.P. and every year, 
thereafter. 
It needs clarification whether member of 
Parliament will automatically cover the 
Prime Minister and other Ministers the 
relation may be made accessible to the 
ptllic scrutiny. 
The word "family" should be defined so 
as to include married sons and daughters 
and both the parents even though they 
are living separately. Penalty should be 
provided for making false or incomplete 
declaration and also for not making such 
a d~laration as contemplated by this 
clause. 
Members of all Legislative Assemblies 
and Chairman 9f different Corporations 
and Boards should also be brought under 
the purview of this Bill. 

\ . 
Sl. Source 
No. 
7. Shri Harish Kumar Sharma, 
Advocate, 
Secretary, Indian Citizen's 
Welfare & Crime Preventive 
Association, 
Aligarh, 
Memo. No. 17 
8. Shri Milap Chandra Chorsia 
New Delhi, 
·Memo. No. 18 
9. Shri H.R.S. Goel, I.E.S. (Retd.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 25 
10. Smt. Chanchal Behn, Secretary, 
Moral Education Foundation, 
Delh4 
Memo. No. 27 
11. Shri Arvind Chaturvedi, 
New Delhi, 
~mo. No. 46 
12. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 47 .. 
92 
Suggestion 
Sr. Officers and Qass I officers of the 
administrative and judicial field should 
also be included under provision of this 
clause. 
A new sub-clause (2) shall be inserted as 
under:-
"(2) Any member of Parliament failed to 
furnish a return under sub-clause (1), 
shall be directed by the Lokpal to furnish 
the same within 30 (thirty) days from the 
date or direction, even, jJ such member 
of Parliament failed to comply such 
directions, such non-compliance shall be 
construed as the contempt of the Lokoal. 
In stead of MPs, the terms 'every public 
funtionary' should be written. 
There should be a difinite date for 
submission of return, penalty for failing 
to submit. 
The word "family" should be defined. 
Clause 18, may be restructured as 
following:-
Clause 18(1):-"Every public servant 
shall within three months after the 
commencement of this Act and 
thereafter before the 30th June of every 
year submit to the Lokpal in the 
prescribed form a statement of his assets 
and liabilities and those of' the members 
of his family. 
(2) If no such statement is received by 
the Lokpal from any such public servant 
within the time specified in sub-sectim~ 
( 1), the Lokpal shall make a report to 
that effect to the competent authority 
and send a copy of the report to the 
public servant concerned. If within two 
••* of such report the public servant 
~ does not submit such 
statewaents, the Lokpal shall publish or 
F-138718/AS 

Sl. Source 
No. 
13. Shri Saroj Kumar, 
Orissa, 
Memo. No. 48 
14. Shri S.P. Dey, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 49 
15. Shri C.J.M. Mathew, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 51 
93 
Suggestion 
cause to be published the name of such 
public servant in three newspapers 
having nation wide publication or 
circulation". 
Explanation: In this section 'members of 
his family' means the spouse, children 
and parents of the concerned public 
servant. 
Clause 18 should be followed by an 
explanation, as follows:-
"Every member of parliament shall 
mean all the members of both the 
houses of Parliament including the 
nominated members as well as the 
speaker & Deputy Speaker of the Lok 
Sabha & the Deputy Chairperson of 
Eajya Sabha, except the ex-officio 
Chairman of Rajya Sabha". 
Caluse 18 may be restructured as 
follows:-
(i) In sub-clause (1) every member of 
Parliament shall furnish a return of 
all assets owned by hi11111Ier and the 
members of his/her family and all 
liabilities incurred by him/her and 
the members of his/her family 
before the LOK PAL every year in 
such form as may be prescribed. 
Every member of Parliament shall 
also furnish a certified copy of the 
Income tax, return for payment of 
income tax, wealth tax, etc., if he/ 
she is an income tax payee; 
otherwise he/she shall furnish 
affidavit to the effect that he/she is 
not an income tax payee. 
(ii) In sub-clause (2) the competent 
authority shall make rules for 
specifying the model code of 
conduct for the members of 
Parliament. 
(iii) The Lokpal may also have the 
antecedents of all the elected 
Members of Parliament verified by 
the Government · Investigating 
Agencies. 
(i) In case of substantial change in 
assets and liabilities, the submitter 
should give details of how the 
changes were effected. 
(ii) Need to specify the penalty for 
failure to submit such returns. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
16. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo, No. 60 
17. Shri R.K. Tiwari, 
Bareilly, U.P., 
Memo. No. 62 
18. Shri J.C. Wankhade, 
Magen.wadi, Wardha, 
Memo. No. 63 
19. Shri Rakesh Sharma, 
Kurukshetra, 
94 
Memo. No. 64 
20. Shri B.V. Setty, 
Bangalore, 
Memo No. 77 
21. Shri Ashutosh Mishra, 
Muradabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 84 
22. Shri K.K. Pande, 
Bilaspur, M.P., 
Memo. No. 87 
23. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex. SG. (Lok Sabha), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
Suggestion 
Should be modified to include any 
person who comes under the definition 
of 'Public functionary' in Section 2(g); 
and it should be made public document. 
Target date for furnishing return of 
assets may be fixed. 
Return of assets to be filed with speaker 
of Lok Sabha and Chairman of Rajya 
Sabha. 
To include MLAs, Ministers of State 
Governments, Senior Officers of Central 
& State Governments, Board, 
Corporation, local bodies under Central 
& State Governments. 
There should be a provision to attach the 
property of those guilty by the Lokpal. 
Following be added to the clause:­
"Every member of Parliament shall also 
furnish the sources of his income. Any 
property over & above this declaration 
shall be confiscated by the Lokpal. 
Family shall ~ean, husband/wife, 
mother & father and married & 
unmarried children. 
After the word "prescribed", following 
be inserted:- "To make it public and to 
invite public comments and suo-moto 
frame charges after giving reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, if necessary 
and initiate criminal proceedings under 
the act against Person concerned." 
(i) the terms 
Parliament" 
"every member of 
be substituted by 
"every public functionary". 
(ii) the words "and all liabilities 
incurred by him and the members of 
his family" be deleted. 
(iii) At the end of marginal heading add, 
"etc". 

Sl. Source 
No. 
24. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, 
Upalokayukta (Karnataka), 
Memo. No. 106 
25. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, 
lAS (Retd.), 
Bombay, 
Memo. No. 107 
26. Madras Bar Association, 
Memo No. 108 
1. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd.), 
Gujarat, 
MemQ_. No. 2 
95 
Suggestion 
Lok Pal should be authorised to make an 
investigation not only in cases of failure 
to furnish returns but also in cases where 
reasonable ground is afforded to suspect 
that a case of amassing wealth is 
involved. 
Returns should be filed by the 31st 
March every year. 
Family should be defined. 
(i) Following should be added in clause 
18, line 3, 'within a month of his being 
sworn in as a Member of Parliament or 
as a Member of Council of Ministers and 
thereafter in the first week of the 
succeeding calendar year during his 
tenure. 
(ii) Family should be defined to include 
father, mother, step mother, brother, 
step brot~er, sister, step sister and son, 
doughter, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, 
children of son and daughter. 
(iii) After clause 18, clause 18(a) should 
be added in the following terms-'Prime 
Minister· or a Minister who assumes 
office without being a member of either 
House shall furnish a return of assets 
owned by him and by his family to the 
Lokpal within a month of his being 
sworn in as Prime Minister or Minister'. 
Clause 20 
The Provisions under the clause are in 
conflict with the concept of bringing 
transparency into administration. The 
Lokpal's report should not merely be 
placed before the Houses of Parliament 
but should be published and made 
accessible to the public. This will have a 
salutary effect on arousing the awareness 
of accountability among the "Public 

Sl. Source 
No. 
2. Shri Milap Chandra Chorasia, 
New ,Delhi, 
Memo. No. 18 
3. Shri Prakash Chaube, 
Advocate, 
Bihar, 
Memo. No. 19 
4. Shri R.B. Sharma, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 75 
96 
Suggestion 
functionaries" and even among the 
public servants. 
Sub clause (1) shall be substituted as 
under: 
"The Lokpal shall decide, whether 
any information . obtained by the 
Lokpal, or by any officer, employee, 
agency or person referre.d to in 
Clause 8, in course of, or for the 
purposes of, any verification or 
enquiry under this Act, and any 
evidence recorded or collected in 
connection therewith shall be treated 
or not as confidential, in 
considerations of the security or 
defence of the country, if so 
decided, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872, no court shall be entitled 
to compel the Lokpal, or any such 
officer, employee, agency or person 
to give evidence relating to such 
information or to produce the 
evidence so recorded or collected." 
(i) There should be provision that the 
record, report/finding of the Lokp~ 
should have the status of section 74 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
after completion of enquiry 
conducted by the Lokpal but there 
should have been strictly ban on the 
court of Law except the Supreme 
Court to call for the report, record 
any findipg of the Lokpal in course 
of any judicial trial etc. 
(ii) Detail of enquiry should be available 
to public after completion of enquiry 
on payment of the requisite cost. 
The proceedings of the Lokpal should be 
made public to ensure transparency, 
except when it is necessary to conduct 
investigations & proceedings in camera. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
5. Shri Pradeep Kumar, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 83 
6. Shri P. Guha, 
Kharagpur (W.B.), 
Memo. No. 90 
7. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, 
Upalokayukta (Karnataka), 
Memo. No. 106 
1. Shri G.R. Anandimath, 
Hubli, Kamataka, 
Memo No. 57 
2. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
3. Justice K.L. Sharma (Retd.), 
Lucknow, U.P., 
Memo. No. 100 
4. Shri Dharma Vira, 
Memo. No. 105 
1. Shri Barish Kumar Sharma, 
Advocate, 
Secretary_~- Jndian Citizen's 
Welfare & Crime Prevention 
Association, Aligarh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Memo. No. 17 
2. Shri H.R.S. Goel, l.E.S. (Retd.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 25 
97 
Clause 21 
Suggestion 
Provisions be made to institute penal 
proceedings against any journalist and/or 
newspaper which publishes reports about 
any matter or proceedings before the 
Lokpal, till the time it has been finally 
disposed off. 
In Sub-clause (1), the words "no court" 
needs clarification. 
Lokpal should have a discretion of 
disclosure. 
The quantum of fine is to be specified 
under Sub-clause (1). 
In Sub-clause (2), bonafide criticisms and 
analysis should be exempted. 
Power to punish for its contempt to 
execute and enforce compliance of its 
decisions, orders and directions against 
the delinuents or the persons concerned 
should be specifically conferred on the 
Lokpal. 
Clause 21(1) and (2) should be stringent. 
Clause 22 
(i) The punishment under Sub-clause 
(2) should be more than that 
provided for. 
(ii) Under Sub-clause (4) High Court 
should be replaced by Supreme 
Court of India. 
In Clause 22(4), it spould be Supreme 
Court not High Court for appealing. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Shri B.B. Ratho, Sr. Advocate, 
President, High Court Bar, 
Association, Orissa, 
Memo. No. 43 
4. Dr. V. Vijaya Kumar, 
Bangalore, 
Memo. No. 47 
5. Shri G.R. Anandimath, 
Hubli, Karnataka, 
Memo. No. 57. 
98 
Suggestion 
In Clause 22 (4) the word "High" 
appearing in lines 1 and 3 be deleted and 
substitute the same by . the word 
"Supreme" and the Explanation given 
may be deleted. 
Clause 22 (1) may be restructured as 
follows:-
"If at any stage of a proceeding before 
the Lokpal, it appears to the Lokpal that 
any person appearing in such proceedings 
had knowingly or wilfully given false 
evidence, had fabricated evidence with 
the intention that such evidence should 
be used in such proceedings or had 
wilfully withheld or had failed to provide 
when called upon to do · so, evidence 
within his control, the Lokpal may, if 
satisfied that it is necessary and 
expedient in the interests of justice that 
the person should be tried summarily for 
giving or fabricating, as the case may be 
false evidence of withholding or failing to 
provide evidence, take cognizimce of the 
offence and may, after giving the 
offender a reasonable opportunity of 
showing cause why he should not be 
punished for such offence, try such 
offender summarily, so far as may be, in 
accordance with the procedure prescrit?ed · 
for summary trials under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, and sentenc¢· -
him to imprisonment for a term which · 
may extend to six months, or to fine 
which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or to bbth". 
(i) In Sub-clause ( 4) appeal should be 
only to Supreme Court. 
(ii) Provision should be made to furnish 
copy of the order forthwith to the 
person concerned. 

\ 718/RS 
Sl. Source 
No. 
6. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
7. Shri D.B. Sharma, 
Allahabad, U.P., 
Memo. No. 70 
8. Shri P. Guha, 
Kharagpur (W.B.), 
Memo. No. 90 
9. Shri Dharma Vira, 
Memo. No. 105 
10. Justice Kamleshwar Nath, 
Upalokayukta (Karnataka), 
Memo. No. 106 
1. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd.), 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No. 2 
99 
Suggestion 
(i) In Sub clause (1) the provisiOn of 
Summary trial should be omitted. 
(ii) Special task force to be constituted 
by Lokpal to deal with informal 
complaints. 
In Sub clause (1) the last two lines be 
substituted with "and sentence him to 
imprisonment for a term, which may 
extend to six months or to a fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees or 
both." 
In Sub clause (4), the proviSion for 
appeal to the High Court is to be 
removed. 
Clause 22 (1) and (2) the sentence of the 
offence for false complaint should be 
severe. 
This clause should be amended to 
provide for an appeal to the Supreme 
Court. 
Clasue 23 
The Provision of Clause 13 (2) deprive 
the public from getting true information. 
In the absence of any opportunity to the 
public to know about the deliberations of 
the Lokpal, there is likelihood of public 
suspicion and even rumour mongering, 
which is unhealthy for public peace. 
There must be some way of reaching 
information to the public through the 
media regarding the inquiries in hand of 
the Lokpal. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
2. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, 
Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No.7 
3. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
100 
Suggestion 
(i) Sub clause (1) should be deleted. It 
is a draconian provision that violates 
all considerations of transparency 
and the freedom of the Press. 
(ii) The whole of this clause deserves to 
be deleted as it is unconstitutional. 
However, in order to protect the 
interest of the person aggrieved by 
publication, the following may be 
substituted: 
"If anybody prints or publishes any 
information in respect of any 
complaint under this Act and if the 
Lokpal dismisses such complaint 
under Clause 12 or where it closes 
the case under Clause 17(1)(a), the 
person who has printed or published 
the information shall also print and 
publish the result of the complaint 
under Clause 12 or Clause 17(1)(a), 
with equal prominence and 
presentation. 
The whole of this section deserves to be 
· deleted as it is unconstitutional. In order 
to protect the interest of the person who 
is aggrieved by publication following 
should be substituted:-
"lf anybody prints or publishes any 
information in respect of any 
complaint under this Act and if the 
Lokpal dismisses such complaint under 
Clause 12 or where it closes the case 
with respect to such complaint under 
Sub clause (a) of Clause 17(1), the 
person who has printed or published 
the information shall also print and 
publish the result of the complaint 
under Clause 12 or Clause 17(1)(a) 
with equal prominence and 
presentation two times at the interval 
of ten days. If he fails to do this he 
shall incur the penalty of six months' 
simple imprisonment and/or fine of 
Rs. 10,000/- to be imposed by the 
Lokpal in a summary trial under this 
Act". 
F-1487 

Sl. Source 
No. 
4. Shri Milap Chandra Chorasia, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 18 
5. Smt. Chanchal Behn, Secretary, 
Delhi, 
Memo. No. 27 
6. Dr. Hari Sharan, Saxena, 
Bhopal, M.P., 
Memo. No. 54 
7. Shri G.R. Andanimath, 
Hubli, Karnataka, 
Memo. No. 57 
8. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
9. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
10. Shri A. Sowrirajan, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 99 
11. Shri Dharma Vira, 
Memo. No. 105 
12. Bar Council of India 
Memo. No. 110 
101 
Suggestion 
Part (c) of Sub clause (1) shall be 
substituted as under: 
"where the Lokpal directed not to print 
or publish any information with respect 
to any complaint under this Act." 
This Clause should be deleted. 
Substitute the words "three months" 
instead of "six months" and "Five 
Hundred" instead of "Ten thousand" in 
Sub clause (3). 
Provision be made to furnish copy of the 
order forthwith to the person concerned 
under Sub clause (5). 
Punishing any person for disclosure of 
information in respect of complaints and 
proceedings under this Act is against the 
right to know and hence Sub clause (3) 
should be deleted. 
Sub clause (1) should be deleted as there 
should be complete transparency before 
the Lokpal. 
Restriction imposed on freedom of Press 
is unfortunate. 
Clause 23(1) and (2)-it should have a 
higher punishment than what is provided. 
Clause 23(2)-the period of 
imprisonment should be extended to 
3 years and fine for Rs. 50,0001. 
(i) The Secrecy provision deserves to be 
relaxed and only the secrecy of the 
proceedings should be ensured. 
· (ii) Punishment under clause 23(3) 
should be not more than 15 days 
imprisonment and fine of not more than 
Rs. 2000/-. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Shri D.N. Bhargava, 
Controller General (Retd.), 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No. 2 
2. Dr. J .J. Bennett, 
President, 
Indiah Citizens Forum, 
Madras, 
Memo. No. 5 
3. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, 
Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
4. Dr. Ajaya Kumar Mishra, 
Chairman, Sankalp, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 10 
5. Shri L.B. Ambarkhana, 
Advocate, 
Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 11 
6. Shri Moses P. Manohar, 
Secretary, 
The National Council of Churches 
in India, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 13 
102 
Suggestion 
Clause 24 
The penalties should be for complaints 
found to be patently false and malicious. 
At the same time the Act should also 
prescribe the penalties to be imposed on 
the public functionaries found guilty by 
the Lokpal. 
In sub clause (1) before "false" add the 
words "malicious and". 
(i) There is no need for summary trails by 
the Lokpal. Action can be taken under 
the normal laws in case false evidence is 
given. The Lokpal can also be free to 
suspend or terminate its proceedings in 
such cases under Clause 17(1)(a). 
(ii) the Clause should be deleted as the 
ordinary law of the land is sufficient to 
deal with a false complaint. 
The term of imprisonment and the 
quantum of fine as provided in case of 
false complaints under sub clause (2) 
may be reduced. The offender may be 
sentenced to imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and also 
to fine which may extend to fifteen 
thousand rupees. 
There must not b~ any punishment on 
failure to prove complaint, otherwise no 
one will dare to proceed before the 
Lokpal. 
The punishment provided in case of false 
complaint under Sub clause (2) is too 
heavy. The Clause should be suitably 
modified to give a chance to any one to 
register a complaint if he/she has 
genuine suspicion on the acts of 
commission and omission of a public 
functionary. 
-------------------

Sl. Source 
No. 
7. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
8. Shri S.S. Jagatap, 
Advocate, 
Sangli (Maharash tra), 
Memo. No. 15 
9. Shri I. U. Gehani, 
Lucknow, U.P., 
Memo. No. 21 
10. Shri Karan Singh Shadipuria, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 45 
11. Shri C.J .M. Mathew, 
Haryana, 
Memo. No. 51 
12. Shri Samir J. Roy, 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No. 52 
13. Dr. Hari Sharan Saxena, 
Bhopal, M.P., 
Memo. No. 54 
14. Shri N.K. Ja)akumar. 
Thiruvanan tha ;1Lmun, 
Memo. No. 60 
15. Shri Rakesh Sharma, 
Kurukshetra. 
Memo. No. 64 
103 
" 
Suggestion 
In Sub-Clause (1), words "frivolous, 
malicious and without reasonable 
grounds" should be added after the word 
"false". 
The punishment for making false 
complaint is too heavy and it well desist 
persons from making even genuine 
complaints for fear of failing to prove it. 
Hence, the punishment must be less than 
that for provided under Clause 22. The 
convicted complainant must also get two 
chances of appeal i.e. first appeal to 
High Courts and the second appeal to 
Supreme Court as provided under Clause 
22 (4). 
The punishment proposed under Sub 
clause (2) is too heavy and will 
discourage the public to make complaint. 
Sub clause (2) should be deleted. 
Object of the Lokpal is to deter 
corruption. Since the complainant will 
not have access to official files, etc. 
punitive action should not be taken 
against him. Punishment should be 
confined to malafide cases. 
There should be no lower limit on 
imprisonment period under Sub clause 
(2). 
Sub clause (2) should be either deleted 
or amended and substitute the words 
"three months" instead of "one year", 
"one year" instead ·of "three years"; 
"one thousand" 111 place of "fifty 
thousand". 
Provision for punishing the complainant 
should be dispensed with. 
Persons making false complaint must not 
be punished under such hardprovisions. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
16. Shri Dharam Pal, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 67 
17. Shri S.P .. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.), 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 92 
18. Shri C.K. Jain, 
Ex. SG (Lok Sabha),New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
19. Justice K.L. Sharma (Retd.), 
Lucknow, 
Memo. No. 100 
20. Justice P.B. Sawant, Chairman, 
Press council of India 
21. Madras Bar Association. 
Memo. No. 108 
22. Bar Association of India 
Memo. No. 110 
104 
Suggestion 
Sub clauses (1) to (4) should be deleted. 
In Sub clause (1), the complainant, 
should be punished only if the complaint 
is false and with malafide intentions. 
This Clause has to be worded carefully 
and ·provide punishment for manifesting 
malafide and baseless complaints for 
character assassinations, and complaints 
which do not succeed in final inquiry but 
had prima facie case would deserve no 
action against the complainant. 
No quantum of fine or punishment to the 
complainant in the case of false and 
frivolous complaint be fixed in the Bill 
· and it should be left to be determined by 
the Lokpal in a ·judicious manner after 
the conclusion of enquiry or trial. The 
complainant should not be subjected to 
prosecution or any imprisonment. 
Clause 24 as it should be deleted and 
instead· be substituted by a new Clause 
24 whereunder the Lokpal may be given 
power to direct the complainant to pay 
damages to the public functionary, as 
may be considered just and proper in the 
case by the Lokpal. 
Clause 24 should be deleted. 
If a complaint is found to be false, then 
the complainant should be proceeded 
against, under the general law and the 
provision of summary trial should be 
deleted. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Shri K.C. Bhardwaj, 
Convener, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 1 
2. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Chairman, Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 7 
3. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court, 
Ahmedabad, · 
Memo. No. 14 
4. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
Jaipur, 
Memo. No. 56 
5. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60. 
105 
Suggestion 
Clause 26 
The Lokpal's report must invariably 
contain its explicit view whether the 
allegations have not been proved or had 
not been substantiated. But the 
unbridled power must not lie with the 
competent authority to decide whether 
the allegations have not been proved or 
had not been substantiated. In case of 
disagreement with the Lokpal, the 
competent authority should record in 
writing the basis of the disagreement and 
refer the matter back to Lokpal so that 
Lokpal may clarify the reason for its 
decision. If the competent authority still 
disagrees with the view of Lokpal, 
reference should lie with the Supreme 
Court for final decision. 
(i) Either the whole of this clause be deleted 
as remedy under ordinary law cannot be 
barred, alternatively the Clause may be 
amended so as to restrict further 
proceedings in court, subject to the prior 
sanction of the Lokpal. 
(ii) The limitation in this Clause is 
undesirable. New or additional evidence 
may become available to a complainant 
to file a prosecution in a court of law and 
his right to do so should not be denied. 
The Clause should be deleted. 
The recommendations of the Lokpal 
pertaining to inquiry will have to be 
accepted and implemented by the 
Government within a stipulated period. 
Bar of prosecution on allegations in 
respect of the same matter as m the 
complaint should be removed. 

·:, 
\ 
Sl. Source 
No. 
6. Shri Dharam Pal, 
New Delhil 
Memo. No. 67 
7. Justice J>.B. Sawant, Chairman 
Press Council of India 
Memo. No. 104 
8. Centre for Policy Research 
Memo. No. 109 
9. Bar Association of India 
Memo. No. 110 
1. Shri Kewal Khanna, 
JaipurJ· 
Memo. No.· 56 
2. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.) 
New Delhi, 
Memo No. 92 
106 
Suggestion 
This clause should be deleted. 
Clause 26 should be deleted completely. 
In line 3 of clause 261 the words 'or the 
competent authority' need to be deleted. 
This Clause runs contrary to the basic 
principles of constitution and thus, 
deserves to be deleted. 
Clause 27 
The jurisdiction of public functionary 
needs to be further covered by bringing 
Governors into its jurisdiction besides 
other public functionaries. 
In Sub clause (1), Lokpal should have 
suo-mota jurisdiction on the basis of 
newspaper reports, etc. 
3. Justice Kamleshwar Nath Upalokayukta 
(Karnataka), 
The Lokpal should be free to conduct 
exhaustive investigation independently 
and without any inhibition. Memo. No. 106 
1. Shri B.B. Ratho, Sr. Advocate 
President, High Court Bar 
Association, Orissa, 
Memo. No. 43 
1. Shri Arvind Chaturvedi, 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 46 
2. Shri Samir J. Roy, 
Gujarat, 
Memo. No. 52 
Clause 28 
This Clause be deleted and other 
following clauses be renumbered 
accordingly. 
Clause 29 
The amount so determined by the 
Lokpal should be recovered from the 
guilty and should not be paid by Central 
Government. 
The complainant shall be compensated 
by the public functionary proven guilty 
and rewarded by the Central 
Government as determined by the 
Lokpal. 
-----------------··--···· --- --·------·----- -- ····--·--·- -·-------··· .. --- ···--· 

Sl. Source 
No. 
3. Madras Bar Association 
Memo. No. 108 
1. Shri S.S. Jagatap, Advocate 
Sangli, Maharashtra, 
Memo. No. 15 · 
2. Dr. Prem Singh Dahiya, 
Himachal Pradesh 1 
Memo. No. 30 · 
3. Shri S.P. Paramasivaiah, 
Advocate, 
Karnataka 1 
Memo. No. 31 
4. Shri Nath Sonkatri, 
Madhya Pradesh J 
Memo. No. 32 
5. Shri G.R. Andanimath, 
Hubli Karnataka 1 
Memo. No. 57 
6. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS 
New Delhi 1 
Memo. No. 92 
1. Shri B.B. Ratho, 
Senior Advocate 
Cuttack~ 
Memo. No. 43 
SA 718/RS 
107 
Suggestion 
After the Lokpal determines the amount 
which shall be paid to the complainant 
by way of compensation or reward, it 
shall be order that the same shall be 
recovered from the concerned public 
functionary or from his estate and such 
reward or compensation shall be treated 
as a sum to be recovered under the 
Revenue Recovery Act. 
Clause 30 
Clause 32 
There must be a provision to go to the 
Supreme Court and the decision of the 
Supreme Court shall be binding on the 
Lokpal. 
The appeal in such cases should be to the 
Snpreme Court. 
All the first appeal against the orders 
passed under the Lokayukta Act of states 
shall lie to the upa-Lokpal. Similarly 
against upa-Lokpal to Lokpal. The 
orders of Lokpal should be final. 
The orders of Lokpal should not be 
challenged anywhere else. 
After the words "in any court" the words 
"except as provided under this Act." may 
be incorporated in Sub clause (2). 
In sub-clause (2), decisions of the Lokpal 
as distinguished from · recommendations 
should be subject to the jurisdiction of 
the Supreme Court. 
32 (2)(b) and (c) be deleted and the sub­
clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g) renumbered 
as (b), (c), (d) and (e). 

Sl. Source 
No. 
1. Shri S. D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, 
Lok Sevak Sangh, 
New Delhi 1 
Memo. No.7 
2. Shri Godfrey Gonsalves, J.I. 
Goaj 
Memo. No. 12 
3. Shri Moses P. Manohar, 
Secretary, 
The National Council of Churches 
in India, New Delhi 1 
Memo. No. 13 
4. Shri T.U. Mehta, 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
Ahmedabad1 
Memo. No. 14 
5. Shri S.S. Jagatap, Advocate 
Sangli (Maharashtra), 
Memo. No. 15 
6. Shri Prakash Chaube, Advocate 
Bihar, 
Memo. No. 19 
7. Shri C.J.M. Mathew, 
Haryana 1 
Memo. No. 51 
8. Shri O.K. Mohapatra, IPS 
New Delhi 1 
Memo. No. 53 
108 
Suggestion 
Clause 33 
(i) Clause 33 (a) should be deleted as "suo 
moto" jurisdiction is contemplated. 
(ii) This Clause is redundant in view of the 
limit on jurisdiction contained in clause 
9. If, however, this Clause has · to be 
retained, it wo~ld be wrong to exclude 
the Chief Justices and the Judges of the 
High Courts in Sub clause (a). 
Sub clause 33 (b) should be deleted. 
Sub clause 33 (b) should be deleted. 
Power should be conferred on the 
Lokpal to initiate inquiry on its own. 
(i) 33 (b) should be deleted as suo motu 
jurisdiction is contemplated 
(ii) In 33 (a) add-
"(iv) Any Chief Justice or a judge of any 
of the High Courts in India". 
Judges of the High Courts and lower 
courts should also be brought under the 
purview of this clause. 
(33)(a)(iii) should be deleted. 
Under Sub clause (b) tke Lokpal should 
be given power to take suo moto action. 
(i) Sub clause (b) should be included as 
Clause 2(h) and the Lokpal be 
empowered to make any enquiry upon its 
own knowledge or information. · · 
--....,.....------·-- -·-··------· ·---· ··-- . -----······-
.F,-1'567WRS 

"'· 
Sl. Source 
No. 
9. Dr. Hari Sharan Saxena, 
Bhopal M.P.4 
Memo. No. 54 
10. Shri D.C. Hardanie, 
Rajasthan, 
Memo. No. 59 
11. Dr. N.K. Jayakumar, 
Thiruranauthapuram, 
Memo. No. 60 
12. Dr. U.K. Jha, 
U.P.> 
Memo. No. 61 
13. Shri J.C. Wankhade, 
Wardho, 
Memo. No. 63. 
14. Sliri Rakesh Sharma, 
Kurukshetra > 
Memo. No. 64 
15. Shri S.P. Mukerji, 
New Delhi 7 
Memo. No. 92 
16. Shri C.K. Jain, Ex. SG (Lok Sabha) 
New Delhi, 
Memo. No. 93 
17. Shri A. Sowrirajan 
New Delhi 1 
Memo. No. 99 
18. Justice P.B. Sawant, Chairman 
Press Council of India 
Memo. No. 104 
19. Shri Dharma Vira, 
Memo. No. 105 
109 
Suggestion 
Sub clause (a) should be deleted. 
Lokpal should act suo moto on the 
report of CAG and PAC under Sub 
clause (b). 
Lokpal should be given powers to initiate 
proceedings suo moto. 
Lokpal should be given power to initiate 
suo moto enquiry against public 
functionary. 
(i) In Sub clause a(i) the words "and Prime 
Minister" should be added. 
(ii) Sub clause a(ii) and (iii) should be 
deleted. 
This Clause must be deleted and persons 
mentioned there should be included 
under the provisions of the Act. 
(i) In Sub-clause (a), the jurisdiction should 
cover Election Commission, C&AG, 
UPSC, Governor etc. 
(ii} In Sub-clause (b), Lokpal should be 
empowered to take cognizance 'suo moto 
also, and hence this clause should be 
deleted. 
In sub-clause (b), the Lokpal may take 
suo moto cognizance of a case. 
In sub-clause (b), · the Lokpal should be 
given the power to initiate trial suo 
mota. 
(i) Clause 33(a)(iii), the reference to 'the 
Chairman or any other member of the 
UPSC' should be deleted. 
(ii) clause 33(b) should be deleted. 
All the judges of Supreme Court, 
C.A.G., C.E.C. and other E.Cs. and 
other Commissioners of the Commission 
and the Chairman and Members of the 
UPSC should be brought under the 
jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
------------------------

Sl. Source 
No. 
20. Justice Kamleshwar Nuth, 
Upalokayukta, Karnataka, 
Memo. No. 106 
21. Bar Association of India 
Memo. No. 110 
1. Shri S.D. Sharma, 
Working Chairman, 
Lok Sevak Sangh 
New Delhi 1 
Memo. No. 7 
2. Shri T. U. Mehta, Sr. Advocate 
Supreme Court 
Ahmedabad, 
Memo. No. 14 
3. Shri S.P. Mukerji, lAS (Retd.) 
New De1hL 
Memo. No. 92 
1. Shri V.K. Mahaswa,ri, H.J .S. 
Addl. Distt. and Session Judge. 
Deharadun 1 
Memo. No. 24 
110 
Suggestion 
The exclusion of suo moto jurisdiction, 
Lokpal is a serious weakness and 
therefore clause (b) should be deleted. 
The Lokpal should be empowered to 
start inquiry suo moto. 
Clause 34 
Add the following-
"And nothing contained in this Act shall 
enable the Lokpal to inquire into and to 
deal with the matters which are pending 
or which are, in future, brought before 
any court of law". 
Clause 35 
Add the following in the clause "and 
nothing contained in this Act shall enable 
the Lokpal to inquire into and to deal 
with the matters which are pending or 
which are, in future, brought before any 
court of law". 
Delay by Commission of Enquiry should 
fall within the jurisdiction of the Lokpal. 
Clause 35 should be deleted from this 
Act and this should be incorporated in 
Commission of Enquiry Act 1952. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
1. Smt. Chanchal Behn. Secretary. 
Delhi, 
Memo. No. 27 
In addition to corrupt1on and 
malpractices, there should ~tbo be the 
provision of trial for dereliction by tlw 
legislatures. or the Senior offiL·crs under 
Government cmploymcnt. 

Sl. Source 
No. 
111 
Suggestion 
Statement of Objects and Reasons 
1. Shri Bipin Behari Ratho, (i) In para 5 
Freedom Fighter, Sr. Advocate "In the 6th line after the word 'by' delete 
and President of High Court the words "Chief Justice of India or by 
Bar Association, Orissa, any other judge of the Supreme Court, 
Cuttack i nominated by the Chief Justice of India 
Memo. No. 43 for this purpose". Substitute in its place 
by the words "A Committee consisting of 
the Chief Justice of India and two senior 
most judges of the Supreme Court". 
(ii) In the 9th line, delete the word 'by'. 
In the lOth, 11th and 12th lines, delete 
the words "Minister in charge of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and Minister of 
State of Personnel and Public Grievances 
and Pension. 

APPENDIX-III 
(See Para 10 of the Report) 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
Sl 
No. 
Name of Witness(es) 
1. Shri Arvind Varma, Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions 
2. Shri C.K. Jain, Former Secretary General, Lok Sabha 
3. Shri T.N. Chaturvedi, M.P. 
4. Justice Guman Mal Lodha, M.P. 
5. Shri Satish Aggarwal, M.P. 
6. Shri Arun Shourie, Journalist 
7. Shri H.D. · Shourie, representative of 'Common Cause' a Non­
Governmental Organisation (NGO) 
8. Representatives of the confederation of Indian Industry (C.I.I.) 
(i) Shri Deepak Singh, Chairman, CII Public Policy Committee 
(ii) Shri Ranjit Puri, Chairman, CII Customer Focus and Marketing 
Committee 
(iii) Shri Deshbir Singh, Chairman, CII Uttar Pradesh Committee 
(iv) Shri R. Srinivasan, Resident Director and General Manager 
(Corporate Affairs), ANZ Grindlays Bank 
(v) Shri S. Sen, Sr. Director, CII 
(vi) Shri Deepak Roy, CII 
Date of 
Hearing 
06.2.1997 
19.2.1997 
03.3.1997 
03.3.1997 
04.3.1997 
17.3.1997 
17.3.1997 
18.3.1997 
9. Shri N.N. Vohra, Former Home Secretary 19.3.1997 
10. Shri B.G. Varghese, Journalist 19.3.1997 
11. Prof. S.S. Singh, IIPA 19.3.1997 
12. Justice R.N. Prasad, Former Judge of Patna High Court 
13. Shri O.K. Mohapatra, IPS, I.G.P. and C.V.O., Airports Authority 
of India 
14. Shri Kuldip Nayar, Journalist 
15. Shri S.P. Mukherjee, Former Secretary Government of India 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) 
16. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, M.P. 
112 
19.3.1997 
19.3.1997 
20.3.1997 
20.3.1997 
20.3.1997 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMI'ITEE 
XII 
*TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th October, 1996, in Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarasi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
7. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
9. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
10. Shri Vijay Goel 
11. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
12. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
14. Prof. M. Kamson 
15. Shri Idris Ali 
16. Shri Gopal Tandel 
17. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
18. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. The Committee, thereafter, after some discussion, keeping in view the public impor­
tance of the Lokpal Bill, 1996 decided to invite suggestions/views .from the public including 
representatives d Bar Councils, Supreme Court and High Court Bar Associations, etc. 
thereon. The Committee accordingly directed the Secretariat to issue necessary advertise­
ment in this regard in the print media and give it wide publicity through the electronic media 
as well. · · 
4. * * * 
5. The Committee then adjourned 
Wednesday, the 9th October, 1996. 
at 3.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 
.. . 
• Minutes of First'to Eleventh Meetings of the Committee celate to some other matters discussed by the 
Committee. 
*** Omitted portion relates to some other matter 4iscussed by the Committee. 
113 

XVID 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 6th February, 1997 in Committee 
Room, 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -· Chariman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
11. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
12. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
13. Shri Vijay Goel 
14. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
15. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
16. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
17. Prof. M. Kamson 
18. Shri ldris Ali 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
21. Shri Sudhir Giri 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
3. Shri Mukul Pande, Under Secretary 
4. Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Lokpal Bill, 1996.The Secretary, 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions made a presentation on the subject 
detailing the origin and the salient features of the Bill. The Members sought clarifications 
***Omitted portion relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
114 

115 
from him on various points arising out of his presentation and from the provisions of the 
Bill. The Committee directed the Secretary to send written replies to the points raised by the 
Members. 
4. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 P.M. to meet again on 19th February, 1997. 
SA 718/RS 

XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 19th February, 1997 in Room No. 
63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Vijay Goel 
11. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
12. Kumari Mamta Banerjee 
13. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
15. Prof. M. Kamson 
16. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
17. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
18. Shri Shatrltghan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Mukul Pande, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
WITNESS 
Shri C.K. Jain, Former Secretary General, Lok Sabha . 
2. ** •• ** 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up further consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996 
and heard the views of Shri C.K. Jain, former Secretary General, Lok Sabha on various 
provisions of the Bill. Members then sought clarifications from Shri Jain on a number of 
issues arising out of his presentation which were explained by him. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. 
***Omitted portion relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
116 
F·16B71E 

XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 3rd March, 1997, m Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Matang Sinh 
3. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
6. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
7. Shri Vi jay Goyal 
8. Kumari Mamta Banerjee 
9. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
10. Shri Khelsai Singh 
11. Shri Taslimuddin 
12. Shri Sudhir Giri 
D. Shri N. Dennis 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri T.N. Chaturvedi, M.P. 
2. Justice Guman Mal Lodha, M.P. 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses Shri T.N. Chaturvedi and 
Justice Guman Mal Lodha and briefed them about the business so far transacted by the 
Committee in examination of the Lokpal Bill, 1996. Thereafter, Shri Chaturvedi and Justice 
Lodha separately expressed their views on various provisions of the Bill. Members sought 
clarifications from them on several issues ansmg out of their presentation which were 
117 

118 
explained by them. The Committee requested Justice Lodha to submit his views in writing 
on certain clauses of the Bill. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday 
the 4th March, 1997. 

XXI 
TWENTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 4th March, 1997, in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
11. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
12. Shri Sudhir Giri 
13. Shri N. Dennis 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
15. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
16. Shri Torno Riba 
SECREtARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mukul Pande, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
WITNESS 
Shri Satish Agarwal, M.P. 
2. The Committee resumed consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996 and heard Shri Satish 
Agarwal, M.P. on the s~bject. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee Clecided to take evidence of eminent persons including bureaucrats, 
jurists, journalists, leaders, representatives of political parties and representatives of 
institutions/organisation etc. on the Bill in its meetings fixed for the 17th, 18th 19th and 20th 
March, 1997. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m. to meet again on 3.00 p.m. on Monday, 
the 17th March, 1997. 
119 

XXII 
TWENTY -SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 17th March, 1997 in Committee 
Room, 'A', Ground Floor,, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrj Jalaludin Ansari 
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABRA 
4. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
5. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
6. Shri Vijay Goyal 
7. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
8. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
9. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
10. Shri ldris Ali 
11. Shri Khelsai Singh 
12. Shri Sudhir Giri 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
AND PENSIONS 
Shri S.C. Tewary, Dy. Secretary 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri Arun Shourie. Journalist 
2. Shir H.D. Shourie, Representative of 'Common Cause', a Non-Governmental Organ­
isation (NGO) 
2. * * * 
3. The Committee thereafter took up further consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996 and 
separately heard Shri Arun Shourie and Shri H.D. Shourie on various provisions of the Bill. 
The Members sought clarifications from them on various p<'i.nts arising out of their 
submissions. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 
the 18th March, 1997. 
***Omitted portion relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
120 

XXIII 
TWENTY- THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 18th March, 1997 in Committee 
Room, 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SA.BHA 
2. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
3. Shri J&laludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
5. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
6. Shri Idris Ali 
7. Shri Khelsai ·Singh 
8. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
9. Shri Torno Rib a 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joi.nt Secretary 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
AND PENSIONS 
Shn S.C. 1ewary, Dy. Secretary. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (CII) 
Shri Deepak Singh, 
Shri Ranjit Puri, 
Shri Deshbir Singh, 
Shri R. Srinivasan, 
Shri s. Sen, 
Shri Deepak Roy, 
Chairman, en Public Policy 
Committee 
Chairman, en Customer Focus and Marketing Committee 
Chairman, CII Uttar Pradesh 
Committee 
Resident Director and General Manager (Corporate Affairs), 
ANZ Grindlays .Bank. 
Senior Director, Cll 
Deputy Director, CII 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII) and apprised them briefly about the endevours made in the past to 
enact legislation for establishment of an institution of Lokpal at the Central level and the 
interaction so far had by the Committee with a cross section of people including jurists, 
parliamentarians, journalists and other eminent persons on the Lokpal Bill, 1996 introduced 
in the Lok Sabha on the 13th September, 1996 and thereafter referred to the Committee. 
The Chairman then ·requested the representatives to express their views/suggestions on 
121 

122 
various provisions of the Bill. Shri Deepak Singh, and other representatives of the 
Confederation then placed before the Committee their views, particularly on the clauses 
which could be amended to strengthen the proposed institution of Lokpal. The Members 
thereafter sought certain clarifications from them on the points arising out of their 
submissions. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on 
Wednesday, the 19th March, 1997. 

XXIV 
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 19th March, 1997, in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
6. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
7. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
8. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
9. Shri Idris Ali 
10. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
11. Shri Sudhir Giri 
12. Shri N. Dennis 
13. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
14. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Slui S. Jason, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri N.N. Vohra, Former Home Secretary 
2. Shri B.G. Varghese, Journalist 
3. Prof. S.S. Singh, IIPA 
4. Justice R.N. Prasad, former Judge of Patna High Court 
5. ShriD.K. Mohapatra, IPS, IGP and CVO, AAI 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996 and separately 
heard S/Shri N.N. Vohra, B.G. Varghese, Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, Prof S.S. Singh 
and Shri D .K. Mohapatra on the various provisions and the scheme of the Bill. The 
Members sought clarifications from them on various points arising out of their submissions. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The CoJT.mittee then adjourned at 5.20 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 p.m. on Thursday, 
the 20th March, 1997. 
I?~ 

XXV 
TWENTY -FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 20th March, 1997, in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Shii Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Rajubhau Thakre 
6. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
7. Shri ldris Ali 
8. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
9. Shri N. Dennis 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary · 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri Kuldip Nayar, Journalist 
2. Shri S.P. Mukherjee, former Secretary, Government of India (Department of Agricul­
ture and Cooperation) 
3. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, M.P. 
2. The Committee resumed consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996 and heard S I Shri 
Kuldip Nayar and S.P. Mukherjee separately on the subject. The Members sought 
clarifications from them on several points arising our of their submission. Thereafter, the 
Committee heard the views of Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, M.P. and briefly explained about 
the process of interaction and discussion initiated by the Committee with a cross section of 
people including jurists, Parliamentarians, journalists and other eminent persons concerning 
examination of the Lokpal Bill, 1996. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, M.P. presented the view­
point of his party on the Bill before the Committee. Members then sought clarifications from 
him on certain points. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 P.M. 
124 

XXXIII 
*THIRTY-THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th March, 1997, in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
3. Shri N. Rajendran 
4. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
5. Shri Raj Babbar 
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
9. Prof. M. Kamson 
10. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
11. Shri N. Dennis 
12. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
13. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
14. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman on behalf of the Committee congratulated 
Shri Ramachandran Pillai on his re-election to the Rajya Sabha and welcomed him on his 
being re-nominated to the Committee. 
3. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause c.'Onsi.deration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996. 
Clauses 2 and 3 
The Committee felt that no change or amendment wt'ls necessary in Oauses 2 and 3. 
* Minutes of Twenty-sixth to l11irty-second meetings of. the Committee relate to some other matters discussed by 
the Committee. 
125 

126 
Clause 4 
The Committee noted that the 7 Member Committee as proposed in this Clause for 
recommending the names for appointment as Chairman and Members of the Lokpal seemed 
to be heavily loaded in favour of the party I parties in Government, giving excessive leverage 
to the ruling party I combine in the appointment process, and as such it would not inspire 
public confidence. The Committee, accordingly, felt that the first proviso to clause 4(1) 
should be amended and the Committee provided thereunder should comprise Vice-President 
of India as the Chairman and the Prime Minister, Speaker of the House of the people and 
the Leaders of Opposition in the House of the people and the Council of States as its 
Members. 
Clause 5 
The Committee felt that no change/ amendment was required m this clause. 
Clause 6 
The Committee felt that the term of office of 5 years provided under this clause for the 
Members of the Lokpal is rather too long and it should be reduced to three years. 
Clause 7 
The Committee noted that the status of the Chairman and the members of the Lokpal 
as envisaged in the Bill is akin to the Chief Justice/ Judges of the Supreme Court and the 
procedure for their removal should accordingly be more stringent vis-a-vis the one provided 
for under clause 7, if not analogous to the one lnid down under article 124 (4) and (5) of the 
Constitution. The Committee, therefore, expressed the view that clause 7 should be 
amended to provide for an inquiry against a member of the Lokpal for his removal to be 
made by the Chief Justice of India and the two senior-most judges of the Supreme Court. 
Clause 8 
The Committee was in broad agreement with the provisions made under this clause. 
The Committee, however, was of the view that lest there be any apprehensions about the 
Central Government or State Government taking inordinately long time in giving their 
concurrence for providing the services of any ·officer or employee or investigating agency to 
the Lokpal as prescribed under sub-clause (2) (ii) of clause 8, adequate provision be made in 
the rules to be framed under this Act vide clause 32 to epsure that the services of officers 
etc. by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, are provided 
to the Lokpal with due promptness. 
Clause 9 
The Committee felt that it should be obligatory for the Lokpal to inquire into the 
subject matter of the complaint made to it under this Act and accordingly the word 'may' 
occurring in sub clause (1) of clause 9 should be substituted by the word 'shall'. The 
Committee also expressed the view that the discretion conferred on the Lokpal under sub­
clause (3) of clause 9 to refer any matter cited in the complaint for inquiry under the 
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, was not desirable and accordingly the words 'except on 
the recommendation, or with the concurrence, of the Lokpal' occurring therein should be 
deleted. 

127 
Clause 10 
The Committee felt that having regard to the view expressed by it to do away with the 
powers conferred on the Lokpal vide clause 9 (3) for referring any matter cited in the 
complaint for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, sub clause (2) of clause 
10 would become redundant and hence it should also be deleted. 
The Committee also discussed at some length the provision contained in clause 10 (3) 
empowering the Lokpal to inquire into only complaints in respect of offences alleged to have 
been committed during the previous five years. The Committee was of the opinion that the 
limitation period of complaints needs to be enhanced to make it 10 years as many a time 
cases of corruption of immense proportions surface very late and national interest demands 
that they must be inquired into to bring the guilty to book. Besides, there already exist 
provisions in Lok Ayukta Acts of some States for inquiry into complaints in respect of 
offences alleged to have been committed upto 10 years earlier. 
Clause 11 
The Committee broadly agreed with the provisions of clause 11. tt, however, felt that 
the provision of making a deposit of Rs. lOOCY- under sub-clause (3) for filing a complaint 
need not be provided for in the Act, itself, because every time the fee is required to be 
enhanced I modified, the concerned authority would have to come before Parliament. It 
should instead be left to be provided for in the rules. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, 
the 1st May, 1997 to further take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 

XXXIV 
THIRTY -FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 1st May, 1997, in Committee Room 
'A', Parliament House Annexe,· New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
9. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
10. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
11. Shri Sudhir Giri 
12. Shri N. Dennis 
13. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati J aswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee resumed Clause by Clause consideration of the Lokpal Bill, 1996. 
Clause 12 
The Committee felt that in view of the change proposed by it in sub-clause {3) of clau<>e 
10 for raising the period of limitation for complaints from 5 years to 10 _years, consequential 
change should be made in clause 12{l){a) and the period of 5 years mentioned therein be 
substituted to read as 10 years. Likewise, in view of the proposed deletion of sub-clause (2) 
of clause 10, consequential change in clause 12 {1) {b) should also be effected. 
The Committee also noted that the wording of sub-clauses (c) and {d) of clause 12 {11 
confers unguided and arbitrary powers of in-limine rejection of complaints on the Lokpal. 
The Committee felt that it would be in the public interest to ensure proper investigation of 
complaints and accordingly it was necessary that the language of sub-clause {1) (c) of clause 
12 should be reworded to read 'that the complaint is manifestly false and vexatious' and sub­
clause {l){d) should llltogether be deleted. 
Clause 13 
The Committee expressed the view that the provision of in camera proceedings by the 
Lokpal as provided vide sub-clause (2) of clause 13 was not in consonance with the system 
128 

129 
of open court hearings currently prevalent in our country. Besides, it created unnecessary 
apprehensions in the minds of the people about the fairness of inquiry. The Committee, 
accordingly, felt that sub-clause (2) of clause 13 should be amended and the words in 
camera occurring therein should be substituted by the words in open and a proviso be 
added thereto as follows: 
'Provided that the Chairman and the Members of the Lokpal may conduct an 
inquiry in camera in exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recor<ted in 
writing.' 
Clause 14 
The Committee felt that as under Clause 14 the Lokpal could scuttle investigations 
being pursued by the Police officials under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, it 
should be deleted. 
Clause 15 
The Committee noted that under sub-clause (4) of clause 15 information as may be 
relevant or useful to the conduct of inquiry by the Lokpal can be withheld on various 
grounds as mentioned thereunder so much so that the Secretary to the Government of 
India or the Chief Secretary of the State Government have been given extensive powers 
to prevent disclosure of information to the Lokpal. The Committee felt that as sub-clause 
( 4) was inconsistent with the nature of proceedings before the Lokpal and denial of 
information would reduce the institution of Lokpal to a mockery, sub-clause (4) of clause 
15 should be deleted. The Committee also felt that in view of the deletion of sub-clause 
(4), consequential amendment in sub-clause (3) of clause 15 would become necessary. 
Clause 16 
The Committee was in broad agreement with the prov1s1ons of this clause. It was, 
however, of the view that the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 16 may be modified to 
provide that in cases where the documents seized by the Lokpal are required t.o be 
returned, the Lokpal shall return the same after retaining the copies thereof with due 
authentication. The Committee also felt that the explanation added to sub-clause (2) of 
clause 16 should be dropped. 
Clause 17 
The Committee considered the provisions of this clause in detail. It was of the view 
that after inquiry, the Lokpal should make a Report of its findings to the competent 
authority whether the offences alleged in the complaint have been found to be 
substantiated or not either wholly or partly and under no circumSlances it should be 
empowered to close the case. The complainant and the public functionary concerned 
should also be informed by the Lokpal about its having made such a Report. The 
Committee also felt that the Lokpal should, while communicating its findings and 
recommendations to the competent authority, clearly specify the action to be taken 
against the pubhc functionary against whom the offence alleged in the complaint has been 
found to be substantiated. either wholly or partly. The Committee was also of the 
opinion that as in substance sub-clauses (u) and (b) of clause 17 (1) related to findings of 
the Lokpal on the conclusion of inquiry, they could be combined together and brought 
under claw:e 17(1). 
The Committee was also of the opinion that sub-clause (3) may also be amended to 
provide for laying of the Report received from the Lokpal before the House of the 
People or the Council of States. as the cuse may be. within thr first week (instead of 

130 
within a period of 90 days as presently stipulated in the Act) on their assembling for a 
Session and for chronological reasons, the Committee suggested renumbering of sub­
clause (3) as amended, as sub-clause (2) and sub-clause {2), as sub-clause {3). 
Clause 18 
The Committee noted that clause 18 is too general in nature and accordingly felt 
that it should be amended to provide for -
(i) Furnishing of return of assets by the members within a period of 90 days on 
their becoming members and annually thereafter, within 90 days of 
commencement of each Financial Year; 
(ii) addition of an Explanation to- the clause to define the family as including both 
the spouse and dependent children; 
(iii) Reporting by the Lokpal of the details of the returns filed by the Members of 
Parliament to the Chairpersons of the House of the People and the Council of 
States; and 
(iv) a deterrent clause to deal with cases of non-filing or delayed filing of returns 
by the Members of Parliament or their filing them in an incomplete or falsified 
manner. 
Clause 19 
The Committee felt that the language of clause 19 should be slightly modified in 
the interest of clarity and the words 'the Members' occurring therein should be 
substituted with the words 'the Chairman and the Members of the Lokpal'. 
Clause 20 
The Committee was of the view that the bar placed on the courts to use evidence 
collected by the Lokpal under this clause was not justified and hence this clause should 
be deleted. 
Clause 21 
The Committee was in broad agreement with the provisions of clause 21 as it was 
necessary to respect and protect the dignity of the office of the Lokpal. The 
Committee, however, expressed the view that the sweep of sub-clause (2) of clause 21 
is too wide and tantamounts to an unreasonable restriction on free speech. The 
Committee felt that even otherwise the purpose contemplated under sub-clause (2) is by 
and large achieved by sub-clauses {1) and (3) and hence sub-clause (2) should be 
deleted. Reference to sub-clause (2) in sub-clause (3) consequentially would also have to 
go. 
Clause 22 
The Committee was of the view that sub-clause (1) of clause 22 should be deleted 
as provisions for summary trials for offences of the nature sought to be covered 
thereunder already exist in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. Accordingly, reference 
to Sections 175, 178, 179 and 180 of the Indian Penal Code in sub-clause (2) of clause 
22 becomes unnecessary and the words from 'in Section 175... to the Indian Penal 
Code' occurring therein be substituted by the words 'in clause 21{1) of this Act'. 
The Committee also felt that having regard to the status of the Chairman and 
Members of the Lokpal which is akin to the Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme 
Courts, sub-clause (4) of clause 22 should be amended to provide for appeals against 
the convictions pronounced by the Lokpal to the Supreme Court (and not to the High 

131 
Court). The Explanation to sub-clause (4) would consequently become redundant and hence 
it should be deleted. 
Clauses 23, 24 & 25 
The Committee noted that Clauses 23 and 24 confer powers on the Lokpal to try 
offences arising out of printing or publication of any information in relation to any complaint 
or making of such complaints as are held by it to be false. Clause 25 has been provided for 
modified application of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure for the trial of 
offences under clauses 22, 23 and 24. 
The Committee felt that there has to be transparency in the functioning of the Lokpal 
and it should not convert itself into a criminal court except for the purpose of punishing ex­
facie cases of contempt under clause 21(1). Clause 23 tends to make the proceedings of the 
Lokpal too confidential and clause 24 confers penal jurisdiction on the Lokpal to punish 
complainant whose complaints are held to be false. The Committee observed that on the 
analogy of the Lokpal having no powers to prosecute or punish guilty public functionary, no 
powers should be vested in it to prosecute or punish the complainant or any witness who 
could at best be left to be prosecuted under the Indian Penal Code in the normal course. 
The Committee, accordingly felt that clauses 23 and 24 should be dropped and clause 25 
which would consequentially become redundant should also be deleted. 
Clause 26 
The Committee noted that the bar placed on prosecution under this clause in respect of 
allegations not proved or .substantiated before the Lokpal and the courts being barred from 
taking cognizance of such allegations was contrary to the spirit of the ordinary law of the 
land which provided for appeals at various stages in the courts. The Committee, accordingly, 
felt that the complainants should have a right to go to the courts to seek appropriate 
remedies in case they are not satisfied with the decision of the LokpaVcompetent authority 
and clause 26 should, therefore, be dropped. 
Clause 27 
The Committee was of the view that for the words 'notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act' occurring in clause 27 (1) the words 'subject to the provisions of clause 12' 
should be substituted to set at rest any apprehensions arising from the orders issued by the 
President requiring the Lokpal to inquire into any allegation subject to the conditions or 
limitations specified therein. 
Clauses 28 & 29 
The Committee was of the view that the areas covered by clauses 28 and 29 were 
somewhat similar in nature and inter-linked and hence it would be more appropriate if both 
these cluuses were combined into one and provision was made for the amount of 
compensation/reward or punishment to be decided by the Lokpal while concluding its 
findings. The Committee also felt that the words 'and the Central Government shall pay, the 
amount or amounts so determined, to the complainant' occuning at the end of clause 29 
should be substituted by the words and the Lokpal shall determine the person by whom the 
said compensation or award shall be paid after giving that person a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard'. 
Clause 30 
The Committee noted that it has already favoured deletion oi clause 26 and accordingly 
felt that sub-clause (2) of clause 30 which bars Courts jurisdiction on the proceedings or 
decision of the Lokpal should also be dropped. 
F-18 718/RS 

132 
Clause 31 
The Committee was of the view that in view of the deletion of sub-clause {1) of clause 
22 and clauses 23 and 24 proposed by it, consequential changes will become necessary in 
clause 31. 
Clause 33 
The Committee was of the view that the basic objective behind the setting up of an 
institution of Lokpal is to cleanse public life from the scourge of corruption and it w~s, 
therefore, paramount to ensure that the Lokpal was not fettered in any way from conducting 
any inquiries upon its own knowledge and information. The Committee, accordingly, 
suggested deletion of sub-clause (b) of clause 33 which tends to bar any inquiry suo motu by 
the, Lokpal into cases of corruption against public functionaries. 
Clause 35 
The Committee felt that clause 35 should be amended to take care of the amendments 
proposed by it in sub-clause (3) of clause 9. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title 
The Committee was of the view that the consequential changes in respect of Clause (1), 
the Enacting Formula and the Title with reference to the year of enactment may be carried 
out in the Bill and accordingly, the year 1996 occurring in clause {1) and the Title should be 
substituted by the year 1997. Similarly, in the Enacting Formula the words 'Forty Seventh' 
should be substituted by the words 'Forty Eighth'. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M. to meet again at 4.'()() P.M. on Tuesday, 
the 6th May, 1997 to take up considerations of its draft Report on the Bill. 

XXXV 
TIDRTY -FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th May, 1997, in Room 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
9. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shri Vijay Goel 
12. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
13. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
14. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
15. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
16. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
17. Shri Idris Ali 
18. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
19. Shri Sudhir Giri 
20. Shri N. Dennis 
21. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
22. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Sec • .:tary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Fortieth Report on the Lokpal Bill, 
1996 and after some discussion, decided to recommend certain amendments in clauses 3 and 
17 as well so as to provide for substitution of sub-clause (b) of clause 3(2) with the words 
'two Members who are, or have been, judges of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justices of 
the High Courts' and deletion of the words 'other than the Prime Minister' from clause 
17(2). The Committee, thereafter, adopted the Report with some minor changes and 
authorised its Chairman to appropriately modify/amend the draft Report in the light of the 
discussions. 
3. The Committee decided to present the Report along with the evidence tendered 
before it on the Bill to both the Houses of Parliament on Friday, the 9th May, 1997. The 
Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Ramachandran Pillai to present 
the Report and lay the evidence in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Satya Pal Jain and in his 
absence Shri Mangat Ram Sharma to lay the Report alongwith the evidence on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 6.40 P.M. 
133 