 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED 
THIRTIETH REPORT ON THE ATROCITIES AND CRIMES  
AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2021) 
…..………NOVEMBER
….…NOVEMBER, 2011
 
REPORT NO. 
 233 

 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
C.S. (H.A.)-458      
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT ON THE ATROCITIES AND CRIMES  
AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN 
                                
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  ACRONYM (iii) - (v) 
4.  REPORT       1 - 72 
 Chapter   -   I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
3 - 20  
 Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
 21 - 41 
 Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 42 - 61 
 Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
 62 - 72 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE-  
AT A GLANCE 
 73 - 81 
6. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
83-84 
7. ANNEXURE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020) 
 
1.      Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Dr. Anil Jain  
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
6.      @ Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. % Vacant 
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
9. #Vacant  
10. $ Vacant 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmishta Sethi 
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
29.      *Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal 
30. Shri Ravneet Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by expiry of his previous Rajya Sabha Term 
*Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 30th December, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of  Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju 
Bhaiya), MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports. 
# Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Dinesh Trivedi from the membership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 12th February, 2021. 
% and $ Consequent upon  joining of  Council of Ministers on 7th July, 2021  by Shri Bhupender Yadav and Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh both MPs, 
Rajya Sabha. 
 (i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Thirty Third Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations Contained in the Two Hundred Thirtieth Report o n 'Atrocities and 
Crimes against Women and Children'. 
 
2. The Two Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha on the 15 th March, 2021. 
 After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent 
to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action 
Taken Notes on the said Report to the Committee on 2nd July, 2021.
  
 
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated                               
24th September 2004.     
 
4.
 The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Thirty Third Report and adopted the same 
at its meeting held on 9th August, 2021. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
9th August, 2021 
New Delhi 
Sravana 1, 1943 (Saka)                                                                                 
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                          
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
AHTU Anti-Human Trafficking Units  
AIDMAM All India Dalit Mahila Adhikar Manch  
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist  
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research & Development  
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
CAPF Central Armed Police Force 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CrPC Code of Criminal Procedure 
CCTNS Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System  
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CCPWC Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children  
CAWCH Crime Against Women- Check & Halt  
CMAPS Crime Mapping Analytics and Predictive System  
CMPO Child Marriage Prohibition Officer  
CNCP Children in Need of Care and Protection  
CIF Community Investment Fund  
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
DoT Department of Telecommunications  
DAY-NRLM Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Rural Livelihood Mission 
DHI Department of Heavy Industry  
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
DLSA District Legal Service Authority  
DMPU District Missing Person Unit  
ERSS Emergency Response Support System  
EU European Union 
ERC Emergency Response Centre 
FTC Fast Track Courts  
FIR First Information Report 
FSLs Forensic Science Laboratories  
FICN Fake Indian Currency Note  
FTSCs Fast Track Special Courts  
FNHW Food Nutrition Health Wash  
GPDP Gram Panchayat Development Plan  
GRP Government Railway Police  
HEIs Higher Educational Institutes  
IPC Indian Penal Code 
ITSSO Investigation Tracking System for Sexual Offences 
ICJS Interoperable Criminal Justice System  
I4C Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre  
ISEA Information Security Education & Awareness  
ISP Internet Service Provider  
JWOs Juvenile Welfare Officers  
JCCTs Joint Cyber Crime Coordination Teams  
 
(iii) 

 
LEA Law Enforcement Agencies  
LMS Learning Management System  
LCs Local Committees  
MoSJ&E Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs  
MOW&CD Ministry of Women & Child Development  
MMI Multi Modal Integration  
MoU Memorandum of Understanding  
MWAs Market Welfare Associations  
MPS Missing Person Squad  
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
MSI Master System Integrator  
MOOC Massive Open Online Courses 
NCFL National Cyber Forensic Lab 
NGOs Non- Governmental Organizations  
NDSO National Database of Sexual Offenders 
NISHTHA National Initiative for School Heads and Teachers Holistic Development  
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau  
NRLM National Rural Livelihood Mission  
NCTC National Level Training Centre  
NEFMS National Electronic Fund Management System  
NCW National Commission for Women  
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
OSCs One-Stop Centres  
PWDVA Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 
PCMA Prohibition of Child Marriage Act  
POCSO Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 
PMJDY Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana  
PMGKY Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana  
PCI Press Council of India 
PCR Police Control Room 
PPEs Personal Protective Equipments  
PFOs Public Facilitation Officers 
RPF Railway Protection Force  
RWAs Resident Welfare Associations 
SPUWAC Special Police Unit for Women and Children  
SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
SRG State Resource Group  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
SHGs Self-Help Groups  
TRP Television Rating Point 
TSP Telecom Service Providers 
 
(iv) 

 
 
UTTIPEC Unified Traffic Transportation Infrastructure (Planning and Engineering) 
Centre  
UTs Union Territories  
UAE United Arab Emirates 
VWDC Vulnerable Witness Deposition Complexes  
VPN Virtual Private Network  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the 'Atrocities and Crimes 
against Women and Children'. The said Report of the Committee was presented to the Parliament on 
15th March, 2021. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs in respect of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I: The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted b y the Government:  
Paras: 2.4.14, 2.6.4, 2.7.11, 2.9.8, 2.11.4, 2.12.3, 2.12.4, 2.12.6, 2.15.5, 2.15.8, 2.16.11, 2.17.2, 2.17.3, 
3.4.5, 3.4.12, 3.4.22, 4.2.7, 4.2.8, 4.3.6, 5.6.6, 5.6.18, 5.7.4, 6.3.17, 6.3.18, 6.4.4, 6.4.5, 6.4.6, 6.4.9, 
6.4.10, 6.5.10, 6.7.3 (of the Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report) Total recommendations - 31 
Accepted.  
 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted 31 of its recommendations as 
mentioned in Chapter–I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not de sire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s r eplies: - Paras: 2.5.11, 2.7.13, 2.15.4, 2.15.6, 2.15.15, 2.16.10, 
2.20.12, 2.22.4, 3.4.10, 3.4.18, 3.4.29, 3.4.39, 3.4.41, 5.5.7, 5.6.16, 5.6.27, 5.6.28, 5.6.33, 5.7.5, 6.3.19, 
6.3.20, 6.4.8, 6.5.11, 6.7.16, 6.8.8 (ibid
)  (Total recommendations- 25. Not to be pursued further.   
 
 The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry in respect of 25 
recommendations and, therefore, does not want to pursue such recommendations further. 
 
Chapter III: The observations/recommendations in respect of which the Committ ee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 2.3.12, 2.3.13, 2.3.14, 2.4.16, 2.5.10, 2.7.12, 2.8.9, 
2.9.7, 2.14.6, 2.14.7, 2.17.4, 2.18.4, 2.19.2, 2.20.11, 3.4.7, 3.4.19, 5.5.6, 5.5.8, 5.6.17, 5.6.26, 6.2.12, 
6.2.14, 6.7.8  (ibid) Total recommendations- 23 Not convincing replies. 
  
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of 23 of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should take further necessary 
action and furnish convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of thre e 
months after presentation of the Report. 
 
Chapter-IV: The observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received:   Para: 2.4.15, 2.10.5, 2.11.5, 2.12.5, 2.14.4, 2.14.5, 2.15.14, 
2.20.10, 3.3.2, 3.4.24, 3.4.33, 4.3.5, 6.2.13, 6.4.7, 6.6.3, 6.7.13, 6.8.3, (ibid) Total recommendations- 
17 To be pursued further. 
  
In respect of the 17 recommendations placed in Chapter IV, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry has either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the 

2 
 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of 
the Committee within three months. 
 
 The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 
  

3 
 
Chapter- I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 
1.1 Conviction Rate 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.1.1 The Committee is constrained to note the abysmally low conviction rate in crimes against 
women and children which also shows a serious mismatch between the measures adopted and their 
implementation. The Committee further notes that an analytical tool-"On line Investigation Tracking 
System for Sexual Offences (ITSSO)" has been provided to law enforcement agencies to monitor and 
track Police investigations within two months in sexual offenses as per the Criminal Law (Amendment) 
Act, 2018. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should take up the matter with all the 
States/UTs for stringent implementation of the analytical tool ITSSO. Further, the MHA should also 
work out a mechanism for gathering information on reasons for the delay in the investigation in 
criminal cases on annual basis, preferably in analytical tool ITSSO itself. Based on inform ation so 
gathered, the MHA can analyze and issue necessary SOPs/advisories to States/UTs for taking necessary 
corrective steps. 
 
(Para 2.4.14 of 230th Repot) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 ITSSO has been developed and deployed in the States/ Union Territories. It allows/enables 
police in the real-time monitoring of sexual offence cases for timely disposal of FIR up to the level of 
police station concerned. This tool facilitates every State/ Union Territory to optimally deploy its 
resources in investigation. The States/Union Territories have been regularly reviewing the progress of 
investigations. This is also reiterated to the States/ Union Territories regularly by the MHA. A user 
manual on how to use ITSSO by police has also been issued to States/UTs. The disposal rate of cases in 
States/ Union Territories has shown improvement due to this. 
 
1.1.3 Further, conviction in such cases depends on various factors including forensic analysis 
reports, consistency of witnesses and victims during trials, etc. Accordingly, the BPR&D has prepared 
a SOP for use by law enforcement personnel in States/ Union Territories titled „Investigation and 
Prosecution of Rape Against Women‟. It seeks to provide a complete set of rules and guidelines related 
to the response of the police while dealing with rape cases and to ensure a co-ordinated and multi-
disciplinary approach to sexual offences, in general. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.1.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
  
1.2 Representation of Women in Police 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.2.1 The Committee notes with disappointment that women presently constitute 10.30% of the 
Police force. The Committee fails to understand the delay on the part of States/UTs to give adequate 

4 
 
representation to women in Police forces. The Committee notes that MHA has regularly advised the 
States to ensure that 33% of Police forces are women and has made it mandatory in UTs. But , no 
States/UT Police in the country has representation even close to 33%. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to conduct special recruitment drives to recruit 
women at all levels in a time-bound manner. The Ministry may also coordinate with States and UTs to 
remove all administrative bottlenecks for the same. 
(Para 2.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an Advisory dated 22 June 2021, requesting all States/UTs 
to conduct special recruitment drives to recruit women at all levels in a time-bound manner. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.2.3 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed abou t the progress made in 
this regard. 
 
 
1.3 Helpline Numbers 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee notes that multiple helpline numbers are used for different categories of 
complaints about crimes against women and children which also vary from State to State. The 
Committee strongly recommends that there should be a single three-digit helpline number that can be 
uniformly accessed across all States/UTs. This will be more beneficial to people who travel and 
commute from one State to another including the foreigners who visit different States during their stay 
in India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should advise all States/UTs to 
integrate their helpline numbers with 112 for creating a three-digit common Pan-India helpline number. 
A common national helpline number for women would provide a single platform for everyone who is 
in distress and can be accessed in every nook and corner of the country. The helpline number may also 
be linked to other State-sponsored support services like shelters, one-stop centers, counseling, 
emergency transport assistance and other protection measures holistically. 
(Para 2.7.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 Pan India Single number „112‟ Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) is now 
functional in 35 States/ Union Territories. This single number enables access to police, medical and 
fire services in emergencies. This system provides for integration with other helplines for emergency 
services, including women and child helpline.  MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union 
Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.3.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
 

5 
 
1.4 Nirbhaya Fund 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.4.1 The Committee is disappointed to note that Nirbhaya Fund is continuously diverted towards 
other Schemes/Projects. The Committee takes a very serious note of this and strongly recommends that 
the Ministry should desist from sanctioning funds for such schemes from Nirbhaya Fund and adhere to 
the original purpose of Nirbhaya Fund. 
(Para 2.9.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 This issue was consulted with the Ministry of Women and Child Development, who have stated 
that all the projects/schemes under Nirbhaya Fund are appraised by an Empowered Committee on the 
basis of the recommendation of the concerned Ministry/ Department, as per the norms/ parameters of 
the Nirbhaya Framework and keeping in view of the original purpose of Nirbhaya Fund. However, the 
Ministry has stated that it has noted the recommendations of the Committee in this regard for 
compliance. It is further submitted that MHA has not diverted any Nirbhaya Funds for any such 
scheme/ project. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.4.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.5 Shelter Homes 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.5.1 The Committee notes that the number of shelter homes set up by States is insufficient to meet 
the desired objective of providing temporary relief and dwelling arrangements to the victimized 
women. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may take up the 
issue with the Ministry of Women and Child Development to set up more shelter homes. The 
Committee also recommends providing adequate food, clothing, medicines and other basic amenities in 
all the shelter homes. 
(Para 2.11.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 The issue was referred to the Ministry of Women and Child Development, who have informed 
that they have taken note of the recommendations of the Committee and will endeavor to open more 
shelter homes on need basis. The Ministry of Women and Child Development will also endeavor to see 
that adequate food, clothing, medicines and other basic amenities are provided in shelter homes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.5.3 The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that ade quate financial resources 
may be provided to open new shelter homes
 and provide basic amenities in shelter homes. 
  
 

6 
 
1.6 One-Stop Centres (OSCs) 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.6.1 The Committee notes that the above-mentioned States have established One-Stop Centres in all 
Districts nearer to or within public hospitals. But, the Committee feels that considering the increasing 
crimes against women, more Centres are required. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should take up with the Ministry of Women & Child Development to advise 
States to open at least one One-Stop Centre at every sub-divisional level 
(Para 2.12.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.2 The Ministry of Women and Child Development has taken note of the recommendations of the 
Committee and will endeavor to open more One-Stop Centres (OSCs) on need basis, in district shaving 
higher number of crime against women; having bigger geographical area and aspirational districts, 
within the available resources. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.6.3 The Committee notes the reply.   
 
Recommendation 
 
1.6.4 The Committee also believes that it is important to have involvement of social organizations 
and State Women Commissions in checking the functioning and the quality of services rendered by the 
One-Stop Centres and, therefore, recommends that grass-root Panchayati Raj Institutions, local NGOs 
and State Women Commissions should be involved in conducting a periodic safety audit of the One-
Stop Centres. 
(Para 2.12.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.5 Ministry of Women and Child Developmenthas taken note of the recommendation and would 
make endeavor to associate PRIs, State Women Commissions etc for social audit of the effectiveness of 
the Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.6.6 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be apprised abo ut the further action 
taken in this regard.  
 
Recommendation 
 
1.6.7 The Committee appreciates the initiatives, like interlinking of departments and creation of a 
single-window system to help women victims of violence, taken by the State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh. The Committee, therefore, recommends that other States should also establish synergy and 
coordination amongst various departments concerned with the safety and security of women and 
children. 
(Para 2.12.6 ibid) 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.8 It is stated that the MHA has issued advisories to the States/Union Territories on Guidelines 
and Standard Operating Procedures for preventing and combating crimes against vulnerable sections 
of the society, including women, children. Further, in order to facilitate implementation of the 
guidelines/ SOPs, Rs.107.49 crore has been released to States/Union Territories for setting up/ 
strengthening Women Help Desks in Police Stations. The Desk envisages to have enlisted panel of 
experts like lawyers, psychologists, NGOs who can assist in accessing support, provide shelter, 
rehabilitation etc., and help in registration and follow-up in the cases giving required assurance and 
support to the women approaching the police for assistance. In terms of the Committee's 
recommendations, States/ Union Territories have been requested to undertake an immediate review of 
the existing facilities for vulnerable groups inter-alia on the lines of the measures given in the various 
advisories issued by the MHA, including review of steps taken for sensitization of police personnel, 
coordination with agencies/ departments concerned as also communities and civil society 
organizations.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.6.9 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
1.7 Strengthening of Institutions 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.7.1 The Committee further recommends that the MHA should take up the matter with the 
Ministry/Department/Organization concerned to prepare a national database of destitute 
women/children living on the streets, religious places, railway stations, etc., as they are also highly 
vulnerable to crimes. The database thus gathered will help in providing food, shelter, protection from 
the vagaries of nature, counseling and rehabilitation, etc., to such people particularly, women and 
children who are in dire need of help and assistance from the Government. 
(Para 2.15.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 Ministry of Women and Child Development has taken note of the recommendation and would 
make endeavor for putting in place database in consultation with relevant central Ministries and 
States/ UTs. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.7.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.7.4 The Committee appreciates the work done by the National Commission for Women (NCW) in 
taking cognizance of atrocities and crimes against women all across the country. The Committee 
observes that there is still a need to delve deep into rural areas of the country where similar crimes 
occur frequently without getting reported. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA 

8 
 
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Women & Child Development and NCW to take more 
positive actions against crimes taking place particularly, against the poor and vulnerable women in 
rural areas of the country. 
(Para 2.15.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.5 Realizing the issue, the Ministry of Women and Child Development has introduced the Scheme 
of One Stop Centre (OSC) in every district of the country to facilitate women affected by violence with  
5 services i.e. police assistance, medical treatment, legal aid, psychological counseling and temporary 
shelter under one roof. Further, the Ministry will endeavor to open more OSCs on need basis, in 
districts having higher number of crime against women; having bigger geographical area and 
aspirational districts, within the available resources. Further, efforts will be made to engage PRIs, 
State Women Commissions, NCW etc., for monitoring the activities of OSCs. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.7.6 The Committee notes the reply  
 
 
1.8 Advisories issued
 by the MHA 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.1 The Committee observes that it is important to learn from the relevant experiences of the past 
which would be helpful in combating the atrocities and crimes against women and children in the 
future. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should also take advice from States/UTs 
that have been successful in curbing the issues of atrocities and crimes against women and children. 
The MHA should accordingly, devise a mechanism so that the best practices of all the State 
Governments and all police departments may be compiled in the form of compendiums and shared on 
one platform for the use of all senior/nodal officers at the Central/States/UTs level. 
(Para 2.16.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. NCRB has published a compendium 
on Good Practices in CCTNS & ICJS. This is available on the website of NCRB. MHA is publishing 
best practices and success stories of the States/Union Territories, especially in prevention and 
management of crimes against women and children, in its e-magazine She-Raksha. These have been 
shared with the stakeholders, including States/Union Territories. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.8.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
1.9 Role of NGOs in Assisting the Victimized Women and Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.9.1 The Committee deeply appreciates the efforts made by the NGOs towards extending various 
welfare services to women and children, particularly meant for their safety and protection. The 
Committee observes that the engagement and involvement of the Government with the NGOs/Civil 
Society/Social Organizations is very important and crucial because the NGOs are working at the gra ss-
root level. They can feel the pulse of the community and over the period have acquired experience and  
learned about the difficulties of the victims of atrocities and crimes at the ground level. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should focus on building public and private 
partnerships by involving NGOs and other social organizations as part of their 
Schemes/Programmes/Projects. The NGOs and community should be directly involved in all 
schemes/projects/ programmes particularly, those aiming at enhancing legal awareness, strengthening 
reporting mechanisms including helpline numbers, expediting justice delivery systems and designing of 
schemes and interventions of the Government meant for rescue, rehabilitation, counseling of the victims. 
This will help in instilling confidence among women and children and improve their overall safety. The 
NGOs should also be involved in Consultative Committees in the Government, Panels of schools and 
colleges and other institutions to create awareness and conduct programmes on gender sensitization. 
 
(Para 2.17.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 „Police” and “Public order” are State subject under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. Community partnership, including involvement of NGOs is an important component of 
prevention of crimes against women and children, and is being taken up at the level of States/UTs. 
MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1.9.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.9.4 NGOs can play a crucial role in reforming the delinquents and bringing the diverted children 
back into the mainstream by getting them enrolled in schools/vocational courses so that these children 
instead of again getting involved in crimes and other illegal activities at juvenile age can be involved i n 
the betterment of the community and society. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs should conduct mapping of the NGOs and identify the Schemes/Programmes/Projects 
for which their help can be used effectively. 
(Para 2.17.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.5 „Police” and “Public order” are State subject under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. However, Community partnership,  including involvement of NGOs is an important component 
of prevention of crimes against women and children, and are being coordinated in the projects at 

10 
 
States/UTs level by Ministry of WCD. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 
30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.9.6 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
1.10 Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.1 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs and Delhi Police should 
conduct a detailed study on the distress calls received on helpline numbers to discern a pattern so as to 
find out whether it increases or decreases during night time, on weekends and from which as more calls 
are are received. The analysis of this study will help the Delhi Police in developing a c lear 
understanding of the pattern of these distress calls and taking appropriate steps to redress the same. 
  
(Para 3.4.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.2 Delhi Police has informed that the recommendations/valuable suggestions have been noted for 
compliance.  In this regard, the distress call data of ERSS-112 from January 2021 to March 2021 have 
been analyzed and call takers, dispatchers were deployed as per the volume of distress calls.  The PCR 
vehicles have also been deployed adjacent to areas from where more calls are received.  Besides this, 
District DCsP also access Crime Mapping Analytics and Predictive System (CMAPS), which based on 
data of past crimes, provides inputs for policing activities such as planning of pickets, patrolling 
etc.   Thus, Delhi Police deploys manpower at the appropriate place to curb crime and maintain Law 
& Order. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.10.3 The Committee notes the effort of Delhi Police in analyzing the distress c all data of ERSS-
112, deployment of PCR vehicles and creation of Crime Mapping Analytics and Predi ctive 
System (CMAPS).  
 
 
Recommendations 
 
1.10.4 The Committee appreciates the substantial improvement in the year 2020 in the filing of the 
final report in Rape and POCSO cases as compared to previous years. However, the Committe e 
recommends that Delhi Police should identify the reasons that hinder the filing of the final report 
within the stipulated period and address them in the right earnest. The Committee recommends that all 
cases may be tracked through Investigation Tracking System for Sexual Offences (ITSSO)  and ensure 
certainty of conviction on filed charge sheets. This will instill confidence among women and children 
and also create fear of law among people and culprits. The Delhi Police should further improve upon 
investigation, filing of charge sheets, collection of evidence, forensic and DNA examination in order to 

11 
 
have a better conviction rate in cases of crimes against women and children in Delhi which will 
certainly help Delhi to become a role model for the rest of the country. 
(Para 3.4.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.5 Rape and POCSO cases are being dealt by the local Police scrupulously.  Timely investigation, 
filing of charge sheet, collection of evidence and DNA examination is addressed holistically as a part 
of investigation in such cases, and the investigation authorities are required to adhere to the 
established procedures. Further, the Delhi Police has noted the recommendation of the Committee for 
compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1.10.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.7 The Committee takes note of the 15 all-women Police Control Room vans in Delhi and 
recommends that a survey may be conducted by Delhi Police about the effectiveness of having all  
women PCR vans vis-à-vis traditional PCR vans and suitably increase its numbers if found effective. 
 
(Para 3.4.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.8 Launching All Women Police Control Room vans was a step by Delhi Police towards making 
the national capital safe for women.  The initiative has been taken since women distress callers find it 
easy to communicate with women police personnel and narrate their grievances without any hesitation. 
Presently, 15 All Women PCR MPVs are performing duty in specifically selected areas/points.  All 
Women PCR Vans are being deployed to ensure the safety and security of women at public places, help 
women in distress, work as patrol vans and perform multiple roles like other MPVs. All women PCR 
vans also identify vulnerable places for women and ensure safety of women, especially during evening 
hours.  They also distribute literature about women safety near women colleges and market 
places. Further, the Delhi Police has noted the recommendation of the Committee for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.10.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.11 Written submission of Indian Leadership Forum Against Trafficking (ILFAT) on the 
trafficking of women and children 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.11.1 The Committee notes that the MHA has allocated Rs.100 crore for the establishment of Anti-
Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) in all States/UTs under the Nirbhaya Fund. The Committee 
understands the importance of these units and the requirement of office infrastructure, computers and 

12 
 
other logistics for its establishment and operational needs and therefore, recommends that MHA may 
allocate adequate funds to the States/UTs for establishment and strengthening of AHTUs in States/UTs 
including representation of female officers. An additional requirement of funds, if any, may be raised 
with the Ministry of Finance in the coming financial year (2021-22) at the RE stage so that AHTUs are 
established and made operational without further delay. 
 
(Para 4.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for necessary action.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.11.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.11.4 The Committee also recommends that the Government should establish a National Anti-Human 
Trafficking Bureau to investigate trans-border trafficking across States as well as cases of human 
trafficking involving a foreign country. It should also cooperate and coordinate with the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Bureau at the State capital level and intelligence agencies for making concerted and holistic 
efforts in tracking, tracing and rescuing trafficked women and children. The Committee further 
recommends that the MHA should develop a mechanism for convergence and coordination between the 
different agencies, institutions, organizations, departments (Home, WCD, Labour, Railways, Transport 
and Health) for smooth and better accessibility of services to the victims and survivors of trafficking. 
 
(Para 4.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11.5 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The National Investigation Agency 
Act, 2008 was amended in 2019 and National Investigation Agency has been authorized to investigate 
cases of human trafficking having inter-state, national and international ramifications. An institutional 
mechanism to address the issue of human trafficking at State level in a comprehensive and full-bodied 
manner has been shared with all States and UTs on 1 st December, 2020 and they have been advised to 
notify Anti Human Trafficking Units at State-level, District-level and Police Station-level, in the 
following manner: 
 
(i) Each State shall notify a State-Headquarter level Anti Human Trafficking Bureau headed by 
an Additional Director General of Police level officer to oversee and coordinate all trafficking 
related issues within the State and for coordination with other States/UTs. 
(ii) States shall notify an Anti Human Trafficking Unit in every District of the State, which shall 
be responsible for all human trafficking related matters in each District and will report to the 
State-Headquarter level Anti Human Trafficking Bureau. Each District level AHTU shall 
function under the supervision of a Superintendent of Police/Deputy Superintendent of Police 
level officer and will be responsible for monitoring and coordinating all activities in the 
District. 
(iii) States shall notify a Women Help Desk in every Police Station of the State, the Women Help 
Desk shall inter-alia also be responsible to undertake matters of rescue, prevention, protection 

13 
 
and support investigation of human trafficking cases of women of the respective jurisdiction 
and will coordinate activities with other Police Stations and will also perform such duties and 
responsibilities as directed by the District AHTU. 
 
1.11.6 By establishing the above arrangement, each State will have a Unit for preventing and 
countering human trafficking at all levels of the State/UT - Headquarters of the State/UT, District level 
and Police Station level to deal with the problem of human trafficking in a comprehensive manner. 
Besides this, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Women & Child Development and Ministry of 
Labour & Employment coordinate the activities relating to preventing and countering human 
trafficking. MHA has also been engaging with Ministry of Railways and other relevant agencies to 
address the issue of human trafficking in a holistic manner. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ 
Union Territories on 30th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.11.7 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
1.12 Missing Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12.1 The Committee takes note of the advisory issued by MHA to States/UTs regarding missing 
children and recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may take up with States/UTs to ensure the 
availability of Juvenile Welfare Officer and Para-legal volunteer as per the extant provision of  law in a 
time-bound manner in each Police Station for proper registration and investigation of cases of missing 
children and rehabilitation of the recovered children. 
(Para 4.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.2 In terms of the recommendation of the Committee, MHA has issued an advisory dated 19 th May, 
2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.12.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
1.13 Interventions of the Ministry of Home Affairs in handling cyber crimes 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.13.1 The Committee observes with satisfaction that a National Database of Sexual Offenders 
(NDSO) has been created by the Ministry of Home Affairs for the use of the Law Enforcement  
Agencies (LEA) to identify repeat offenders, receive alerts on sex offenders as also in the investigation. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that NDSO may include the offenders and criminals 
proliferating in cyber space who are repeatedly engaged in cyber pornography, cy ber blackmailing, 
cyber-stalking/bullying, etc. This is highly essential to strengthen the investigation machinery involved 

14 
 
in the identification and tracking the offenders committing cybercrimes, particularly against women 
and children. 
(Para 5.6.6 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
1.13.2 NDSO has information on sexual offenders, who have been convicted for principal offences 
under Section 354, 376 and 509 of IPC, and Section 4 and 6 of POCSO. Further, Inter-Operable 
Criminal Justice System provides law enforcement officers access to data for specific offences, 
including those involved in cybercrimes against women and children at national level as a search 
function.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
1.13.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.13.4 The Committee observes that it is very important to conduct a nation-wide campaign to create 
awareness amongst all sections of the society regarding the use and misuse of cyber space and also 
about the evolving technology which is being leveraged to commit different and new types of cyber 
crimes. It is also very important to protect minor children/juveniles from indulging in crimes like 
talking, online-trolling, molesting, etc. The Committee recommends that cyber safety lesson plans 
should be included in the educational institutions to make students aware of internet safety and its 
responsible use. Further, the educational institutions should be instructed to hold sessions with parents 
to make them identify at an early stage, any signs of their children being a victim of any o f th e 
cybercrimes. The Committee also expresses its concern regarding the growing use of online streaming 
sites/ apps showing sexually abusive content in movies, serials, etc., and feels that appropriate 
regulation thereof is required to save the society from its deleterious impact. 
(Para 5.6.18 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.5 A 'Handbook on cyber safety for Adolescents/Students' has been released. The soft copy of this 
booklet has been made available at www.cybercrime.gov.in
 and https://mha.gov.in/ 
documents/downloads. This booklet has also been circulated to all Ministries/Departments and States / 
UTs for wide spreading it to their respective areas. Ministry is holding regular meetings with 
Educational Institutes to discuss the further course of action to increase awareness amongst students in 
prevention of cybercrimes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.13.6 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
1.14 Efforts of the MHA to block cyber pornographic content and other obsce ne contents on 
the internet 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.14.1 The Committee is of the view that social media have become very popular and are being used 
by certain vested interests and elements to target young children by trapping them with false 
information. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA along with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology should have regular interaction with popular social media 
entities to create a system of deterrence as a preventive measure to stop this kind of trapping of 
children. Comprehensive guidelines can also be prepared for social media intermediaries to counter 
such vested interests. 
 
(Para 5.7.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.2 Ministry has been interacting with social media entities on need basis. Points are noted for 
deliberations with MeitY and other stakeholders. MeitY, on 25 th February 2021 notified “ The 
Information Technology (Intermediary guidelines and Digital Media Ethic s Code) Rules, 2021” under 
the Information Technology Act, 2000. The Rules prescribe comprehensive due diligence to be followed 
by Intermediaries including social media platforms. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.14.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.15 Making Gender Sensitization a Part of School Curriculum 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.15.1 The Committee considers operation Nirbheek as a very constructive measure for regular 
interaction of Police officers with the children and recommends that the MHA may take up with the 
Ministry of Education for implementation of the programme in every school all across the country , 
both Government as well as private. As part of this, a complaint box may be placed in every school and 
a female Police officer may be appointed as a Nirbheek Officer, who would open the complaint box 
regularly on an appointed day. In those complaints, the children may reveal the crimes committed 
during school hours by the teachers, by their colleagues and by their family members. The Police the n 
can register an FIR on the basis of the complaint and also provide counseling and support to the 
victimized children. 
(Para 6.3.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.2 The recommendations were shared with the Ministry of Education, who have informed that the 
NCERT fully supports operation 'Nirbheek'. with regard to complaint boxes, this concern has been 
suggested to various stakeholders like teachers/ teacher educators and principals by means of training 
materials and training programs by NCERT. A few examples are the NISHTHA program for 
Elementary stage, NISHTHA for Secondary stage, Working Paper on Education for Gender Equality 

16 
 
and Empowerment, Training Materials for Teacher Educators on Gender Equality and Empowerment- 
Vol.l: Perspectives on Gender and Society, Vol. 2: Gender and Schooling Processes, Vol.3: Gender 
and Women's Empowerment. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.15.3 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about the i mplementation 
status of operation Nirbheek. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.15.4 The Committee also recommends that in school and college curriculum, in addition to gender 
sensitization, there should be more content about leadership, sacrifice and the remarkable role played 
by women in all walks of life. This will create a feeling of respect for the women, a nd help in 
addressing the negative mindset/stereotypes that exist in society. 
(Para 6.3.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.5 The recommendations were shared with the Ministry of Education. As per the 
recommendations/ observations of the Committee, an advisory on WOMEN SAFETY has already been 
issued by University Grants Commission to all the Vice-Chancellors of all Universities and Principals 
of all the Colleges in which the recommendation has been covered. 
 
1.15.6 NCERT addresses these concerns through its textbooks, other teaching learning materials and 
through training programmes. The textbooks on Mathematics, Environmental Studies and Languages 
of the Primary Stage; and Social Science and science textbooks of Upper Primary and Secondary 
Stages have portrayed contribution of women in various aspects. Other issues like equality, 
understanding gender, diversity and discrimination, people as resource, gender, religion and caste etc., 
have also been integrated. Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan is following NCERT/CBSE curriculum. 
Gender Sensitization, awareness of leadership, sacrifices and remarkable role played by women in all 
walks of life are celebrated in KVS through skits, Nukkad Nataks. and morning assembly addresses. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.15.7 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.16 Gender Sensitization of Society 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.16.1 The Committee is of the view that the litmus test of any civil society is to see how well 
educated, well protected and adequately respected its women are. The heinous crimes that are still 
taking place against women and children indicate that contemporary society is seriously lacking to 
qualify the test. The Committee notes that according to NCRB data of 2018, more than 90% of cases of 
rape were committed by someone known to the victim. This depicts that the main reasons for the 
crimes against women are societal. Therefore, it is important to promote gender sensitization in the 
educational curriculum from the schooling stage so that good values are inculcated and imbibed which 

17 
 
over a period of time will be reflected in society. But, there are many people who do not go to school 
and are committing heinous crimes against women and children, therefore, it is important not to 
confine gender sensitization programmes to educational institutions only and should involve the entire 
society in a holistic manner. 
 (Para 6.4.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.2 The recommendations were shared with Ministry of Education, who have informed that the 
NCERT has been working for gender sensitization of various stakeholders at all stages of school 
education. In all its capacity building programs organized by NCERT there are sessions related to 
socialization practices, gender related violence, laws for sexual harassment in schools of girls, self-
defense techniques for girls, portrayal of gender in media, adolescence education and growing up 
concerns and gender issues in curriculum, textbook and pedagogy. The NCERT has developed 
Training Material for Teacher Educators on Gender Equality and Empowerment Vol I, II and llI. An 
online course on gender sensitization is being developed by the Department wherein special care has 
been taken to include modules like- Socialization and cultural conditioning in the Indian context, 
Gender violence and Laws for Safety and Security of girls and women and Adolescence Education and 
Growing up concerns.  
 
1.16.3 The NCERT has developed learning content to bring attitudinal change with respect to gender 
which addresses issues of mutual respect between genders and the behavioral aspects of boys under the 
National Initiative for School Heads and Teachers Holistic Development (NISHTHA) Elementary 
NCERT developed the module Relevance of Gender Dimension in Teaching Learning process and 
conducted training of Key Resource Persons (KRPs) from different states of India. Under the 
Ayushman Bharat scheme the NCERT also contributed in the development of the module on Gender 
Equality for Health and wellness in School for adolescent children. KRPs from different states of India 
have been trained on the above module. 
 
1.16.4 The Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that the NCW, Ministry of 
Education and other institutions conduct gender sensitization programmes for different sections of 
society from time to time. Further, one of the major activities undertaken under BBBP scheme of the 
Ministry is gender sensitization and public awareness for safety and dignity of women and girls. 
However, suggestions of the Committee have been noted for increasing outreach.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.16.5 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.16.6 The Committee further observes that crimes against women and children are on the rise and are 
happening all across the country. At times, the brutality that follows these crimes shocks the human 
consciousness and these images flash out of India, across the world, which brings a very bad name to the 
country. 
(Para 6.4.5 ibid) 
 
 

18 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.7 Observation of the Committee has been noted and the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development does feel that every endeavor is to be made to see that the image of the country does not 
get affected globally. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.16.8 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.16.9 The Committee is of the view that it is very important to consider the prevention of crimes as 
not only a law and order issue but also a social responsibility. The Committee, therefore, recommends, 
that a national effort is required to create social awakening with the involvement of social, religious 
organizations and society as a whole to awaken the conscience of people, sensitize and mobilize 
masses opinion on the atrocities and crimes against women and children. 
(Para 6.4.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.10 The Ministry of Women and Child Development agrees with the recommendation and 
would make every endeavor to awaken the conscience of people by involving the communities and 
various stakeholders. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.16.11 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.16.12 The Committee further recommends that the Government should make an all-out effort to 
stop the practice of honour killing and other social evils prevalent among many communities. Besides, 
efforts should also be made to ensure that evils like witch-hunting/witch branding are addressed and 
stigmatization of women eliminated. In this regard, States/UTs can share their initiatives and 
experiences with each other. 
 
(Para 6.4.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.13 The recommendations have been shared with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. Further, advisories have been issued to the States/Union Territories in this regard from 
time-to-time. MHA/ BPR&D regularly organize Conferences/ Webinars allowing sharing of best 
practices and initiatives.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.16.14 The Committee notes the reply. 
 

19 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.16.15 The Government strongly recommends that adequate budgetary allocation be made for 
community-based programmes and services to create public awareness and motivation to influence 
mindsets at large. It is also important to develop a public-private partnership involving all segments of 
society to bring behavioral changes through proper communication initiatives at the national, state and 
local level and to work towards large-scale social mobilization on gender-related issues. 
 
(Para 6.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.16 Ministry of Women and Child Development agrees with the recommendation and would 
make every endeavor to bring behavioral changes by involving the communities and various 
stakeholders through its schemes and programmes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.16.17 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.17 Sensitization on Legal Issues 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.17.1 The Committee takes note of the Mahila Police Volunteer Scheme which has been 
implemented as a pilot project in Haryana by the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The 
Committee also notes that a project report has been submitted to MoW&CD. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue the matter with the Ministry 
of W&CD for an early analysis of the project report and if found useful, a feasibility study for  uniform 
implementation of the Mahila Police Volunteer Scheme throughout the country may be undertaken. 
The State-wise individual schemes may also be studied and the best practices followed under these 
schemes may be adopted and integrated with Mahila Police Volunteer Scheme for an effective legal 
awareness campaign for women. For the purpose, Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) 
workers/Anganwadi workers and district-level legal volunteers may also be involved as a facilitator to 
spread legal awareness among women. 
(Para 6.5.10 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.17.2 After evaluation of the Scheme by the NITI Aayog, the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development has decided to discontinue the Scheme of Mahila Police Volunteers as the response from 
States was not very encouraging. However, under other schemes of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, component for effective legal awareness campaign for women would be undertaken. 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.17.3 The Committee notes the reply about the decision to discontinue the Sc heme of Mahila 
Police Volunteer. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps tak en by Ministry of 
Women and Child Development (MoW&CD) for enhancing legal awareness among women. 
 
 
1.18 Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes Against Women 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.18.1 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to ask their ground-level 
Police officials to also invoke the clauses of The Scheduled Castes and Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities 
Act), 1989 when rape and sexual violence is committed against women belonging to SC/ST 
community. 
(Para 6.7.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18.2 Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an Advisory dated 29 th July, 2020 advising all States/UTs 
to ensure enforcement of law particularly in crimes relating to vulnerable sections. Enforcement 
agencies should be instructed in unambiguous terms that enforcement of the rights of the weaker and 
vulnerable sections including SC/ST and women should be ensured. Police should play a more 
proactive role in detection and investigation of crime against women. MHA has also issued advisory to 
States/ Union Territories on 30th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.18.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
  

21 
 
Chapter-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the matter in 
view of the Government‟s reply 
 
2.1 Fast Track Courts 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.1.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the law enforcing agencies should be provided with 
the "public prosecutors" for their assistance to ensure proper investigation, collection of evidence, 
timely submission of charge sheet and strong presentation of the case before the court. The Committee 
strongly feels that this would certainly help in increasing the number of conviction cases. Further, the 
officer senior to public prosecutors should remain vigilant to prevent seeking unnecessary 
adjournments from the courts. In this regard, the new feature i.e. Adjournment Alert Module 
provisioned under the e-Prosecution online application can be used optimally to prevent procedural-
delays. 
(Para 2.5.11 of 230th Repot) 
Action Taken 
  
2.1.2 The Adjournment Alert module is being actively used by the States/Union Territories. NCRB 
has shared an user manual with the States/ Union Territories. Further, MHA has also issued advisories 
in this regard. A total of 6542 alerts have been generated so far. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.1.3 The Committee notes the reply.
 
 
 
2.2 Helpline Numbers 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee further recommends that the MHA should conduct a nation-wide study on call-
drops on these helpline numbers and steps be taken to ensure follow-up of these calls. All efforts 
should be made to ensure that response time for a distress call is minimal and help reaches in time to 
the victim. Moreover, a counseling facility over the call should also be facilitated for further guidanc e 
and to calm down the victim in distress. 
(Para 2.7.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 In order to ensure   that there is minimum call drop, seamless connectivity to Emergency 
Response Centre (ERCs) and expedited delivery of   telecom services   necessary for effective and 
efficient delivery of emergency service to the distress caller, MHA has undertaken intervention of the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) with the Telecom Service Providers(TSP) and the States/ 
Union Territories. Implementation is being regularly reviewed by the DoT. 
 

22 
 
2.2.3 Further, Guidelines and   Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been customized for 
handling   of calls in the ERCs and dispatch of emergency response as per the requirements of the 
respective States/UTs. The emergency responders viz. call   takers, dispatchers, etc. are adequately and 
routinely trained to understand the nature of the distress and effectively handle distress calls 
towards   logical resolution. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.2.4 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
2.3 Strengthening of Institutions 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee takes note of the data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 
under different heads of crime on crimes against women and observes that there is no further 
segregation of data on the basis of different social parameters like education, income, caste, etc. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should explore the possibility of 
further desegregating the data pertaining to atrocities violence against women. This will help in 
understanding the prevailing situation of crimes against women and help in taking corrective measures 
by the law enforcement agencies. It is also important to create a database of other offenders li ke the 
criminals engaged in molesting, drug trafficking, etc. 
(Para 2.15.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.2 „Police‟ and „Public order‟ are State subject as per Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. „Police‟, „Public Order‟, „Prisons‟ and „persons detained therein‟ are „State‟ subjects in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.  Maintaining law and order, protection of life and 
property of citizens, management and administration of prisons and persons detained therein is the 
responsibility of the respective States/ Union Territories. States/UTs are competent to deal with all 
matters relating to these subjects under the extant provisions of laws. The NCRB collects and publishes 
crime statistics of various types at national level as per defined protocols and format for reporting of 
crime data by States/ UTs.  This is published by NCRB as reports, which include “Crime in India”, 
“Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India”, “Prison Statistics in India” etc.  This data is available in 
public domain on the website of NCRB. Information on social parameters like education, income, 
caste, etc., are not collected at the police stations during the registration of the FIR. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.4 The Committee observes that the 'Principal Offence Rule' followed by NCRB for crime 
statistics has lacunae as in a particular case where more than one offense has been committed, only the 
most serious offense is considered. The Committee, therefore, recommends that NCRB may review the 

23 
 
“Principal Offence Rule” so as to ensure that data is collected and reflected in their statistics in such a 
way that no crime gets unaccounted for. 
(Para 2.15.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.5 As per International Standards, the Bur eau follows „Principal Offence Rule‟ for counting of 
crime. The application of the rule prevents multiple-counting of a single case under various crime-
heads. The crime statistics published by NCRB are compatible with the international practice. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3.6 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.7 The Committee observes that the stringent provisions in the law have not acted as deterrence in 
preventing crimes against women and children and have made a very limited impact. This is a matter of 
grave concern for the nation and it becomes important to understand the efficacy of laws in preventing 
crimes against women and children. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA must advise 
and pursue with all States/UTs to conduct a study on the effectiveness of laws. The study may also 
highlight the provisions in the laws/schemes that have helped in addressing the cause of crimes against 
women and children. 
(Para 2.15.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.8 The BPR&D has prepared a SOP on „Investigation and Prosecution of Rape Against Women‟. 
It seeks to provide a complete set of rules and guidelines related to the response of the police while 
dealing with rape cases and to ensure a co-ordinated and multi-disciplinary approach to sexual 
offences, in general. 
 
2.3.9 To facilitate efficacy of law in preventing crimes against women and children, various 
measures have been taken, including launch of various IT modules for assisting states/UTs in timely 
investigation, strengthening of forensic facilities, setting up of fast-track court etc. 
 
2.3.10 A research paper on Crime Against Women: an analysis of rape cases under POCSO & IPC 
prepared by BPR&D has been circulated to all DGsP/ IGsP of States / UTs .MHA has also issued 
advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3.11 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
2.4 Advisories issued  by the MHA 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.4.1 The Committee notes that States have been complying with the advisories issued by MHA 
regarding crimes against women. The Committee recommends that MHA should periodically publicize 
the outcome on the advisories that are being issued to the States/UTs and action taken thereon by them. 
This will act as a motivating factor and will also create healthy competition between States/UTs. 
 
(Para 2.16.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 „Police” and “Public order” are State subject under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. States/UTs have been advised to take steps to prevent crimes against women and children. The 
advisories are available on MHA website and are reiterated periodically. Further, the country-data is 
available to States/UTs, who have been requested to review the performance regularly. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.4.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
2.5 Atrocities and Crimes against Women and Children of SC/ST Community 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.5.1 The Committee also recommends that the MHA should take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJ&E) for providing housing, livelihood, education facility and 
safety including free legal support for the rehabilitation of the survivors of caste and gender-based 
violence. The Committee further recommends that the NGOs and individuals working for the 
protection and welfare of SC/ST women and children should also be involved for the same. 
 
(Para 2.20.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 The matter has been examined in consultation with Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. Section 21 of the PoA Act specifies duty of Government to ensure effective 
implementation of the Act. According to that, measures which the State Government shall take includes 
the provision for adequate facilities, including legal aid, to the persons subjected to atrocities to enable 
them to avail themselves of justice, the provision for travelling and maintenance expenses to witnesses, 
including the victims of atrocities, during investigation and trial of offences under this Act, the 
provision for the economic and social rehabilitation of the victims of atrocities, the identification of the 
areas where the members of the SC/ST are likely to be subjected to atrocities and adoption of such 
measures so as to ensure safety for such members etc. 
 
2.5.3 Moreover, item No. 46 of Annexure-I under Rule 12(4) of PoA Rules specifies provisions of 
Additional relief to victims of murder, death, massacre, rape, gang rape, permanent incapacitation and 
dacoity which includes provisions of basic pension to the widow or other dependents of deceased 

25 
 
persons, assistance in education and maintenance of the children of the victims, provision of utensils, 
rice, wheat, dals, pulses, etc. Item No. 47 of Annexure-I under Rule 12(4) of PoA Rules specifies 
provisions of house to be constructed or provided in case of complete destruction or burnt houses of 
the victims. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.5.4 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
2.6 Response of the Government 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.1 The Committee notes that there was a sudden spurt in domestic violence and trafficking of 
women and children during the unprecedented COVID-19 Pandemic outbreak. This was mainly due to 
disruption in economic activities, work from home and family spending more time at home during 
lockdowns. The female migrant workers and their children were trafficked and had gone missing 
during lockdowns. The Committee observes that steps may be taken under both rural and urban 
employment guarantee schemes focusing especially on poor women so that cash transfers through DBT 
in their names could continue for a longer time. Currently, in many rural areas, a moratorium on 
interest rates for SHGs or loan repayments would also help because they are the women who are 
supporting their families in a big way. Some of these steps would raise women's participation in 
employment and also lead to a reduction in violence against them in an effective manner. 
 
(Para 2.22.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 The matter has been examined in consultation with Ministry of Rural Development. Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS is a demand driven wage employment programme which provide for the enhancement 
of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred 
days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members 
(including women) volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act 2005 
requires that priority be given to women in such a way that at least one-third of the beneficiaries are 
women. Mahatma Gandhi NREG Scheme is a gender-neutral programme which promotes participation 
of women by providing wage parity with men, provision of separate schedule of rates of wages for 
women, facilities for crèche, work-side sheds for children, and child care services. In convergence with 
National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM), women mates have also been deployed, which again 
facilitate the participation of women. The Scheme also endeavors to provide works near the residence 
of the beneficiaries. These measures enhance participation of women, more than half, which are more 
than the minimum percentage of 33% as mandated by the Act.  
 
2.6.3 Under Mahatma Gandhi NREG Scheme, the wage payment is made directly to the bank/post 
office accounts of the beneficiary (including women) by the Central Government through the Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) in National Electronic Fund Management System (NEFMS) implementing 
States/UTs on regular basis.  
 
 

26 
 
DEENDAYAL ANTYODAYA YOJANA-NATIONAL RURAL LIVELIHOOD MISSION (DAY-NRLM) 
 
2.6.4 In view of Corona Virus pandemic, DAY-NRLM promoted Community Institutions and their 
cadres have been responding to the requirements of needy people and to ensure the supply of essential 
services such as production of masks, sanitisers, Personal Protective Equipments (PPEs), managing 
community kitchen, supply of dry rations, food items and vegetables, providing basic banking services 
and supporting health care front-line workers at field level etc. As part of actions taken in response to 
COVID-19, DAY-NRLM in addition to the following COVID protocols and sensitizing SHG members 
for adopting preventive behaviour, had issued guidelines to its State level Missions to carry out the 
following actions: 
 
(i) To identify the migrants and include them into the SHG fold for accessing benefits under 
the scheme.  
(ii) To support SHG members and migrants identified in setting up community kitchen and 
promoting kitchen gardens  
(iii) To prioritize the release of Revolving Fund (RF) and Community Investment Fund (CIF) 
to SHG Federations and utilise the available funds with CBOs to ensure the availability 
of funds for disbursement of loans to SHG members during lock-down and post lock-
down period. 
(iv) To advise SHGs to provide an interest free loan or with low interest to the needy 
members equivalent to their individual members savings in the SHG, moratorium period 
for existing and new loans and rescheduling of the loan repayments on the basis of 
household cash flows. 
(v) To ensure cash liquidity at the doorstep level and far off places especially to the most 
vulnerable and needy, through the SHG members working as Banking Correspondents. 
(vi) To pay the honorarium to SHG members involved in relief measures under NRLM and 
to the community cadres at VO/CLF level from the mission funds for a period of 3 
months at least. Provision for ex-gratia to any deceased among them as a result of the 
Covid-19 disease was also advised. 
(vii) Two Special projects have been sanctioned in FY 2020-21 for comprehensive 
development of Returned Migrant labourers and another 2 projects on Food Nutrition 
Health Wash (FNHW) in the States of Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh as part of COVID-
Response actions. 
(viii) The Mission also facilitated the transfer of Rs.30,944.9 crore benefiting 20.64 crore 
women Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) account holders under the PM 
Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY) 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.6.5 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
2.7 Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.1 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Delhi Police in terms of the creation of 
exclusive women helpdesks and female police officers designated as the Public Facilitation Officers 

27 
 
(PFOs). The Committee strongly recommends that efforts may be made on priority to ensure posting of 
a women police officer in “Help Desks for Women‟ in all the police stations so that the women 
complainant can unhesitatingly express her grievances at the women help desks. To ensure that there is 
no casual approach on the part of the police personnel in the registration of FIR, decoy operations ma y 
be carried out on regular intervals. In this regard, the recommendation of the Committee at para 2.3.12, 
Chapter 2 of this Report may be seen. 
(Para 3.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 Women Help Desks for women visitors/ complainants are working round the clock in all the 
Police Stations of Delhi.  Women police officers are deployed at these help desks, so that women 
complainants can unhesitatingly express their grievances at the women help desk.  A lady police officer 
is also available round the clock in Police Station to deal/investigate the case/complaint related to 
women expeditiously. Moreover, all necessary articles/equipment, as required, have also been 
provided to the women help desks, i.e. table, chair, register, computer and printer with internet 
connectivity.  Besides this, surprise visits are often made by the supervisory officers to check 
complacency in dealing with the female complainants. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.7.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.4 The Committee notes that CCTV cameras not only act as deterrence and prevent crimes from 
taking place but also facilitates investigation on the commission of a crime. The Committee observes 
that the installation of 10,000 CCTV cameras would not be sufficient considering the large area of 
NCT of Delhi, population and crime hotspots as identified by Delhi Police. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Delhi Police should review and increase the proposal of installation of 10,000 CCTV 
cameras under the Safe City Project in Delhi. 
(Para 3.4.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.5 The Safe City Project of Delhi Police comprises following components:- 
 
(i) Installation of 10,000 CCTV Cameras in the jurisdiction of Delhi. 
(ii) Setting up of Command & Control Centre having facilities of Video Analytics, Artificial 
intelligence, machine learning, Facial Recognition System etc., at Police Headquarters, 
District Headquarters and Police Station Level. 
(iii) Integration of various Data Sets (32 data sets) and CCTV Projects under various 
schemes of Delhi Police, with the Safe City Projects Platform. 
(iv) 02 Nos. Mobile Command & Control Vehicle. 
(v) 88 Prakhar Vans equipped with Communication Device, Body Worn Camera, Vehicle 
Mounted Cameras, GPS etc. 
 
2.7.6 Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Pune, a scientific Society of 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has been engaged as Total Service Provider for 
implementation of the project.  The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Delhi Police and 

28 
 
C-DAC, Pune, has been executed on 26 th November, 2020 and C-DAC is in process for selection of 
Master System Integrator (MSI) and Internet Service Provider (ISP) for implementation of the project.  
 In addition to 10,000 cameras under Safe City project, based on Crime Mapping Study, vulnerable 
locations have been identified in the jurisdiction of 50 Police Stations and approval has been accorded 
to Delhi Police for installation of 6630 CCTV Cameras in the identified locations.  
  
2.7.7 Also, Delhi Police through M/s ECIL is in the process of implementing  CCTV Project at six 
locations in New Delhi and Central Districts of Delhi, whereby 2727 Nos. CCTV cameras are being 
installed.  Till April, 2021, 967 cameras have been made live and work is underway for installation of 
remaining cameras. 
 
2.7.8 Apart from the above, based on survey conducted in important locations and identification of 
sensitive areas, Delhi Police under Nigehban Scheme has motivated individuals, Resident Welfare 
Associations (RWAs) and Market Welfare Associations (MWAs) to install CCTV cameras by pooling 
their resources. Under this Scheme, 2,66,483 CCTV Cameras have been installed so far.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.7.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.10 The Committee observes that last mile connectivity needs to be improved to ensure the safety of 
women, specially working women, who get down on metro station at odd hours and have to reach 
home crossing lonely stretches on the way. The Committee had examined this issue in detail while 
examining the subject „The Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi.‟ The Committee in 
its 222nd Report had recommended that the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) needs to undertake 
multi-modal integration measures at all metro stations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs should take up this issue with concerned authorities to speed up the creation of 
infrastructure for last-mile connectivity. 
(Para 3.4.29 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.11 100 nos. AC E buses are being procured/ inducted under FAME-2 scheme of Department of 
Heavy Industry (DHI). The timelines have been extended due to unprecedented COVID-19 Pandemic. 
The delivery of buses has commenced in March 2021. 25 buses have been delivered till date and are 
under commissioning at present. The likely date of completion of induction of all the 100 buses is 
September, 2021. DMRC has informed that they have undertaken Multi Modal Integration (MMI) at 
metro stations. The implementation of MMI Scheme involves number of agencies, viz., PWD, DDA, 
MCDs, besides DMRC. The scheme of MMI is approved by UTTIPEC Governing Council chaired by 
the Hon'ble Lieutenant Governor of Delhi. The present status of implementation of MMI is as under: 
 
(i) The total number of stations 285 
(ii) Number of stations identified for implementation of MMI in 
consultation with UTTIPEC 
142 
(iii) Number of stations where MMI already implemented 46 
(iv) Number of stations where MMI is under implementation at present 96 
(v) The Present Status of Implementation is as under:-  

29 
 
 
 
a. Work in progress at 37 priority stations Target- Dec, 2021 
b. Scheme under finalization with UTTIPEC- 59 stations Target- March, 2023 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.7.12 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the target of procur ing 100 buses by 
September 2021 will be achieved. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.13 The Committee takes strong note that Delhi Police has not identified "trafficking" as a common 
reason for missing children. The Committee believes that trafficking of children is an alarming issue 
and has, therefore, discussed it in-depth in Chapter IV of this Report. 
(Para 3.4.39 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.14 Delhi Police has informed that analysis of reasons behind missing children reveals that in most 
of the cases children go missing due to reasons like being scolded by parents at home, academic 
pressure, losing their way, elopement etc.,  Crime Branch made sustained effort to identify whether 
organized gangs were behind kidnapping of children.  However, no such gangs were found active in 
city.  
 
2.7.15 Crime Branch and District Police have continued with their efforts to trace the missing children 
from shelter homes, Railway Stations, Bus Stands etc., under the Operation Smile-II and Operation 
Muskan-II.  Police teams visited various shelter homes and spoke to children to find out about their 
residential addresses so that they could be re-united with their families.  This resulted in tracing and 
re-uniting total 6038 children so far.  
  
Incentive for tracing of missing children
 
 
2.7.16 Special stress is laid on tracing children aged 14 or below since many of them fall prey to 
traffickers.  Daily recovery and rescue of missing children has increased after the announcement of 
incentive of out of turn promotion for constables / head constables who trace at least 50 missing 
children aged below 14 (of whom at least 15 children must be eight years old or younger) in a 
year.  Similarly, those who trace at least 15 missing children would be eligible for Asadharan Karya 
Purashkar. 4279 children were reported missing upto 31 st December, 2020, out of which, 3257 have 
been rescued.  Delhi Police have also solved cases of children who were trafficked from places such as 
Assam and Agra & Noida in Uttar Pradesh.  
 
Tracing of Missing Children
 
   
2.7.17 Periodical review and strengthening of Anti Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU) is being done in 
all Districts to improve the functioning/performance of AHTU.  An audit of pending investigation cases 
have been carried out in each case of missing children and adequate training being imparted to the 
investigation officers so that they may investigate such cases properly. The scheme „Pehchaan‟ was 
also continued this year under which children  from under privileged sections were photographed in 

30 
 
order to maintain a data bank which could be used to trace the child in case he/she goes 
missing.  1,97,087 children have been photographed under this scheme so far. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.7.18 The Committee appreciates the efforts of Delhi Police in tracking, tracing an d reuniting of 
missing children with their family. The Committee further recommends that biometric 
credentials under aadhaar may be used for quicker disposal of such cases.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.19 The Committee is aware that the NCT of Delhi covers a large area adjoining three States of 
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee observes the porous borders exist in the region 
where a large movement of people takes place on a daily basis. This necessitates strict vigilance, 
cooperation and coordination amongst the police forces of all the three bordering States and Delhi. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs in coordination with the thr ee 
bordering States and Delhi Police should establish a permanent coordination mechanism that will help 
in effective tracking, monitoring and preventing crimes. The Committee is of the view that it is 
essential for optimal reporting of crimes and prompt investigation thereof when the crimes committed 
in NCR involve other bordering State/s and vice-versa. 
(Para 3.4.41 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.20 Delhi Police organizes Inter-State Coordination meetings regularly for sharing criminal 
intelligence and terrorist hideouts. The meetings are attended by the representatives from UP, MP, 
Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K, Bihar and Jharkhand.  The issues 
related to organized crime, illegal gun running, Fake Indian Currency Note (FICN), traffic, 
intelligence sharing, terror, online frauds etc., are discussed in the meetings and follow up actions 
taken accordingly.  Besides coordination meetings at Police Headquarters level, District DCsP also 
hold regular coordination meetings with their counter parts of neighboring States. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.7.21 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
 
2.8 Challenges in dealing with Cyber Crimes 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.8.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that cybercrimes transcend geographical boundaries. The 
crimes are taking place in India while criminals are located in some other countries. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs to take up this issue with the Ministry of 
External Affairs and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to develop an 
understanding to sign pacts with different countries, especially with those countries that are linked with 

31 
 
maximum cases of cyber crimes. Better coordination with counter –crime agencies of foreign countries 
is highly required to effectively handle the cases of trans-national cybercrimes. 
 
(Para 5.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 Under Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) Scheme, Ministry is constantly engaged 
through Ministry of External Affairs at various multilateral forums like BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa), SCO (Shanghai Cooperation Organization), EU (European Union), bilateral 
forums like Germany, UAE, USA and with various agencies like Cybercrime coordination Centre of 
USA, Interpol (through CBI) etc. I4C with these agencies, establishing effective communication for 
sharing of information of incidents of cybercrime and capacity building in the area of cybercrime. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.8.3 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about th e number of 
cybercrimes busted with such cooperation/coordination with international 
organizations/countries and conviction rate in such cases. 
 
 
2.9 Interventions of the Ministry of Home Affairs in handling cyber crimes 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.1 The Committee appreciates the re-launch of revamped Cyber Crime Reporting Portal and 
operationalization of toll-free numbers which will help the citizens report cybercrimes and avail 
assistance in lodging online complaints. 
(Para 5.6.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.2 Noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.9.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.4 The Committee observes that so far, about 13,000 police personnel, judicial officers and 
prosecutors have been provided training on cybercrime awareness, investigation, forensics, etc., and 
still many of the States/UTs have not come onboard for the purpose. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should advise States/UTs to provide training to more personnel so that they are well 
trained to deal with the increasing cybercrimes. 
(Para 5.6.27 ibid) 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.5 Ministry is continuously pursuing with the States/UTs to speed up completion of pending 
activities in a time bound manner so as to achieve the physical and financial targets under the CCPWC 
Scheme. 
2.9.6 Further, in order to provide cybercrime investigation related training under I4C Scheme to a 
large number of stakeholders including police officers, judicial officers/prosecutors and forensic 
experts, NCRB has launched a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) platform namely CyTrain portal 
(https://cytrain.ncrb.gov.in) on 12th March, 2020. It offers professional quality e-learning resources on 
cybercrime investigation.  In order to access the courses available on the portal, user can simply 
register using an email-Id of Government domain like nic.in, gov.in In case of unavailability of 
Government email-id, an offline procedure has also been provided. The training curriculum has been 
designed with the following „six tracks‟ to address the challenges as mentioned in the 
recommendations: 
 
(i) Responder Track: Targeting First Responder Officer and Duty Officer who first responds 
to any crimes which may have any link with the cyber/digital aspect. 
(ii) Forensic Track: Targeting Digital Forensics A specialist at States/UTs and Central 
Forensics departments/Labs. 
(iii) Investigation Track: Targeting Investigating Officers at Police Station Level and CPO. 
(iv) Intelligence Track: Targeting Intelligence Officers/Analysts who work at States/UTs 
Intelligence Unit/Departments or Central Intelligence Agencies. 
(v) Management Track: Targeting senior level officers of States/UTs/CPO/CAPFs who heads 
Cybercrime Investigation / Digital Forensics Unit. 
(vi) Judiciary / Prosecution Track: Targeting Judges/Prosecutors for awareness building on 
latest Cybercrime MO 
 
2.9.7 NCRB has also established a State of the Art e-Cyber Lab at NCRB Headquarters, New Delhi. 
The Lab is equipped with more than 25 latest Digital Forensics tools from industries and more than 50 
open source cybercrime detection and forensics tools. The e-Cyber Lab is also integrated with the 
MOOC platform (CyTrain portal) and called as e-Cyber Lab which was launched on 13 th October, 
2020 for providing virtual experience on experimentation on latest modus operandi on cybercrime.  
 
2.9.8 Ease of accessing the CyTrain & e-Cyber Lab would enable the States/UTs and other LEAs in 
saving huge amount of costs and efforts by avoiding arrangements of offline trainings on cybercrime 
for the large number of Police Officers across the country and allow officers to attend online training 
at their convenience. The portal also provides cybercrime awareness literature for all including the 
citizen. As on date, a total of more than 5400 trainees have registered on the CyTrain portal and more 
than 1400 online certificates have been issued to officials, who have successfully completed the 
courses. Regular efforts are being made to popularize the CyTrain portal among all stakeholders for 
enrolling on Cytrain portal.  
 
2.9.9 An Online Capacity Building Programme on Cyber Law, Cybercrime Investigations and Digital 
Forensics, offering a Post Graduate Diploma of 9 months in a phased manner, to 1000 officials (2 
batches of 500 each) of Police, State Cyber Cells, Law Enforcement Agencies, Prosecutors and 
Judicial Officers through Learning Management System (LMS) was launched on 8 th November 2020. 
The 1st batch course started from 23 rd November, 2020 and expected to be completed by Aug, 2021. A 
total of 493 officers have registered, and a total of 46 live classes/sessions are conducted to date (as on 

33 
 
23rd March, 2021) for the 1 st Batch. The 2 nd Batch is envisaged to start by June, 2021. MHA has also 
issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June, 2021. 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.9.10 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.11 The Committee further observes that the nature of crimes is evolving and changing on daily 
basis due to technological advancement. It is, therefore, important for the Centre to have coordination 
with the States/UTs for optimal utilization of existing resources. The Committee recommends that the 
existing National-Level Training Centre at Dwarka, New Delhi, established by the Ministry  of Home 
Affairs should be used to provide short and long term training and refresher courses periodically to all 
the senior officers of the States/UTs who are involved in monitoring and handling cybercrimes in their 
respective States/UTs so that they can be educated properly to meet the challenges and technological 
advancement. The trained officers should further train their counterparts/subordinates in their 
States/UTs. 
(Para 5.6.28 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.12 National Level Training Centre (NCTC) under NCRB headquarter at Mahipalpur is conducting 
short and long term training and refresher courses periodically for all the LEAs. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.9.13 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.14 The Committee, taking note of the reply of the MHA, observes that there is a need for optimal 
use of the resources and assets that are dispersed amongst various agencies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs to create a National Nodal Agency for inter-State, inter-
agency coordination among Centre, State/UT Ministries/Departments and intelligence agencies. This 
will help in combating cybercrimes effectively through a concerted centralized effort and would 
facilitate faster and easier redressal of cybercrime cases. 
(Para 5.6.33 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.15 Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has established Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre 
(I4C) to provide a framework and eco-system for Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) to deal with 
cybercrimes in a coordinated and comprehensive manner.   The I4C will aim to strengthen the 
capability of Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and improve coordination among various agencies 
and LEAs. It will work towards enhancing the nation‟s technical capability to tackle cybercrimes and 

34 
 
develop an effective operational architecture for coordinating with various LEAs in regards to 
cybercrime. 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.9.16 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
2.10 Efforts of the MHA to block cyber pornographic content and other obsce ne contents on 
the internet 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.10.1 The Committee observes that dependency on cyber space has been growing exponentially with 
the constant adoption of digital services, tools, and applications. This has also led to an increase in 
cybercrimes and associated challenges. To address the challenges, a targeted approach  from different 
angles is needed which will include imparting proper training to law enforcement agencies, investing in 
the right cyber security solutions, evolving dynamic prevention methods and raising mass awareness on 
the use and misuse of the cyberspace. 
(Para 5.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2 The revamped Cybercrime reporting portal launched in 2019 provides special focus on 
cybercrimes against women & children. Incidents reported on this portal are routed automatically to 
the respective States/UTs Police based on the information provided by the public. Incidents reported on 
this portal are being dealt by respective Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) of States/UTs as per the 
legal provisions. Besides, a toll free number 155260 has also been made operational for citizens to get 
assistance in lodging online complaints in their own language. As the awareness and recording of 
cybercrimes reporting online through revamped portal has improved, there has been an increase in 
reporting of cybercrimes. Further, cybercrime awareness tips and advisories are being circulated to 
LEAs and they have also   been requested to disseminate the information in their regional and local 
languages.  MHA has requested States/ Union Territories to adequately create awareness in their 
State/ UT on prevention from cybercrime. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories 
on 30th June, 2021. In addition, a Twitter Handle Cyber Dost with more than 3 lakhs followers is also 
active in spreading awareness on cyber crimes.   
 
2.10.3 Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) through a program, namely, 
Information Security Education & Awareness (ISEA), has been creating awareness among users 
highlighting the importance of following the ethics while using internet and advising them not to share 
rumours/fake news. A dedicated website for information security awareness 
(https://www.infosecawareness.in) provides relevant awareness material. Under the programme, 21 
awareness workshops on Information Security exclusively for women have been organized covering 
2,083 participants. The topics/content covered in these workshops include cyber security, cyber 
stalking, online shopping, social media and privacy, password management, internet security, mobile 
security, browser security, online banking, instant messaging, etc. Besides this, an exclusive handbook 
namely „Information Security  Awareness handbook for Women‟, „Cyber Security tips for Women‟ and 

35 
 
„Online Safety tips for Women@Home during COVID -19‟ have been designed. The awareness content 
designed/developed exclusively for women have been made available for download on the website 
https://www.infosecawareness.in/women
. 
 
2.10.4 As part of this program, C-DAC, NIELIT and other noted training partners are conducting 
training exclusively for women and making them Industry ready by imparting the requisite technical 
skills in the domain of Cyber Security. The program started with 3 cities initially and is now having 
footprints across India including successful batch at Srinagar and Silchar (Assam). The Ministry is 
continuously pursuing with the States/UTs to speed up completion of pending activities in a time bound 
manner so as to achieve the physical and financial targets under the CCPWC Scheme. Further, in 
order to provide cybercrime investigation related training under I4C Scheme to a large number of 
stakeholders including police officers, judicial officers/prosecutors and forensic experts, NCRB has 
launched a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) platform namely CyTrain portal 
(https://cytrain.ncrb.gov.in) on 12th March, 2020. It offers professional quality e-learning resources on 
cybercrime investigation.  In order to access the courses available on the portal, user can simply 
register using an email-Id of Government domain like nic.in, gov.in In case of unavailability of 
Government email-id, an offline procedure has also been provided. The training curriculum has been 
designed with the following „six tracks‟ to address the challenges as mentioned in the 
recommendations: 
 
(i) Responder Track: Targeting First Responder Officer and Duty Officer who first responds 
to any crimes which may have any link with the cyber/digital aspect. 
(ii) Forensic Track: Targeting Digital Forensics A specialist at States/UTs and Central 
Forensics departments/Labs. 
(iii) Investigation Track: Targeting Investigating Officers at Police Station Level and CPO. 
(iv) Intelligence Track: Targeting Intelligence Officers/Analysts who work at States/UTs 
Intelligence Unit/Departments or Central Intelligence Agencies. 
(v) Management Track: Targeting senior level officers of States/UTs/CPO/CAPFs who heads 
Cybercrime Investigation / Digital Forensics Unit. 
(vi) Judiciary / Prosecution Track: Targeting Judges/Prosecutors for awareness building on 
latest Cybercrime MO 
 
2.10.5 NCRB has also established a State of the Art e-Cyber Lab at NCRB Headquarters, New Delhi. 
The Lab is equipped with more than 25 latest Digital Forensics tools from industries and more than 50 
open source cybercrime detection and forensics tools. The e-Cyber Lab is also integrated with the 
MOOC platform (CyTrain portal) and called as e-Cyber Lab which was launched on 13 th October, 
2020 for providing virtual experience on experimentation on latest modus operandi on cybercrime.  
 
2.10.6 Ease of accessing the CyTrain & e-Cyber Lab would enable the States/UTs and other LEAs in 
saving huge amount of costs and efforts by avoiding arrangements of offline trainings on cybercrime 
for the large number of Police Officers across the country and allow officers to attend online training 
at their convenience. The portal also provides cybercrime awareness literature for all including the 
citizen. As on date, a total of more than 5400 trainees have registered on the CyTrain portal and more 
than 1400 online certificates have been issued to officials, who have successfully completed the 
courses. Regular efforts are being made to popularize the CyTrain portal among all stakeholders for 
enrolling on Cytrain portal.  
 

36 
 
2.10.7 An Online Capacity Building Programme on Cyber Law, Cybercrime Investigations and Digital 
Forensics, offering a Post Graduate Diploma of 9 months in a phased manner, to 1000 officials (2 
batches of 500 each) of Police, State Cyber Cells, Law Enforcement Agencies, Prosecutors and 
Judicial Officers through Learning Management System (LMS) was launched on 8 th November 2020. 
The 1st batch course started from 23 rd November, 2020 and expected to be completed by Aug, 2021. A 
total of 493 officers have registered, and a total of 46 live classes/sessions are conducted to date (as on 
23rd March, 2021) for the 1st Batch. The 2nd Batch is envisaged to start by June, 2021. 
MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.10.8 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
2.11 Making Gender Sensitization a Part of School Curriculum 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.11.1 The Committee is of the considered view that due to lack of legal awareness particularly, 
amongst minor children/juveniles, they are getting involved in crimes like stalking, online-trolling, 
molesting, etc., in their schools/colleges, considering these as non-criminal activities. Therefore, it is 
necessary to impart knowledge of cyber security to them so that they do not get targeted by offende rs. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may take up with the 
Ministry of Education to include the basics of cyber security in the school curriculum at an early age. It 
may include the general information of cyberspace, threats and challenges associated with cyber 
security, details of online activ ities that are punishable under the law to make them aware of do‟s and 
don‟ts while engaging in online activities. This will educate the children about the use and misuse of 
cyber space and also act as a deterrent to stop them from committing cybercrimes. A nationwide 
campaign may also be conducted in schools for creating awareness among parents to recognize e arly 
signs of child abuse, risks of online addiction, cyber-bullying, explicit content, etc., to improve the 
online safety of their child. 
(Para 6.3.19 ibid) 
 
2.11.2 The Committee further recommends that it should be mandatory in all educational institutions 
to teach 'Social Media Regulations' covering aspects on all social and legal requirements so as to ensure 
increased awareness and compliance. Institutions must also formulate penalties and actions 
corresponding to the violation of the guidelines. The MHA may take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Education in this regard at an appropriate level.  
(Para 6.3.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.11.3 Ministry of Education is holding regular meetings with Educational Institutes to discuss further 
course of action to increase awareness amongst students in prevention of cyber crimes. UGC has 
constituted an Expert Committee of IT Experts/ Administrators in e-Governance and digital 
technologies involved in policy formulations to guide UGC for developing an eco-system for cyber 
security in Higher Educational Institutes (HEIs).  The Committee held its first meeting on 5 th May, 
2021. NCERT is taking up several activities mentioned below to create awareness on cyber safety and 
security among students as well as teachers.  

37 
 
 
ICT in Education Curriculum for Students and Teachers
 
  
2.11.4 In classes 9 th to 12 th safety, security and ethics in the cyber world are being introduced as 
separate chapters in ICT, IT and Computer Science textbooks. Topics like email safety. spam mail, 
malicious link, fraud malls; safe in Social Networks: identity protection, confidentiality and caution 
while dealing with anonymous or unknown; cyber bullying'. how to safeguard, where to report, Laws 
against stalking and bullying; Cyber Stalking, Cyber crime, cyber Law, Hacking, Fake websites, 
Phishing and other online frauds caution and how to deal in such events; copyright, Plagiarism and 
IPR issues; Software licensing - Proprietary software, Free and Open source software, Copyrighted vs. 
Free resources, Creative Commons; E-waste; Mobile security, mobile app security etc. 
 
Orientation of State Resource Groups in States/ UTs
  
 
2.11.5 During the State Resource Group (SRG) training conducted for 3l states, cyber safety 
components have been integrated in the training sessions according to its relevance. Around 1350 
SRGs have been trained during this programme till 2019-20. SRG training for 2020-21 will be started 
form 2lst Feb, 2021 and expected to orient at least 20 State Resource Persons (SRPs) in each state. 
 
Collaboration with ISEA-CDAC, Hvderabad
 
 
2.11.6 NCERT is in the process of signing a MoU with ISEA- CDAC, Hyderabad (MeitY) for working 
collaboratively in creating awareness and capacity building on cyber safety and security. Activities 
done in collaboration are as follows.  
 
(i) Two booklets on guidelines for parents on cyber safety & security and cyber 
parenting were developed and released on 9 th February, 2021. These booklets can be 
accessed at https://ciet.nic.in/pages.php?id=booklet-on- cyber-
safety-
security&In+en&ln=en  
(ii) A Telegram channel on Cyber Safety and Security (https://t.me/cybersafetysecurity) is 
created for disseminating information on a regular basis.  
(iii) First course 'Cyber Hygiene Practices: Personal Digital Devices' as part of course 
series "Cyber Hygiene" was developed and launched on DIKSHA from 8 th February, 
2021. This course can be accessed at https://diksha.gov.in/explore-course/
 
course/do_3132118572713902081183. Through this course several threads were 
introduced and oriented on the safety measures. 
(iv) Two more courses as part of the Cyber Hygiene series are in the process of 
development. 
 
Collaboration with Cyber Peace Foundation 
 
 
2.11.7 eRaksha Competitions - A series of competitions for students and teachers like slogan writing, 
CD cover designing, painting etc., were conducted on the theme Digital Citizenship and Online Safety.  
 
Collaboration with UNESCO
 
 
2.11.8 During COVlD-19, a brochure on cyber bullying was developed in collaboration with 
UNESCO and disseminated across the country.  

38 
 
Orientation of NCERT Faculty:  
 
2.11.9 A series of online sessions on cyber safety & Security were organized for capacity building of 
NCERT faculties on the following topics and broadcasted live through YouTube channel:  
 
(i) Be safe Online  
(ii) Safety measures with respect to browser and mail 
(iii) Safety & Security :Devices during online transaction  
(iv) Adoption of OER: An innovative intervention for teaching - learning  
 
Orientation of teachers and teacher educators through NISHTHA Programme
 
 
2.11.10 National Initiatives for School Heads' and Teachers' Holistic Advancement (NISHTHA) 
is an in-service training programme which was implemented for Elementary (Class I to VIII) teachers 
and school heads during 2020-21. Cyber safety and security is a component of the three courses. A 
dedicated course on POCSO is part of this programme. In COVID-I9 pandemic situation the course 
was rolled out online and about 24 Lakh teachers were covered. The same module was completed by 
17.5 lakh teachers through face-to-face mode during the year 2019-20. 
 
CIET-NCERT Guidelines
 
 
2.11.11 CIET-NCERT has developed booklets and brochures regarding cyber safety and 
security for schools, teachers, students and parents. All these booklets are disseminated to all state 
agencies as well as autonomous organizations for further dissemination to schools. These resources 
can be accessed a t https://ciet.nic.in/pages.php?id=booklet-on-cyber-
safety-security&In+en&ln=en. 
These guidelines orient children and adults related to safety measures and also the legal aspects 
related to cyber safety and security.  
 
2.11.12 An Online course on Gender Issues in Education is being developed by NCERT wherein 
the module on "cyber Safety and Security" addresses concerns such as cybercrime against women, 
legal process and responses, cyber pomography, cyber ethics and cyber education'. Guidelines are 
issued from time to time by KVS on topics related to cyber security. The securiry instructions of 
NCPCR have been sent to all Kendriya Vidyalayas, so that cybercrimes can be avoided. At the school 
level, lectures are organized by calling local cyber security experts, through which this information is 
widely disseminated.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.11.13 The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that the measures taken 
by the Ministry of Education to increase awareness for prevention of cybercrim es may be 
popularized among students/teachers/parents through   nation-wide campaign. 
 
 
2.12 Gender Sensitization of Society 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.12.1 The Committee also recommends that all political leaders should conduct a campaign to raise 
awareness among masses about the gender sensitization which will have a deep and lasting impact and 
change the pattern and attitude of society towards women. The Committee further recommends that 
gender sensitization training of the Police, public and officers in the bureaucracy should be conducted 
regularly on their roles and responsibilities. Further, SOPs and guidelines about gender sensitization 
should also be updated and circulated from time to time. 
(Para 6.4.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.2 The BPR&D completed a project on „Gender Sensitization of Police - A need for Training 
Intervention‟. The overarching objective of the project is to leverage HRD and training interventions 
to ensure a gender sensitive police. The in-built objectives are to delineate the desirable steps/tasks 
that can go a long way in making police in India gender sensitive. The objective at the end of the 
project thus subsumes certain steps at various levels:  
 
(i) To take policy level steps  
(ii) To take intra-organizational steps  
(iii) To take special steps 
  
2.12.3 The Training Division convened a multi-disciplinary webinar on 26 th February, 2021, in which 
participants representing a microcosm of stakeholders including Police, Prison, Prosecution, Medical 
and Forensics were present.  The Training Division commenced a new training initiative, styled 
the National Perspective Management Course, for senior police officers of State Police and Central 
Organizations and the eITEC Courses for capacity building of partner developing countries.  The 
courses are designed to expose the participants to a wide variety of professional concerns relating to 
policing, including women security. Several measures for capacity building on women safety initiated, 
in coordination with stakeholders such as the Ministry of Women & Child Development, NCW and 
MHA, and included: 
 
(i) A series of webinars were organized during the pandemic on issues relating to Soft Skills, 
Community Policing, Role of Intelligence and Safety of Women and Children, under the 
broad head of „Road to Effective Policing‟.  
(ii) Policy initiatives, such as preparation of SOPs for Investigation of Assault on Women, 
including POCSO cases, creating and augmenting Women Help Desk in Police Stations 
across India. 
(iii) Initiating steps to draft a broad-based guideline and scheme for Women Safety in 
association with the National Commission for Women (NCW). 
 
2.12.4 MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30 th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.12.5 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
2.13 Sensitization on Legal Issues 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.13.1 The Committee is of the strong view that Panchayats can play a critical role in responding to 
violence against women and children. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Panchayats should 
be sensitized to respond to violence in a priority and sensitive manner as per the provisions of the laws. 
Regular training and orientation programmes should be conducted with women members of local Gram 
Panchayat and female staff attached to the child care centres and Self-Help Groups (SHGs) to co unsel 
individuals who are found mistreating and abusing women. In order to increase legal awareness among 
working women, Local Committees (LCs) need to be strengthened. The awareness level of the women 
employed in informal sectors, who are engaged in agriculture and other farm and non-farm-relate d 
activities, should also be enhanced through appropriate advocacy and counseling. 
(Para 6.5.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.2 Ministry of Panchayati Raj has issued guidelines on Gram Panchayat Development Plan 
(GPDP) to Panchayats ensuring that steps for constituting committees for the protection of women and 
children may be taken care of.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.13.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
2.14 Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes Against Women 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.14.1 The Committee notes the creation of Internal and Local Committee to provide redressal in 
cases of sexual harassment against women employed in both formal and informal sectors. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the district administration may conduct surveys of different 
workplaces and types of work in which the women in their districts are involved and constitute local 
committees accordingly. The Committee is of the view that the women working in informal sectors are 
poor and migrant workers and are uneducated, unaware of the laws and whom to approach in case 
atrocities and crimes are committed against them. Therefore, the Committee also recommends that 
MHA may advise States to ask all employers to sensitize their employees by organizing orientati on 
and awareness programmes at regular intervals about the legal provisions, Sexual Harassment 
Electronic Box Portal and helpline numbers dealing with violence against women. 
 
(Para 6.7.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.14.2 The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 
2013 casts responsibility on Appropriate Government i.e. State Government and on every employer to 
organize workshops and awareness programmes at regular intervals for sensitizing the employees with 
the provisions of the Act and orientation programmes for the members of the Internal 

41 
 
Committee.  Also, the Ministry, from time- to-time issues advisory to all States/ Central Ministries 
/Industry bodies etc., to sensitize their employees about the provisions of the Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.    
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.14.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.15 Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes against Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.15.1 The Committee notes that there has been a large number of cases under the POCSO Act wher e 
the age of the juveniles has been below the threshold age for applicability of the law. The Committee 
believes that minor sexual offenders may commit more serious and heinous crime if left 
untreated/uncounseled. Therefore, it is very important to relook at these provisions because more and 
more juveniles are getting involved in such crimes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
MHA may take up with MoW&CD to review the current age limit of 18 years and see if it can be 
reduced to 16 years for the applicability of the POCSO Act, 2012. 
(Para 6.8.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.15.2 Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, (JJ Act), 2015 which is the primary legislation for children in need of 
care and protection (CNCP) and children in conflict with law. Child accused of crime under POCSO 
Act is protected under the provisions of JJ Act, 2015 based on principal of restorative justice. The JJ 
Act, 2015 empowers Juvenile Justice Board to decide upon matters of children in conflict with law. 
Further, offences committed by the children have been categorised as petty, serious and heinous 
offences. The JJ Act, 2015 also include procedure to decide upon cases where children above the age 
of sixteen years have been alleged to commit a heinous offence. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.15.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
  

42 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
 
3.1 Registration of Crimes against Women and Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.1 The Committee notes that cases of crimes against women and children are not getting registered 
at the police station and in time and are one of the main reasons for delay and denial of justice to th e 
victim and family. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Rajasthan Police for 
conducting decoy operations to check whether FIRs are being registered at Police Stations or not. The 
Committee strongly recommends that such decoy operations should be conducted at regular intervals 
throughout the country. This will create alertness amongst ground-level Police officials and will lead to 
the registration of more cases. The Committee also recommends developing and promoting online 
registration of FIR for different categories of complaints particularly, for the crimes committed aga inst 
women and children. In this regard, the MHA should issue a detailed advisory to all the States/UTs. 
 
(Para 2.3.12 of 230th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 „Police‟ and „Public order‟ are State subject as per Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. It is stated that all States/Union Territories have operationalized Crime and Criminal Tracking 
Networks and System (CCTNS). FIRs are being registered 100% on CCTNS in 15890 Police Stations. 
Further, all States/Union Territories have launched their State Citizen Portals providing citizen centric 
police services, which includes online filing of complaints, including for crimes on women and 
children. Police register information report in writing, in case it is a cognizable case. Citizens can also 
file complaints online in cases related to cyber-crimes on the National Cyber-crime Portal, including 
cyber-crimes against women and children. 
 
3.1.3 MHA has issued advisories to all States/UTs to register FIR and take timely action in cases of 
crimes against women, apart from taking mitigating steps for prevention of crimes against women. A 
detailed advisory on protection of vulnerable groups, including women, has been issued to States/ 
Union Territories on 19 May 2021 and 30 June 2021. 
 
3.1.4 It is further stated that as part of capacity building of the police in this regard, apart from the 
regular trainings, the BPR&D organized a One Day Webinar on “Woman Safety with Sensitivity” on 
8th March, 2021 at BPR&D, Hqrs., New Delhi. A book titled “Women‟s Safety & Security - A 
Handbook for First Responders and Investigators in the Police” was released during the webinar. 
This book has been prepared for First Responders and Investigators in the police, for the purpose of 
prevention and investigation of crime against women with specific reference to the crime of sexual 
assault, which includes investigation, victim compensation and rehabilitation. Emphasis has been 
laid upon appropriate behavioural and attitudinal skills of the police in course of prevention and 
detection of crime against women and children and interaction with victims of crime. The book has 
been circulated to DGsP of all States/UTs and DGs of CPOs/CAPFs. 
 

43 
 
3.1.5 A project on „CAWCH:  Crime Against Women- Check & Halt Prevention Strategies‟ has been 
completed under BPR&D. The project studies the use of technology and technological/security 
infrastructure for devising strategies to build confidence amongst women. It aims to identify and 
recognize the prevalent societal evils to analyse and solve the problems of crime against women. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.6 The Committee notes that all States/Union Territories have operationalized Crime and 
Criminal Tracking Networks and System (CCTNS) along with State Citizen Portals p roviding 
citizen centric police services, which includes online filing of complai nts, including for crimes on 
women and children. The Committee is of the view that internet connectivity and digital 
infrastructure are important for proper functioning of CCTNS and other o nline services. The 
Committee therefore, recommends that the MHA should take up with concerned authority to 
monitor the down times of CCTNS in police stations and the reasons for the sam e. The MHA 
based on the Report thus generated, should hold periodic meetings with the States/UTs concern 
to sort out the problem/issues hampering smooth functioning of CCTNS.  
 
3.1.7 The Committee notes the reply about the circulation of the “Women‟s Safety & Security- 
A Handbook for First Responders and Investigators in the Police” book to DGsP of all 
States/UTs and DGs of CPOs/CAPFs. The Committee further recommends that th e handbook 
be made available online so that it is eas ily accessible to the police personnel particularly 
working at ground level during interaction with victims of crime.  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.8 The Committee believes that it is important to give due importance to a complaint by women 
about sexual harassment or incidences of violence through free and easy registration of FI Rs in any 
Police Station. In cases of delay in lodging an FIR by victim/family members etc., police must seek and 
record the reasons for the delay in the FIR sheet. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA 
should introduce Zero-FIR in all the States and Union Territories. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should provide the facility of lodging Zero-FIR in 
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & System (CCTNS) 
(Para 2.3.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.9 Where a crime is committed outside the jurisdiction of the police station concerned, the police 
have been advised to register a FIR as a Zero FIR in the case and transfer the same to the Police 
Station concerned. The Crime and Criminal Tracking Networks and System (CCTNS) adequately 
facilitates for registration of such case and electronic transfer with record. MHA has been regularly 
issuing advisories to all States/Union Territories to mandatorily register FIRs, and where necessary a 
Zero FIR, to ensure timely recording of complaints in prevention of crimes against women. MHA has 
issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30 June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.10 The Committee notes that the Crime and Criminal Tracking Networks and System 
(CCTNS) adequately facilitates for registration of zero-FIR and further recommen ds that the 
MHA may advise States to seek and record the reasons by the PS concerned  for the delay in 

44 
 
lodging an FIR by victim/family members. The Committee further recommen ds that MHA may 
advise States to issue SOPs to record the reasons for delay in registration of cases by the  
complainants. The Committee would like to be apprised about the numbe r of zero-FIR lodged in 
States/UTs and time taken for transfer of zero FIR to the PS concerned. MH A may monitor it on 
regular intervals in this regard and issue advisories, wherever needed. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.11 The Committee expresses its concern over the tendency of registration of false cases and misuse 
of laws. The Committee observes that after an investigation about the veracity of cases, appropriate 
penal action should be taken by fixing accountability of the Police personnel who have registered false 
cases. At the same time, those individuals who register false cases must not get off scot-free. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should advise States to take strict actions against the 
Police personnel and individuals who have registered false cases. The MHA may take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Law and Justice and if need be, laws should be amended to add stringent 
provisions against false cases. 
(Para 2.3.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.12 Section 182 of the Indian Penal Code provides for penal provision against false cases and 
misuse of laws as below:  
 
“False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to the injury 
of another person.—Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or 
believes to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby 
cause, such public servant— 
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit if the true state 
of facts respecting which such information is given were known by him, or 
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance of any person, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both."  
 
3.1.13 Section 209 of IPC provides for penal offence for dishonestly making false claim in Court as 
below: 
“Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to injure or annoy any person, makes 
in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows to be false, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also 
be liable to fine”.   
 
3.1.14 Further, in terms of the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs has 
also referred this matter to Department of Legal Affairs. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ 
Union Territories on 30th June 2021. Amendments to Criminal laws is a continuous process. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.15 The Committee notes that Section 182 of the IPC has a provision for a fine „whic h may 
extend to one thousand rupees‟ and Section 209 does not mention the amount of fine. The amount 
of fine under Section 182 is very low in present time. The Committee, therefor e, further 

45 
 
recommends that the MHA may take up with Ministry of law & Justice to amend  the section 182 
and 209 of the IPC to enhance the amount of fine under Section 182 of IPC and  Section 209 of 
IPC should also be amended by adding suitable amount of fine under this sec tion. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about the number of cases registered under Section 182 
and 209 of the IPC during past three years. 
 
 
3.2 Conviction Rate 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee is of the view that there is an urgent need for the media to show restraint and 
responsible behavior in reporting the cases of crimes against women and children. The Committee 
believes that sensationalizing these cases in media demonstrates a lack of sensitivity and leads to re-
victimization of the survivors and embarrassment of their family. Further, the media should focus more 
on publicizing the penalty/punishment imposed on the culprits than the incidents of crime. This will 
certainly not only create fear of law but will also act as a deterrence. The Commit tee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA should take up the matter with the concerned Ministries to ensure non-
disclosure of identities of victims and provide protection to the victims and families which has also 
been the observation of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India. 
(Para 2.4.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, who have informed 
that Guidelines/Regulatory framework is available for media sector i.e Print/Electronic/Digital Media 
for self-regulation by the media. In pursuance of its policy to uphold the freedom of the press in print 
media, Press Council of lndia (PCI), a statutory autonomous body has been set up under the Press 
Council Act, 1978 to maintain and improve the standards of newspapers and news agencies in the 
county, and to inculcate the principles of self-regulatory among the press. ln furtherance of its 
objectives, the Council, under Section 13 (2)(b)of the Press Council Act, 1978, has framed "Norms of 
journalistic Conduct" which cover the principles and ethics regarding journalism viz; Accuracy and 
Fairness, Pre-publications, caution against defamatory writing, Trial of Media etc. Print media is 
required to adhere to the said Norms. Specific Guidelines for Protection of Child Rights on the caption 
'Guidelines Drawn up for Reporting on Children' have been formulated. These guidelines require 
media to avoid any such reporting that may stigmatize or expose a child to negative reprisals including 
additional physical or psychological harm or lifelong discrimination by their local communities. 
 
3.2.3 The Council takes cognizance, suo-motu or an complaints, of the contents in print media which 
are in violation of the 'Norms of Journalistic Conduct' As per section l4 of the Act, the Council, after 
holding an inquiry, may warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the 
journalist or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, as the case may be. 
 
3.2.4 Similarly in the electronic media, as per existing regulatory framework, all programmes and 
advertisements telecast on private satellite TV channels are regulated in accordance with the 
Programme Code and Advertising Code prescribed under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) 
Act, 1995 and the Rules framed there under. The said Codes contain a wide range of parameters to 
regulate programmes and advertisements on TV channels including reporting of the cases of crimes 
against women and children, sensationalizing such cases and their portrayal of on TV in a positive 

46 
 
manner. The Government takes action in cases where Programme/Advertising Codes are found to be 
violated by the private satellite TV channels, including issuance of advisory, warning, running an 
apology scroll and in extreme cases, directing the channel to be off air for certain time duration. ln 
addition to this, the Government has issued common advisories from time to time to TV channels on the 
subject. 
 
3.2.5 The Government has notified the lnformation Technology (lntermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 under the provisions of lnformation Technology Act, 2000 which 
inter-alia provides the Code of Ethics applicable to the publishers of news and current affairs on 
digital media and require such publishers to follow the Norms of Journalistic Conduct of Press Council 
of lndia and the Programme Code under the Cable Television (Network Regulation) Act, 1995. Under 
the institutional mechanism provided for under the lnformation Technology (lntermediary Guidelines 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 the accountability of publishers of news on digital media 
is at par with publishers of news on print and electronic media which too follow same 
codes/regulations. Further, the Rules also provide for certain guidelines to OTT players to enable them 
to classify the content on the basis of Themes and Messages, Violence, Nudity, Sex, Languages, 
Discrimination etc. 
 
3.2.6 The Apex Court of the country has also issued directions on non-disclosure of identity of victim 
in cases relating with sexual offences. Accordingly, MHA had issued advisory to States/ Union 
Territories on the same for compliance, which have also been reiterated. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.2.7 The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee observes that the e lectronic 
media in the race to compete to be first on the TRP
, have been seen to indulge in media trial and 
in the name of investigative journalism such crimes are reported in sensational manner. The 
Committee therefore further recommends that the matter may be taken up  with concerned 
Ministry to apply existing provisions more stringently on national especially local electronic 
media.    
 
 
3.3 Fast Track Courts 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.3.1 The Committee notes the initiative of the Ministry of Law & Justice for setting up 1023 Fast  
Track Special Courts (FTSCs) for expeditious trial and disposal of cases related to rape and the POCSO 
Act. Further, the cases registered under POCSO Act during the last 3 years (2017-19) were 
31,668,38,802 and 46,005 respectively. The Committee is perplexed to note that against the 1023 Fast 
Track Special Courts only 597 Courts including 325 exclusive POCSO courts have been made 
operational in 24 States/UTs. This shows that although there has been an increase in cases over years, 
the lack of such courts will further delay the course of dispensing justice which will subsequently 
reduce the faith of victims in the justice delivery system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the matter with the Ministry of Law & Justice to expedit e 
the setting up of remaining Fast Track Courts (FTC) in a time-bound manner and that these courts 
should also adjudicate on the pending cases within a timeframe. 
(Para 2.5.10 ibid) 

47 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 Against the target of 1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) including 389 exclusive POCSO 
Courts, 632 FTSCs including 340 exclusive POCSO courts have been made operational in 26 
States/UTs. Constant efforts are being made by the Department of Justice for operationalization of all 
targeted FTSCs including exclusive POCSO courts and enhancement of case disposal. In this following 
measures have been adopted by the Ministry of Law & Justice: 
 
(i) Review meetings have been held with State functionaries and representatives of concerned 
High Courts for enhancement of case disposal. 
(ii) Minister of Law & Justice has addressed several communications to Chief Ministers and 
Chief Justice of High Courts for speedy redressal of the issues to ensure safety of women 
and children 
(iii) Online Monitoring Framework has been devised for obtaining monthly case statistics. 
(iv) Nodal Officers have been appointed at High Court level. 
(v) Central Share has promptly been released to the States. 
(vi) Third Party Evaluation of the Scheme on Fast Track Courts has been conducted and report 
shared to States and High Courts including concerned Ministry/Department for adopting 
suggested corrective measures for strengthening the implementation of the Scheme in the 
following areas, including 
(a)  Appointment of Special Public Prosecutors and special team of police personnel to 
investigate POCSO Act cases. 
(b)  Establishment of Vulnerable Witness Deposition Complexes (VWDC) in court rooms. 
(c)  Creation of high priority system of service of summons warrants and processes, etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.3.3 The Committee notes that against the target of 1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FT SCs) 
including 389 exclusive POCSO Courts, 632 FTSCs including 340 exclusive POCSO courts have 
been made operational in 26 States/UTs which is 61.7% of the total FTSCs.  The Commi ttee 
further recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Law & Justice  to remove 
bottlenecks and provide adequate financial resources for operationalizatio n of remaining fast 
track courts in a time bound manner. 
 
 
3.4 Helpline Numbers 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4.1 The Committee believes that the reason for receiving a very low number of calls to the he lpline 
numbers is due to low publicity of the numbers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should advise States to publicize and promote the use of helpline numbers 
notified by them in their respective States in an aggressive and continuous manner. This should 
compulsorily be done in regional and local languages through mainstream print, electronic and digital 
media, public transports, advertisements, TV channels, social media, cover page of school-books, etc. 
The Committee feels that when a common platform will be formulated for having a unique and 
universal helpline number for the entire nation, the same should also be duly publicized so that all 

48 
 
vulnerable sections including children, women, foreign visitors, everybody would be able to remember 
it. 
(Para 2.7.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has undertaken awareness campaigns to popularize the 112 
emergency helpline number in print, electronic and digital media and advised all States/Union 
Territories to popularize its benefits. The Ministry has been sharing creative designs and content for 
undertaking awareness campaigns with the States/Union Territories. The States/Union Territories have 
been advised to translate the creatives provided to them in local language and publicize them. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.4.3 The Committee notes the steps taken by MHA to popularise the 112 eme rgency helpline 
numbers. The Committee further recommends that the MHA may advise Stat es/UTs to analyze 
the distress call data of ERSS 112 for deployment of PCR vehicles adjacent to areas f rom where 
more calls are received for quick reaction.  The MHA may share with  all States/UTs the Crime 
Mapping Analytics and Predictive System (CMAPS) used by Delhi Police which is based on data 
of past crimes and provides inputs for policing activities such as planning of p ickets, patrolling 
etc.    
 
 
3.5 Women and Children Help Desks and All Women Police Stations  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.5.1 The Committee is of the considered view that it is important to instill confidence amongst 
women so that they can fearlessly approach Police Station to register their complaint. The Committee 
appreciates the steps taken towards establishing all women Police Station but feels thatthis will not be 
sufficient to cater to the need of the vast population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHA 
may ask States to conduct a comparative study on having all-women Police Stations vis-a-vis 
traditional Police Stations. A survey may also be conducted among people to check whether all women 
Police Stations have actually helped in the ease of reporting of crimes. Based on the outcome of the 
survey, the Ministry may advise the States Governments to further increase the number of all-women 
Police Stations. 
(Para 2.8.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 The BPR&D have prepared a SOP for „Women Help Desk at Police Stations ’. It seeks to 
ensure the smooth functioning of Women Help Desks by focusing on four critical components viz., 
infrastructure, training, HRD and response mechanism. The SOPs conceptualize to create “One Stop 
Support Centre” for women in all the Police Stations in the country.  The BPR&D has undertaken a 
study on Performance Audit of Women Police Stations in India, the study has covered 22 police 
stations in 13 states.MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.5.3 The Committee would like to be informed about the key findings of  the study done by 
BPR&D on Performance Audit of Women Police Stations in India and the action taken/pro posed 
to be taken on the basis of said findings.  
 
3.5.4 The Committee notes that the study of BPR&D has covered 22 police stations in 13 States 
which is a very small sample size with respect to 15,890 police stations in the cou ntry as informed 
by the Ministry. The Committee would like to be informed about the r easons for selection of only 
22 police stations and the criteria used thereof. The Committee would also like to impress upon 
increasing sample size suitably for proper assessment. 
 
 
3.6 Nirbhaya Fund 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.6.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry is implementing twelve projects/schemes for which Rs. 
4171.93 crore has been approved. The Committee further notes that only Rs.3,581.11 crore has been 
disbursed from Nirbhaya Fund out of Rs.9,288.45 crore which is around 38.55%.The Committee is, 
however, disappointed to note the under-utilization of the Nirbhaya Fund by States which is a dedicated 
fund for implementation of initiatives aimed at enhancing the safety and security of women in the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should coordinate with Ministry of 
Women and Child Development and undertake due to consultations with States to improve the 
utilization of the funds allocated to them and expeditiously implement the projects/schemes for which 
allocation has been made and take all necessary steps to overcome the bottlenecks. A Committee may 
also be formed at a central level under MoW&CD to oversee and improve the utilization of the 
Nirbhaya Fund across States/UTs. 
(Para 2.9.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.6.2 This issue was consulted with the Ministry of Women and Child Development, who have 
informed that till the FY 2020-21, the total allocation of funds in the Nirbhaya Corpus is Rs.5712.85 
crore and an amount of Rs.3581.11 crore (around 60.00%) has been disbursed for implementation of 
initiatives aimed at enhancing the safety and security of women in the country. 
   
3.6.3 An Empowered Committee under the chairpersonship of Secretary, M/o Women & Child 
Development, and comprising of members from MHA, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, M/o 
Railways, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Department of Economic Affairs, and 
the representatives of other Ministries/ Departments implementing respective projects/schemes, 
regularly review the status of implementation of ongoing projects/schemes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.6.4 The Committee notes that till the FY 2020-21, the total allocation of funds i n the Nirbhaya 
Corpus is Rs.5712.85 crore and 60.00% amount (Rs.3581.11)  has been disbursed to all 
States/UTs which is still on the lower side. The Committee would like to be appr ised about the 
State-wise allocation and utilization of the fund
s for the specific purpose identified by the States 

50 
 
and approved by the empowered committee. The Committee may also be informed about the cost 
initially proposed by State/UTs and steps taken to improve the utilization pattern. 
 
 
3.7 Safety of women and children in trains 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.7.1 The Committee takes note of the mechanism available to register FIR in running trains. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railways may be pursued to widely publicize the facility 
of registration of cases in the running train through print, electronic and digital media and also expedite  
installation of CCTV cameras in trains and railway stations all across the country. 
(Para 2.14.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.2 Ministry of Railways has informed that CCTV facility has been provided at 686 railway stations 
and in 2931 coaches. It has further stated that the Indian Railway will endeavor to gradually provide 
CCTV Cameras at more Railway Stations, except halt stations and in Coaches of all trains including 
suburban trains. Works for same have also been approved. M/o Railways has requested Principal 
Chief Security Commissioners/Railway Protection Force/all zonal railways to widely publicise 
availability of RPF/GRP staff in important Mail/ Express/Rajdhani/Shatabadi trains and availability of 
FIR forms with them through various social media platforms. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.7.3 The Committee notes that CCTV Cameras have been installed in 2931 coaches and  
observes that this is a very small number, if installation of CCTV cameras in trains and coaches 
are to be counted in view of the vast network of railways across the country. T he Committee 
further recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Railways to expedit e the 
installation of CCTV Cameras at remaining Railway Stations and trains. Also, the availability of 
FIR forms and RPF/GRP staff in trains may be publicized by displaying it on railway tic kets, 
screens/ advertisement boards in the railway stations and other prominent places.  
 
3.7.4 The Committee takes note of the reply that works for installation of CCTV ca meras in all 
the coaches of trains has been approved. The Committee further rec ommends that the same may 
be executed in a time bound manner and the Committee may be apprised of the same. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.7.5 The Committee notes that different States have devised customized Apps for registration of 
complaints in public transport and observes that different Apps in different States will make it difficult 
for a person travelling across the States to make a complaint. The Committee, therefore, in order to 
facilitate and ensure easy registration of complaints, recommends that the Ministry of Home Aff airs 
should explore and take up the matter with the concerned Ministries at the Central level in coordination 
and consultation with States to devise a Pan-India common App on the lines of Pan India Helpline 
Number „112‟ for registration of cases in all modes of public transport. 
 
(Para 2.14.7 ibid) 

51 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.6 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways is implementing the scheme, “Development, 
Customization, Deployment and Management of State-wise vehicle tracking platform for Safety & 
Enforcement as per AIS 140 Specifications”. This involves enabling a panic -button based emergency 
response mechanism. There is single platform for registration and resolution of rail passenger 
complaints including security related complaints in form of Rail Madad helpline 139 integrated with a 
web based portal. These and other helplines would be integrated with the Emergency Response Centres 
in the State for a seamless and timely assistance in case of emergencies. Further, 112 India App is 
available nationally for any emergency response. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union 
Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.7.7 The Committee notes the steps taken for creation of a single platform for registration and 
resolution of rail passenger complaints. The Committee reiterates its recomme ndation at para 
3.7.5 of the Report and would like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
3.8 Role of NGOs in Assisting the Victimized Women and Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.1 The Committee observes that in the rural, far-flung tribal areas, the people are generally v ery 
innocent and they accept the atrocities as a way of life largely due to lack of education, awa reness of the 
existing laws and regulations, etc. In absence of any organization to assist them, they are unable to 
access the justice delivery system in comparison to women in urban areas who are educated, aware and 
have easy and faster access to legal systems. The Committee further notes that generally, the NGOs 
have confined their activities to the urban areas and metropolitan cities. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take necessary measures to incentivize and 
encourage the NGOs to increase their presence in rural and tribal areas to reach out to the vulnerable and 
helpless sections of the society. Further, the NGOs should also increase their online presence so that 
they can extend their services to distant areas. 
(Para 2.17.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 „Police” and “Public order” are State subject under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. However, Community partnership, including involvement of NGOs is an important component of 
prevention of crimes against women and children, and is being coordinated in the projects at 
States/UTs. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.8.3 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the MHA is very gene ric in nature and 
reiterates its recommendation at para 3.8.1 of the Report.
 
 
 
 

52 
 
3.9 Conditions of Sex-Workers 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.9.1 The Committee notes the response of the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
(MoW&CD) that they do not support the legal sanctity of sex work. However, the Committee is of the 
considered view that sex workers are faced with hardships, very much susceptible and more often the 
victims of violence. They are made to suffer in oblivion due to the apathy of law, authorities and 
society at large. The sex workers are not even getting the basic rights and amenities under the 
Constitution of India. The sex workers alike any other citizen, are also entitled to their rights and social 
security. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must take concrete action to 
ameliorate the plight of sex workers in the country. The Ministry of Home Affairs should take up with 
MoW&CD to arrange for legal aid, rehabilitation, adequate health care facilities, and educ ation with 
hostel facilities for the children of sex workers. The efforts of the Government would bring the sex 
workers and their children to the mainstream of society. 
(Para 2.18.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 The recommendations of the Committee were referred to the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, who have informed that it administers the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act (JJ Act), 2015 which is the primary legislation for Children in need of Care and 
Protection (CNCP) and children in conflict with law. Section 2(14) of the JJ Act, 2015 defines children 
who fall under the category of CNCP. Further, the Honorable Supreme Court in case of Writ Petition 
No 102 (in the matter of Re: Exploitation of Children in Orphanages in the State of Tamil Nadu vs. 
Union of India & Ors.) has interpreted the definition of CNCP as given in section 2(14) of the JJ Act, 
2015 as illustrative and that the benefits envisaged for children in need of care and protection should 
be extended to all such children in fact requiring State care and protection. Thus, children of sex 
workers may fall in the category of „children in need of care and protection‟. The decision to declare a 
child as CNCP is vested with the Child Welfare Committee, as per the JJ Act, 2015.  
 
3.9.3 The Ministry has further informed that the JJ Act, 2015 provides rescue, rehabilitation and 
restoration services for CNCP. The rehabilitation measures envisaged in the JJ Act, 2015 includes 
institutional Care where the children are provided with various facilities including birth registration; 
assistance for obtaining the proof of identity, where required, education, skill development; life skill 
education, etc. The Ministry of Women and Child Development has noted the recommendation of the 
Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.9.4 The Committee is deeply concern ed about the plight of sex workers and their children 
who have not even been extended the basic rights enshrined in the Constitution of India and aims 
at ameliorating the suffering and hardship faced by them. The Comm ittee further notes that 
despite having laws/acts like Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Childre n) Act, 2015 and 
Children in Need of Care and Protection (CNCP) that can be used for their benefit, the situation 
has not improved. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation  at para 3.9.1 of the 
Report. The Committee further recommends that children of sex wor kers must be covered and 
benefit extended to them under CNCP and Juvenile Justice (Care and Prot ection of 
Children) Act, 2015 on priority basis. The Committee would like to be apprised abou t the 

53 
 
number of children of sex workers who have been extended the b enefits under JJ Act, 2015 and 
steps taken/ proposed to ameliorate the plight of sex workers and to bring them  and their 
children to the mainstream of the society. 
 
 
3.10 Issue of Transgender 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.10.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must make sincere efforts to 
create an environment where the transgender can become an integral part of the society. The Mini stry 
of Home Affairs should pursue with the concerned Ministries to arrange for providing food, shelter, 
clothing and toilet facilities in all public places. The Committee further recommends that inclusive 
policies should be framed for the transgender community so that they integrate themselves in the social 
mainstream, live a dignified life and contribute meaningfully to the society and economy. Further, any  
abuse/insult undermining the transgender should be made punishable under the law. 
(Para 2.19.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.2 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has enacted “Transgender Persons (Protection of 
Rights), Act 2019”, which provides for recognition of Identity of Transgender Persons, educational, 
Social Security and health of Transgender Persons and formulation of a scheme for welfare of 
transgender persons. The said Act provides penal provisions also. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.10.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Social Justice and E mpowerment and 
would like to be informed in detail about the provisions to provide transgender s food, shelter, 
clothing, toilet etc. facilities in all public places and policies to bring them to the social 
mainstream.  
 
 
3.11 Atrocities and Crimes against Women and Children of SC/ST Community 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.11.1 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should also take up with 
the Ministry of Education to educate the students about the cultural diversity of the country and to 
promote and include human rights education in the school curriculum at the Pan-India level to promote 
gender equality, eradication of caste system and to increase scientific temperament. 
(Para 2.20.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.2 The matter has been examined in consultation with Ministry of Education. Review of textbooks 
is an important component of activities of NCERT. The Department of Gender Studies of NCERT is in 
the process of reviewing its textbooks from a gender perspective. The textbooks of different subjects 
and stages are being reviewed in terms of content, visuals and images so as to see whether they reflect 

54 
 
gender equality and gender sensitivity. Guidelines will be prepared to make the future textbooks gender 
inclusive.  
3.11.3 These issues have also been addressed in textbooks of Science and Mathematics at appropriate 
places. Further, these issues will also be re-looked while reforming New Curriculum Framework. 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan is following NCERT/CBSE Curriculum and accordingly all concerns 
regarding Gender Equality, eradication of caste system and to increase scientific temperament are 
addressed as part of teaching under above mentioned curriculum. Further, a number of co-curricular 
activities organized in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan address these issues along with cultural 
diversity. In addition, the Department of School Education and Literacy has prepared a cultural 
mapping of all the States and UTs of the country. NCERT also has come up with a book namely- "Unity 
in Cultural Diversity". Furthermore, the program focuses on the promotion of indigenous arts, folk 
songs, folk dance, painting, language, arts & crafts etc. of Indian States.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.11.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Education that the Department of 
Gender Studies of NCERT is in the process of reviewing its textbooks from a gender  perspective. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the changes made dur ing the last five years in 
the textbooks to promote gender equality. The Committee further re commends that the MHA 
may take up with the Ministry of Education to advise the SCERT/ State Boards of Education also 
to review their textbooks from gender perspective. 
 
 
3.12 Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12.1 The Committee observes that considering the population of Delhi, only 8,203 persons have 
registered on Himmat Plus App during the year 2020 (upto31 stAugust, 2020). This is a disappointing 
figure and shows that either the App is not upto the mark or the Delhi Police have not been able to 
adequately publicize the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs along with Delhi Police should explore the plausible reasons for the poor subscriber base of the 
App. In case of any draw backs noticed in the App, necessary updations may be carried out to make it 
more citizen-centric, citizen-friendly and user-friendly. Steps may also be taken to publicize the App 
using social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, etc. 
 
(Para 3.4.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.2 The Himmat Mobile application was designed and implemented to provide the Police 
Assistance to the women in distress. Wide Publicity was done to create awareness among general 
public in this regard by means of news paper, television, radio, social media etc.  A total number of 
1,22,964 users have been registered on Himmat Plus Application, till date. 
   
3.12.3 Since, ERSS-112 System is quite popular in Delhi, the integration of Himmat Plus Application 
with ERSS-112 system has already been done to improve response time and best possible support has 
been provided to women distress callers/ citizens of Delhi. 
 

55 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
3.12.4 The Committee notes that even after wide publicity, a total of 1,22,964 user s have been 
registered on Himmat Plus Application which is still very low compared to the p opulation of 
Delhi. The Committee recommends that the Delhi Police may put more sincer e efforts to 
publicize the App in continuous aggressive manner particularly on social media platf orms and 
also conduct a survey to assess the effectiveness of the app in improving the respo nse time and 
extending help at the time of distress. The Committee would like to be app rised about the 
progress made in increasing the number of users of Himmat App. Th e Committee also observes 
that ERSS is more popular than Himmat App. Therefore, MHA and Delhi Police should explore 
the plausible reasons for the poor subscriber base of the App and if need b e to further upgrade 
and update the app. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12.5 As there are more non-governmental CCTV cameras than those installed by the Government of 
NCT of Delhi, the Committee recommends MHA and Delhi Police to have a coordinated approach in  
the collection and analysis of footages of CCTVs installed by the Government as well as private 
entities. A mechanism may also be worked out to keep track of these cameras to ensure that they 
remain functional so that Police can have easy access at the time of need. Efforts should also be taken  
for raising mass awareness about the CCTV cameras in Delhi. The CCTV surveillance will help in 
making streets, markets, transport and other public places safer, particularly, for women and children. 
 
(Para 3.4.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.6 Access to feed from the CCTV Cameras installed in Delhi is available to Delhi Police 
constituency wise.  Besides, CCTV camera owners are being motivated to conduct meetings with 
RWAs/MWAs.  They are also being encouraged to rectify any break downs in CCTV Cameras and to 
get new CCTV cameras installed in place of old/out of order CCTV cameras. Furthermore, regular 
meetings by the ACsP/SHOs/Division/ Beat staff are being conducted with RWA/MWA/owners of 
factories to encourage them to get high resolution CCTV Cameras installed and rectify/replace the 
defective CCTVs with new ones.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.12.7 The Committee notes the reply about the coordination of Delhi Police with  RWAs/MWAs 
for installation, maintenance, etc., of CCTVs. The Committee further recommends that the MHA 
may issue directions to Delhi Police to coordinate with RWAs/MWAs to rectify/replace the 
damaged/defective CCTVs on priority and create a database of CCTVs including their  location, 
working condition and storage, etc. so that there are no blind spots on t he streets, markets and 
other public places. This will also help in easy and speedy collection of video evidence in case a 
crime is committed. The Committee reiterates its recommendation at para 3.12.5 of the Report to 
publicize the installation of CCTVs which will act as a deterrence and help in prevention of 
crimes. 
 
 
 

56 
 
 
3.13 Challenges in dealing with Cyber Crimes 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.1 The Committee notes that there are instances where the cybercrime is committed in one State 
and the offender is located in another State. The Committee understands the jurisdictional complexit y 
involved during tracing, tracking and investigation of cybercrimes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that MHA should take necessary steps to empower all State Police and law enforcement 
agencies (LEAs) to take appropriate action regardless of State boundaries while examining a cyber 
crime. The Ministry must advise the States/UTs that when investigating officers (IO) visit outside their 
jurisdictional State for investigation of a cybercrime, they should be provided with optimum support 
from the local law enforcement agencies of other States and UTs, as required. 
(Para 5.5.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.2 Multiple steps have been initiated by the Ministry by empowering LEAs to deal the menace of 
cybercrime.  In order to overcome jurisdictional issues, an initiative has been taken under Indian 
Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) Scheme to form seven Joint Cyber Crime Coordination Teams 
(JCCTs) in the respective regions at the hotspots of cybercrimes or places having more number of 
cybercrime victims for effective coordination, sharing of information at regular intervals and providing 
logistic support for investigating teams. 
  
3.13.3 The Ministry has provided grants of Rs. 96.13 Crores to all the States/UTs under Cyber Crime 
Prevention against Women and Children (CCPWC) scheme to setup cyber forensic-cum-training 
laboratories, training and hiring of junior cyber consultant so as to provide hands-on training to LEAs, 
Public Prosecutors and Judicial Officers. Cyber forensic-cum-training laboratories have been 
commissioned in 18 States/UT and more than 15,500 police personnel, judicial officers and 
prosecutors have been provided training on cybercrime awareness, investigation, forensics, etc. MHA 
has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30 June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.13.4 The Committee notes that seven Joint Cybercrime Coordination Team s (JCCTs) have 
been formed to prevent cyber crime in the country. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that 
the MHA may periodically assess the performance of JCCTs and upgrade them in view  of the 
advancement of technology and various types of new emerging cyber crimes. 
 
3.13.5 The Committee also notes that Cyber forensic-cum-training laboratories have  been 
commissioned in 18 States/UT which is only 50% of the total States/UTs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may expedite the commissioning of the labs in remaining 
States/UTs and allocate necessary funds required for the set up. The Comm ittee would like to be 
apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.6 The Committee notes with anxiety the technological challenge posed by Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) services and Dark Web that can bypass cyber security walls and allow crimina ls to 

57 
 
remain anonymous online. As of date, VPN can easily be downloaded, as many websites are providing 
such facilities and advertising them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should coordinate with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to identify and 
permanently block such VPNs with the help of internet service providers. The Committee also 
recommends that a coordination mechanism should also be developed with international agencies to 
ensure that these VPNs are blocked permanently. The Ministry must take initiatives to strengthen the 
tracking and surveillance mechanisms by further improving and developing the state-of-the-art 
technology to put a check on the use of VPN and the dark web. 
(Para 5.5.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.7 The recommendation has been shared with the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY). Section 69A of the IT Act, 2000 empowers Government to block information from 
public access under specific conditions of:  
 
(i) interest of sovereignty and integrity of India,  
(ii) defence of India,  
(iii) security of the State,  
(iv) friendly relations with foreign States or  
(v) public order or  
(vi) for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above.  
 
3.13.8 Blocking is either done in compliance of a court order or in pursuance of the recommendation 
of an inter-ministerial committee specified under the said Rules.  The detailed process for blocking of 
websites/URLs is notified through Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking for 
Access of Information for Public) Rules, 2009. MeitY suo moto does not block information and initiates 
blocking action only after it receives request from the Nodal Officer appointed for this purpose. If the 
request for blocking of such VPNs is received under section 69A of the IT Act, MeitY can initiate the 
process as specified in the Rules notified under section 69A of the IT Act. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.13.9 The Committee notes the incomplete reply of the MeitY as no information h as been 
provided on coordination mechanisms with international agencies to block VPNs p ermanently 
and initiatives taken/proposed to strengthen the tracking and surveillance m echanisms to put a 
check on the use of VPN and the dark web. The MHA may put its effor ts in getting such 
information from MeitY and furnish the same to the Committee. 
 
 
3.14 Interventions of the Ministry of Home Affairs in handling cyber crimes 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.1 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to spread 
awareness about cyber safety and cybercrime among the people across the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take all steps in giving due publicity  
to the cybercrime reporting portal through regional and local languages. The publicity should also be 
given on television and from time to time through caller tune message as it has been done during 

58 
 
COVID-19. The Committee also recommends that to facilitate easier and immediate reporting of 
complaints, One-Stop Centers (OSCs), Central Government-run help line number 112 (ERSS) and 
State helpline numbers should also include cyber-related crimes against women and children under 
their ambit and to provide immediate psycho-social support, emotional assistance and counseling 
services to the victims of cybercrimes. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs may also issue advisories to States/UTs to raise awareness through print and electronic media 
including social media about the mechanisms available to citizens for reporting cybercrimes against 
women and children, particularly for sexual abuse as well as the distribution of pornographic material. 
 
(Para 5.6.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.2 The revamped Cybercrime reporting portal launched in 2019 provides special focus on 
cybercrimes against women & children. Incidents reported on this portal are routed automatically to 
the respective States/UTs Police based on the information provided by the public. Incidents reported on 
this portal are being dealt by respective Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) of States/UTs as per the 
legal provisions. Besides, a toll free number 155260 has also been made operational for citizens to get 
assistance in lodging online complaints in their own language. As the awareness and recording of 
cybercrimes reporting online through revamped portal has improved, there has been an increase in 
reporting of cybercrimes. Further, cybercrime awareness tips and advisories are being circulated to 
LEAs and they have also   been requested to disseminate the information in their regional and local 
languages.  MHA has requested States/ Union Territories to adequately create awareness in their 
State/ UT on prevention from cybercrime. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories 
on 30th June, 2021. In addition, a Twitter Handle Cyber Dost with more than 3 lakhs followers is also 
active in spreading awareness on cyber crimes.   
 
3.14.3 Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) through a program, namely, 
Information Security Education & Awareness (ISEA), has been creating awareness among users 
highlighting the importance of following the ethics while using internet and advising them not to share 
rumours/fake news. A dedicated website for information security awareness 
(https://www.infosecawareness.in) provides relevant awareness material. Under the programme, 21 
awareness workshops on Information Security exclusively for women have been organized covering 
2,083 participants. The topics/content covered in these workshops include cyber security, cyber 
stalking, online shopping, social media and privacy, password management, internet security, mobile 
security, browser security, online banking, instant messaging, etc. Besides this, an exclusive handbook 
namely „Information Security Awareness handbook for Women‟, „Cyber Security tips for Women‟ and 
„Online Safety tips for Women@Home during COVID -19‟ have been designed. The awarenes s content 
designed/developed exclusively for women have been made available for download on the website 
https://www.infosecawareness.in/women
. 
 
3.14.4 As part of this program, C-DAC, NIELIT and other noted training partners are conducting 
training exclusively for women and making them Industry ready by imparting the requisite technical 
skills in the domain of Cyber Security. The program started with 3 cities initially and is now having 
footprints across India including successful batch at Srinagar and Silchar (Assam). 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.14.5 The Committee notes that the MHA has not furnished the informati on on the steps taken 
to include cyber-related crimes against women and children under  the Central Government-run 
helpline number 112 (ERSS) and State helpline numbers. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation at para 3.14.1 of the Report and would like to be apprised about the steps taken 
in this regard. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.6 The Committee appreciates the commissioning of Cyber Forensic-Cum-Training Laboratories 
in 16 States namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Odisha, Sikkim, Telangana, 
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely co-
ordinate with the remaining States/UTs for timely commissioning of cyber forensic and training 
laboratories by 31 st March 2021. The Committee also recommends for the timely establishment of 
NCFL at Hyderabad. The Ministry may also review the budgetary allocation and seek  appropriate 
funds and extend necessary support to the States/UTs towards setting up the Cyber forensic-cum-
training laboratories. 
(Para 5.6.26 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.7 At present, 18 States/UT have commissioned the cyber forensic-cum-training laboratories 
under CCPWC Scheme.   Ministry is continuously pursuing with the remining States/UTs to speed up 
completion of pending activities in a time bound manner. The project for setting up of NCFL at 
Hyderabad is now completed, and the modern facility is ready to be dedicated to the nation.   
 
3.14.8 A project titled "Development of Cyber Forensic Training cum Investigation Labs in NE States 
and Cloud based Centralised Cyber Forensic Lab Infrastructure" in 8 north-eastern states is being 
executed jointly by NIELIT Kohima and CDAC Kolkata.  So far 11 training programmes for LEAs and 
Judiciary at different level, namely awareness and beginners level, have been conducted  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.14.9 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed a bout the funds allocated 
and progress made in establishment of forensic-cum-training laboratories in  the remaining 
States/UTs. 
 
 
3.15 Sensitization of the Police Personnel 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.15.1 The Committee strongly believes that women should not feel scared to go to Police Station 
when they require help. The Committee recommends framing of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
for ensuring Police accountability and sensitivity to deal with cases of violence against women. 
Periodic sensitization and training of ground-level officials should also be done so that the cases can be 
registered under appropriate sections of the laws. The Committee recommends that a monitoring 

60 
 
mechanism should also be created at the district level to check the behavior and take cognizance in case 
of Police insensitivity/remark/comment and initiate strict action against the errant official. 
 
(Para 6.2.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.15.2 Needful action has been undertaken by the BPR&D, and a book titled “Women‟s Safety & 
Security - A Handbook for First Responders and Investigators in the Police” has been published. This 
handbook has been prepared for First Responders and Investigators in the police, for the purpose of 
prevention and investigation of crime against women with specific reference to the crime of sexual 
assault, which includes investigation, victim compensation and rehabilitation. Emphasis has been laid 
upon appropriate behavioural and attitudinal skills of the police in course of prevention and detection 
of crime against women and children and interaction with victims of crime. The book is being 
circulated to DGsP of all States/UTs and DGs of CPOs/CAPFs. The BPR&D have prepared a SOP for 
„Women Help Desk at Police Stations‟. The SOP seeks to ensures the smooth functioning of Women 
Help Desks by focusing on four critical components viz., infrastructure, training, HRD and response 
mechanism. The SOP conceptualise to create “One Stop Support Centre” for women in all the Pol ice 
Stations in the country. MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.15.3 The Committee notes the reply about the circulation of the “Women‟s Safety & Security- 
A Handbook for First Responders and Investigators in the Police” book to DGsP of all 
States/UTs and DGs of CPOs/CAPFs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
States/UTs may be advised to provide training to the ground level police person nel on said 
Report of BPR&D as they are the first point of contact with the victim/complainant. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.15.4 The Committee notes the direction of the Supreme Court regarding the installation of CCTV 
cameras in Police stations and recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may issue advisory to 
State/UT Governments at the earliest for installation of CCTV cameras in all Police Stations within a 
time frame. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made in this regard. 
 
(Para 6.2.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.15.5 „Police‟ and „Public order‟ are State subject as per Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. MHA is assisting States in modernization of its police forces through a scheme. Under the said 
scheme, funds have also been allocated to the States for installation of CCTV in the police stations. 
MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30 June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.15.6 The Committee is not satisfied with the cryptic and evasive reply and is of the opinion that 
Ministry of Home Affairs which provides assistance and funds to the State governm ents under 
the scheme for installation of CCTVs in police stations ha
s every right to know about its 
utilization. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised about the allotment of funds for 

61 
 
installation of CCTVs and number of States/UTs that have initiated/installed optimum number  
of CCTVs in police stations. 
 
 
3.16 Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes Against Women 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.16.1 The Committee notes that as per NCRB data, 7,466, 7,167 and 7,115 dowry deaths have taken 
place in 2017, 2018 and 2019, respectively. The Committee believes that dowry deaths should be 
considered as a heinous crime. The Committee observes that the objective of the Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961, was to eradicate dowry system and punish the offenders. Over a period of time, some 
cases of misuse of the provisions of the Act have come to notice. The Committee expresses its 
concern over the arrest of family members and relatives of the husband in the absence of any prima-
facie evidence against them to justify the arrest. There are also instances when false and exaggerated 
allegations are made by the complainant to implicate the family members and relatives. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate legal provisions should be made through 
amendments in the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, so as to prevent its misuse for the harassment on the 
basis of false complaints. The Police may have the right for arrest/detention of the family members 
and relatives only when there is prima-facie evidence on record to justify such arrest/detention. 
 
(Para 6.7.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.2 In accordance with the directions of the Court, including the Supreme Court of India, the MHA 
has issued advisories to States/ Union Territories to curb any likely misuse of section 498A of the Indian 
Penal Code in matrimonial disputes. The States/ Union Territories were, inter-alia, requested to instruct 
their police officers not to automatically arrest a person when a case under Section 498A of the IPC is 
registered but to satisfy themselves about the necessity for arrest as per section 41 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.16.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but still expresses its se rious concern over 
the massive misuse of section 498A of IPC which is often reported through Med ia. Sometimes, it 
is also seen that Investigating Officers (IOs) are not extending positive support to inn ocent family 
members. The Committee, therefore, feels that some suitable amendme nt is required in 498A of 
IPC and reiterates its recommendation at para 3.16.1 of the Report to prevent t he harassment of 
the family members on the basis of false complaints. 
  

62 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the Government have not been 
received 
 
4.1 Conviction Rate 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.1.1 The Committee is of the strong view that timely and proper medical and forensic examination 
in rape cases is crucial in the collection of evidence, investigation and trial. The Committee appreciates 
the steps undertaken by the Ministry of Home Affairs for strengthening State Forensic Sciences 
Laboratories and DNA analysis and setting up of forensic laboratories in the country. The Committee,  
however, observes that there is a strong requirement for establishing a network of forensic laboratories 
in the country as the forensic evidence are of crucial importance in the investigation and filing of 
charge sheets leading to the presentation of a higher number of cases before the Courts. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take steps 
towards setting up at least one forensic laboratory in every State capital in the country, on priority. 
 
(Para 2.4.15 of 230th Repot) 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 It is stated that Forensic Sciences Laboratories (FSLs) have been setup in 32 States/UTs. In 
remaining 4 Union Territories of Chandigarh, Daman Diu Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and 
Ladakh, police utilize the Forensic Sciences facilities available in their neighboring States or in the 
Central Forensic Sciences Laboratories. Further, strengthening of capacities in the Forensic Sciences 
Laboratories for dealing with cases on crimes against women, though a State subject, is a high priority 
activity for MHA. As a multi-pronged strategy towards timely and effective investigation, MHA has 
initiated a series of measures and programs, including strengthening / modernization of State/ Central 
Forensic Sciences Laboratories. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.1.3 The Committee notes that Forensic Sciences Laboratories (FSLs) have b een setup in 32 
States/UTs. The Committee further recommends that the MHA may coordin ate with States/UTs 
to ensure timely upgradation/modernisation and availability of the state-of-art tec hnology in 
these labs which is essential for effective investigation and timely collection of evidence . The 
Committee further recommends that the MHA may take steps towards sett ing up of forensic 
laboratory in the big cities with population of more than one million. 
 
4.2 Safe City project 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee strongly recommends extending the Safe City Project to all the major cities 
including Capitals of all States/UTs in Phase II. The Committee also recommends that the MHA may 
advise States/ UTs to install CCTV cameras equitably in urban and rural areas. The MHA may take up 
with States to encourage NGOs, Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) and private individuals to 

63 
 
install CCTV cameras. The Committee further recommends that a detailed Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) may be released by MHA regarding the installation of CCTV cameras, storage of 
recordings, quick and easy retrieval of the stored data to different law enforcing agencies, etc., through  
appropriate advisory. 
(Para 2.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 New projects in phase II would be selected on the basis of demand assessment and project 
feasibility. „Police‟ and „Public Order‟ are State subjects as per the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. As such, the State Governments plan and take initiative to modernize its police 
forces, including installation of CCTV cameras and issue of relevant guidelines. Accordingly, several 
States/Union Territories have issued guidelines/ legislation in this regard. MHA has also issued 
advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.2.3 The Committee notes the reply of MHA and reiterates its recommendat ion given in para 
No. 4.13.5 of the 224 th Report on Demands For Grants (2020-21) of the MHA to extend the Safe 
City Project to all the major cities including Capitals of all States/UTs in Phase II. The 
Committee would also like to be informed about the implementation status of phase II of Safe 
City Project. 
 
 
4.3 Shelter Homes 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.3.1 The Committee further recommends that CCTV cameras in all shelter homes should be 
installed on priority and in a stipulated time frame so as to prevent incidents of physical abuse of the 
inmates. Moreover, a central database of all shelter homes and their inmates in the country may be 
prepared and a comprehensive survey/audit may also be conducted through independent 
agencies/NGOs and State Women Commission about the living conditions, safety and satisfaction level 
of the inmates residing in these shelter homes. 
(Para 2.11.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 The Ministry of Women and Child Development has taken note of the recommendations of the 
Committee and will endeavor for installation of CCTV cameras in all the shelter homes. Efforts will 
also be made to prepare a central database of all shelter homes and their inmates and for conducting a 
survey/audit about living conditions, safety & satisfaction level in consultation with stakeholders. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.3.3 The Committee notes that no concrete reply has been given on efforts made for 
installation of CCTV cameras in all shelter homes. The Committee would like to be  apprised 
about the efforts made and timeframe fixed for installation of the CCTV Cameras and conduct of 
audit/survey in all the shelter homes.  
 

64 
 
4.4 One-Stop Centres (OSCs) 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.4.1 The Committee is of the view that the inadequacy of post-incident services may lead to their 
re-victimization and affects their rehabilitation. Therefore, adequate investments and interventions 
should be made focusing on both prevention of violence and post-incident service provisions to 
adequately meet the requirements of the survivors that are highly sensitive in nature. The Committee 
is of the considered view that post-trauma counseling is needed for violence against women as only  
framing stringent legal provisions and the administrative mechanism is not enough. Post-trauma 
counseling of the victims of violence should include proper medical attention, emotional assistance 
along with financial assistance to the victim for rehabilitation. 
(Para 2.12.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.4.2 Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that every One Stop Centre (OSC) has 
the provisions for psyco-social counseling, legal aid to every women approaching them for assistance 
whether pre or post violence. Further, in the wake of Covid 19 Pandemic, the Ministry has 
collaborated with NIMHANS to provide specialized counseling to aggrieved women. The women 
approaching OSCs are provided with medical treatment and financial assistance through Victim 
Compensation Scheme as formulated u/s 257A CrPC. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.4.3 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed about the n umber of women 
who have received medical and financial assistance whether pre or post viol ence during COVID-
19 Pandemic. 
 
 
4.5 Safety of women and children in trains 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.5.1 The Committee is of the considered view that public transport system can play a cardinal role in 
ameliorating the living conditions of women. Therefore, it is important to mainstream gender-related 
considerations into public transport so as to provide safe, comfortable, and convenient transport to 
women and reduce gender inequality. The Committee notes that multiple agencies/authorities are 
involved across States for managing public transport. The Committee is of the view that it is important 
to have coordination and cooperation between them. The Central Ministry should consult States/UTs 
and develop a uniform system of safety features in public transport in the country. 
(Para 2.14.4 ibid) 
 
4.5.2 The Committee notes that some States have proposed CCTV surveillance, panic button and 
controllers in public transport to make road transport safe for women. The Committee understands the 
importance of the safety features in public transport and, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs may take upthe matter with the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways to prepare 
guidelines for mandatory installation and regular maintenance of CCTV cameras, GPS, panic button 

65 
 
and controllers in public transport across the country in a time-bound manner. The transport system 
should display the helpline numbers along with the name, ID, etc. of the operating staff. 
 
(Para 2.14.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.5.3 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways is implementing the scheme, “Development, 
Customization, Deployment and Management of State-wise vehicle tracking platform for Safety & 
Enforcement as per AIS 140 Specifications”. This project is being undertaken in States/Union 
Territories under Nirbhaya Framework with total estimated cost of Rs 463.90 crore. As per 
information available, this involves setting up of Monitoring Centres at States/Union Territories, which 
can track Public Vehicles fitted with Vehicle Location Tracking devices and emergency alerts for 
action as required. Proposals have been received from twenty-nine States/Union Territories, out of 
which projects have been sanctioned in twenty-five States/ Union Territories, and the first installment 
of Centre‟s share has been disbursed. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.5.4 The Committee notes the reply. The remaining states may also be advised to c ome on 
board in this regard for which advisories/meetings may be issued/held. 
 
 
4.6 Strengthening of Institutions 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.6.1 The Committee is of the considered view that an in-depth study is required on the changing 
patterns of crimes under various heads to understand the reasons for different types of crime, the types 
of offenders, etc., so as to ascertain the reasons for the failure of the existing public policy governa nce 
mechanisms in curtailing/preventing atrocities and crimes against women and children. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should take up with the BPR&D for conducting a 
scientific study in this regard. This will help in the identification of root causes of crime and in making 
necessary legislative and schematic interventions and also to redesign training modules to prevent  
atrocities and crimes against women and children. 
 
(Para 2.15.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6.2 The BPR& D is undertaking a research on “A Study of Factors Responsible for Recidivism”. 
The objectives of the study are to develop a model to prevent recidivism in major crimes and formulate 
necessary remedial measures and strategies to minimize it. One of the category of crimes covered 
under the study are Crime against Women & Children (POSCO and Section 376, 354 and 509 in IPC).  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.6.3 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed abo ut the key findings of 
the study undertaken by BPR&D on “A Study of Factors Responsible for Recidivism” and 
necessary actions initiated thereon. 

66 
 
4.7 Atrocities and Crimes against Women and Children of SC/ST Community 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7.1 The Committee notes the submission of the All India Dalit Mahila Adhikar Manch (AIDMAM) 
regarding difficulties being faced by the women belonging to the SC/ST communities in getting 
registered the cases of atrocities and crimes committed against them. The Committee observes that this 
is primarily due to the poor implementation of the existing laws and the apathetic attitude of the law 
enforcing agencies. Moreover, the high acquittal rate motivates and boosts the confidence of dominant 
and powerful communities for continued perpetration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs must make holistic efforts towards sensitizing concerned public authorities 
and people at large through regular training and sensitization programmes. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the law enforcement agencies (LEA) should include the provisions of the PoA Act 
while registering cases of rape, sexual harassment, etc., committed against SC/ST women. 
 
(Para 2.20.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.2 The matter has been examined in consultation with Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment who have informed that in this regard, the Ministry has been addressing the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations to implement the provisions of the Protection of Civil 
Rights(PCR) Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities){PoA} Act, 1989 in letter and spirit, with specific emphasis on, setting up of exclusive special 
courts for speedy trial of cases, training and sensitization of police officers and other concerned 
officers, awareness generation, identification of atrocity prone areas as an ongoing process and review 
of cases ending in acquittal. 
 
4.7.3 An advisory reiterating action to be taken on protection of vulnerable groups, including 
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes, has been issued to States/ Union Territories on 19 May 2021. 
MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30 June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.7.4 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about the  number of atrocity 
prone areas, number of review of cases ending in acquittal reported after  issuing of advisories by 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during the last three years. 
 
4.8 Percentage of women personnel in Delhi Police 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.1 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has issued advisories in 2009, 2013 
and 2015 to provide 33% reservation to women so as to ensure adequate representation of women in 
police forces in States and UTs with the objective of giving priority to the security of women. 
However, even after a decade, the representation of women in Delhi Police has not reached 14% which 
comes directly under MHA. As women police need to be given important assignments relating to the 
handling of crimes against women and children, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs should take up the matter with Delhi Police to conduct special recruitment drives so as 

67 
 
to increase the representation of women in Delhi Police on a priority basis in a time-bound manner. The 
details of such special recruitment drives may also be intimated to this Committee. 
(Para 3.3.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.2 To augment the representation of women in the police force of all the UTs so as to make police 
more gender sensitive and also to instill confidence among women folk to enable them to approach the 
police without hesitation, Government of India has approved on 20 th March, 2015, 33% reservation for 
women in direct recruitment in Non-Gazetted posts from Constable to Sub-Inspector in Police Forces 
of all UTs including Delhi Police. This reservation will be available to women against all such 
vacancies existing on the date of issue of the said letter and vacancies arising thereafter. Details of 
recruitment of women in Delhi Police after the above decision are at Annexure-I. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.8.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts of Delhi Police to increase representat ion of 
women in Delhi Police. The Committee notes the reply of Delhi Police about the details of 
recruitment of women in Delhi Police and desires to be apprised about the in crease in percentage 
of women in Delhi Police after the ongoing recruitment process is complet e. The Committee may 
also be informed about the timeline by when the target of 33 % reservation of women in Delhi 
Police is likely to be achieved. The Committee is also disappointed to note that no new  
recruitments have been made since 2018 which is more than three years. T he Committee would 
like to be apprised about the reasons for delay in recruitment and step s taken to fast track the 
recruitment process. 
 
4.9 Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.9.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Special Police Unit for Women and Children 
(SPUWAC) in imparting self-defense skills to girls/women. The Committee, however, recommends 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up with the Ministry of Education to ensure that self-
defense training are imparted in all educational institutions as part of the regular curriculum right from  
childhood. Similarly, arrangements can also be made to organize such training for workingwomen by 
identifying Government office clusters. Delhi Police should also encourage Residential Welfare 
Associations and private companies to hold self-defense training programmes and awareness 
campaigns for their women residents/employees at regular intervals. 
(Para 3.4.24 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.9.2 In terms of the recommendations of the Committee, the matter has been referred to the Ministry 
of Education. Delhi Police has further informed that as far as Self Defence Training to working 
women, RWAs and Private Companies is concerned, Self Defence Wing of SPUWAC Unit has been 
continuing its efforts since 2002 to impart self defense training to working women of Government and 
private organizations including women staff of Hotels, Airport, Call Centers, MNCs, BPOs, teaching 
staff of schools, Doctors, Nurses and Para-medical staff of Govt. and Private Hospitals and RWAs 
under the “SASHAKTI” scheme of Delhi Police.   Self Defense Wing of SPUWAC Unit, because of its 
remarkable achievement, for imparting training in Self Defense to more than 2,08,125 and 3,25,081 

68 
 
girls/women participants in the years 2017 and 2018 respectively, has entered twice in prestigious 
LIMCA BOOK OF RECORD for this feat.  Self Defence Training shall continue to be area of focus for 
SPUWAC. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
  
4.9.3 The Committee notes the achievements of SPUWAC of Delhi Police and pe rsistent effort 
to impart self defence training to girls/women. The Committee would like to be informed about 
the view of Ministry of Education in the matter. 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.9.4 The Committee appreciates the work done by Delhi Police in the identification and mapping of 
crime hotspots in Delhi. The Committee observes that by identification of such hotspots and their 
mapping, the Police will be in a position to control the crime and monitor the miscreants in a more 
efficient and effective manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should advise States/UTs for identification and mapping of crime hot spots in Metropolitan 
cities under their jurisdiction. This will help to track, monitor and control the incidents of crimes and 
also help in developing a uniform policing system in all Metropolitan cities of the country. In the first 
stage, all the Metropolitan cities may be mapped and later on the same may be extended to other ma jor 
cities of the country with high crime graphs, in a phased manner, depending on the outcome from the 
Metropolitan cities. 
(Para 3.4.33 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.9.5 Delhi Police has informed that prevention of crime particularly street Crime, remained one of 
the top most priorities.  Multi-pronged strategies were adopted to control crime.  They include crime 
Mapping and identification of hot spots, dynamic deployment with focus on identified areas, 
identification of active criminals, preparation of compendium of top criminals and its regular updation, 
close surveillance on known criminals, arrest of notorious criminals, increased visibility of police on 
streets, group patrolling led by District DCsP/Addl. DCsP integrated patrolling by local police, PCR 
staff and Traffic Police, regular checking of two wheelers, „Raftar‟ motorcycles deployed for quick 
police response on the spot, action against drinking at public places, action against organized crime, 
citizen-centric policing through Jan Sampark and other community approach programmes, breaking 
the supply routes of fire arms in Delhi etc. Mapping of crime hot-spots is being enabled through 
CCTNS platform, Crime Mapping Analytics and Predictive Systems (CMAP), deployment of Cognos BI 
tool, etc, which have been made available to the States/Union Territories by the NCRB. MHA has also 
issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30 June 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.9.6 The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the effort of Delhi Police to prevent street 
crimes by crime mapping and identification of hot spots, dynamic de ployment, etc. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the implementation status of identification and 
mapping of crime hot spots in other Metropolitan cities. 
 
 
 

69 
 
4.10 Missing Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.10.1 The Committee is aghast to note the sorry state of affairs in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi so far as missing children is concerned. The NCRB data shows 15252, 14896 and 12239 children 
went missing in Delhi in 2017, 2018 and 2019 respectively. Despite the fact that an advisory has been 
issued by the MHA to State Governments/ UT Administrations that in case of every missing child 
reported; there will be an initial presumption of either abduction or trafficking, unless, in the 
investigation, the same is proved otherwise. Delhi Police has not even cited “trafficking" as are as on 
for missing children in their submission. 
(Para 4.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10.2 Delhi Police has informed that analysis of reasons behind missing children reveals that in most 
of the cases children go missing due to reasons like being scolded by parents at home, academic 
pressure, losing their way, elopement etc.  Crime Branch made sustained effort to identify whether 
organized gangs were behind kidnapping of children.  However, no such gangs were found active in 
the city. Efforts taken for tracing the missing children are as under:- 
(i) Whenever any complaint is filed, FIR is registered immediately.  All such FIRs are 
forwarded by E-mail and by post to District Legal Service Authority (DLSA). 
(ii) All traced children are produced before the Child Welfare Committee (CWC) as per 
Juvenile Justice Act. 
(iii) Juvenile Welfare Officers (JWOs) are appointed in all Police Stations. 
(iv) A help line of 8 Digit Number (23241210) has been started. 
(v) District Missing Person Unit (DMPU) is functioning in all the Police Districts.  Missing 
Person Squad (MPS) is also functioning in Crime Branch. 
(vi) If a criminal case is registered regarding missing of a child, it is kept open till the 
investigation into all known aspects is completed.  The case is treated as a “Special Report 
Case”. 
(vii) Investigation into such a case, where child is between 3 to 8 years and not traced over 4 
months, is transferred to Anti Human Trafficking Unit of the District. 
(viii) Anti Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU) is functioning in all Districts and Crime Branch. 
(ix) In case of evidence of organized crime or interstate ramifications, the case is transferred to 
Anti Trafficking Human Unit of Crime Branch for intensive investigation. 
(x) Rescue operations of children forced into labour are undertaken with the help of NGOs. 
(xi) In search of missing children, Police officials regularly visit the Children Homes, poor 
houses, rain baseras (shelters), Nari Niketan, other Night Shelters, mortuaries in hospitals, 
NGOs etc.. 
(xii) Delhi Police launched a unique initiative called „Pehchaan‟.   As a part of the programme, 
officials visit slum and poor areas and organize family photographs of children at risk.  So 
far, over 1086 lakh children have been photographed.  
 
4.10.3 Under „Operation Milap‟, and later „Operation Smile‟, missing children were united with 
parents after interacting with them in children homes like Apna Ghar, Salaam Balak Trust, Bal 
Adhikar Sashktikaran Kendra, Prayas Children Home, Aashiyana and Subhikshika Open Shelter Home 
etc.  Details of missing children during the last 04 years are as under: 
 

70 
 
   2017 2018 2019 2020 
No. of missing children 6454 6541 6355 4297 
No. of traced children 5102 4549 4311 3257 
No. of children untraced 1352 1992 2044 1040 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.10.4 The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
4.11 Sensitization of the Police Personnel 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.11.1 The Committee notes that the “Key Recommendations‟ made by the BPR&D in its study “Trust 
deficit in Police” are highly relevant and recommends that those should be implemented in a time -
bound manner. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made in this regard. 
 
(Para 6.2.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.11.2 „Police‟ and „Public order‟ are State subject as per Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. The BPR&D reports have been shared with the States/Union Territories. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.11.3 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that j ust forwarding the 
Report is not going to serve the purpose. The Committee, therefore, r ecommends that the 
feedback on the BPR&D reports shared by MHA to States/UTs may be take n/ evaluated a nd 
furnished to the Committee. 
 
 
4.12 Gender Sensitization of Society 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.1 The Committee recommends that a nation-wide Women Safety Week in educational 
institutions, Government Ministries/Departments may be observed so as to make the general public 
aware of the dignity and respect of women. The awareness programs like plays, nuked natak, poster 
making, etc., should be organized during this week. RWAs should also be roped in to organize the 
same in residential areas. 
(Para 6.4.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.2 The recommendations were also shared with Ministry of Education. It was informed that the 
NCERT appreciates the recommendations of observing 'women Safety week, in educational institutions 
through various awareness programmes. The Adolescence Education Programme of NCERT has been 
regularly organizing Role play competition at the National level in which gender sensitization is an 

71 
 
important theme. The NCERT through its textual materials sensitizes children, teachers, teacher 
educators to address different forms of physical and emotional crimes and create awareness amongst 
all regarding valuing women's work and their contribution to society. Various programs are organized 
by KVS on regular basis, so that the students can be sensitized towards women's safety. In the morning 
meetings and co-curricular activities, related programs are included. Girl students are given training 
related to women safety by the local police department from time to time. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.12.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Education about obs erving 'women 
Safety week, in educational institutions through various awareness programmes. However, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by other Ministr ies/Departments in 
this regard. 
 
4.13 Community Policing 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.13.1 The Committee is of the opinion that crimes against women and children cannot be controlled 
by law and enforcement agencies alone. The role of community and society by large is very important 
as the root causes of all atrocities and crimes lie in the society itself. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may create a community policing and social awareness mechanism in 
coordination with the Ministry of Women & Child Development and advise States to promote 
community policing in their jurisdictions involving women organizations and authorities at the 
Panchayat level. This will not only help in increased reporting of crimes and enhancing legal 
awareness but also go a long way in building confidence among women. 
 
(Para 6.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.13.2 „Police‟ and „Public order‟ are State subject as per the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. States/ Union Territories undertake various campaigns for legal and social awareness. 
However, Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that it is considering a component 
for effective legal awareness campaign for women in its ongoing schemes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.13.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
4.14 Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes Against Women 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.14.1 The Committee notes that there is a variation in a number of cases registered under 498A of 
IPC and Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act (PWDVA), 2005. The numbers of cases 
under PWDVA show a decline, but cases under 498A of IPC show an increase in 2019. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should advise States/UTs to conduct 

72 
 
periodic sensitization and briefing particularly, to the ground-level officials concerned with PWDVA 
so that the women facing domestic violence can be better equipped to access justice. Due publicity  
should be given by the States/UTs to the “Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 
(PWDVA), 2005‟ through newspapers, TV channels and other means to create awareness a mong the 
people. A nationwide study may also be conducted to monitor the progress with regard to the 
implementation of various laws meant for preventing crimes against women. 
(Para 6.7.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.14.2 It is relevant to mention that PWDVA is applicable to all women facing violence within the 
private sphere of home.  The Ministry of Women and Child Development has taken measures through 
OSCs and the NCW to provide assistance to women affected by domestic violence and has propagated 
about these measures through audio visual media and social media platforms from time to time. As 
regard recommendation of the Committee, it is submitted that the Ministry has already initiated the 
process of review of implementation of the various women- centric laws.     
MHA has also issued advisory to States/ Union Territories on 30th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.14.3 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the outcome of the review 
of implementation of women-centric laws. 
 
 
4.15 Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes against Children 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.15.1 The Committee strongly believes that unless and until the social and economic reasons for 
children being forced into early marriages is not understood, it will not be possible to root out this 
problem from the society. The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHA along with MoW&CD 
and States should study the socio-economic reasons behind child marriages and make necessary 
schematic interventions to address them. The Committee recommends that those who violate the law 
in this regard should be punished which would act as a deterrent. The Committee would also like to be 
informed whether all States/UTs have appointed Child Marriage Prohibition Officers as required under 
PCMA, 2006. 
(Para 6.8.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.15.2 As per the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Child Marriage Prohibition Officer 
(CMPO) have been posted. The Ministry has informed that a Task Force had been constituted to 
examine the age of motherhood, legal age of marriage for girls and other associated issues. The Task 
Force had also examined various factors responsible for Child Marriages. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.15.3 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be apprised about t he outcome of the study 
of constituted
 task force to examine the age of motherhood, legal age of marriage for girls and 
other associated issues and factors responsible for Child Marriages. 

73 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
Representation of Women in Police 
 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed about t he progress made in 
this regard. 
(Para 1.2.3) 
 
Shelter Homes 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that adeq uate financial resources 
may be provided to open new shelter homes and provide basic amenities in shelter homes. 
(Para 1.5.3) 
 
Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the effort of Delhi Police in analyzing the distress call  data of ERSS-
112, deployment of PCR vehicles and creation of Crime Mapping Analytics and Predi ctive 
System (CMAPS).  
(Para 1.10.3) 
 
Making Gender Sensitization a Part of School Curriculum 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about the im plementation 
status of operation Nirbheek. 
(Para 1.15.3) 
 
Sensitization on Legal Issues 
 
 The Committee notes the reply about the decision to discontinue the Sch eme of Mahila 
Police Volunteer. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps tak en by Ministry of 
Women and Child Development (MoW&CD) for enhancing legal awareness among women. 
 
(Para 1.17.3) 
Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the target of procurin g 100 buses by 
September 2021 will be achieved. 
(Para 2.7.12) 
 
 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts of Delhi Police in tracking, tracing and  reuniting of 
missing children with their family. The Committee further recommends that biometric 
credentials under aadhaar may be used for quicker disposal of such cases.  
(Para 2.7.18) 
 

74 
 
Challenges in dealing with Cyber Crimes 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about the  number of 
cybercrimes busted with such cooperation/coordination with international 
organizations/countries and conviction rate in such cases. 
(Para 2.8.3) 
 
Making Gender Sensitization a Part of School Curriculum 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that the me asures taken by the 
Ministry of Education to increase awareness for prevention of cybercrime s may be popularized 
among students/teachers/parents through   nation-wide campaign. 
(Para 2.11.13) 
Registration of Crimes against Women and Children 
 
 The Committee notes that all States/Union Territories have operationalized Cr ime and 
Criminal Tracking Networks and System (CCTNS) along with State Citizen Portals p roviding 
citizen centric police services, which includes online filing of complai nts, including for crimes on 
women and children. The Committee is of the view that internet connectivity and digital 
infrastructure are important for proper functioning of CCTNS and other o nline services. The 
Committee therefore, recommends that the MHA should take up with concerned authority to 
monitor the down times of CCTNS in police stations and the reasons for the sam e. The MHA 
based on the Report thus generated, should hold periodic meetings with the States/UTs concern 
to sort out the problem/issues hampering smooth functioning of CCTNS.  
(Para 3.1.6) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply about the circulation of the “Women‟s Safety & Security- 
A Handbook for First Responders and Investigators in the Police” book to DGsP of all 
States/UTs and DGs of CPOs/CAPFs. The Committee further recommends that th e handbook 
be made available online so that it is easily accessible to the police personnel pa rticularly 
working at ground level during interaction with victims of crime.  
(Para 3.1.7) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Crime and Criminal Tracking Networks and S ystem 
(CCTNS) adequately facilitates for registration of zero-FIR and further recommen ds that the 
MHA may advise States to seek and record the reasons by the PS concerned  for the delay in 
lodging an FIR by victim/family members. The Committee further recommen ds that MHA may 
advise States to issue SOPs to record the reasons for delay in registration of cases by the  
complainants. The Committee would like to be apprised about the numbe r of zero-FIR lodged in 
States/UTs and time taken for transfer of zero FIR to the PS concerned. MHA may monitor it on 
regular intervals in this regard and issue advisories, wherever needed. 
(Para 3.1.10) 
 
 The Committee notes that Section 182 of the IPC has a provision for a fine „whic h may 
extend to one thousand rupees‟ and Section 209 does not mention the amount of fine. The amount 
of fine under Section 182 is very low in present time. The Committee, therefor e, further 
recommends that the MHA may take up with Ministry of law & Justice to ame nd the Section 182 
and 209 of the IPC to enhance the amount of fine under Section 182 of IPC and  Section 209 of 

75 
 
IPC should also be amended by adding suitable amount of fine under this Se ction. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about the number of cases registered under Section 182 
and 209 of the IPC during past three years. 
(Para 3.1.15) 
Conviction Rate 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee observes that the ele ctronic 
media in the race to compete to be first on the TRP, have been seen to ind ulge in media trial and 
in the name of investigative journalism such crimes are reported in sensational manner. The 
Committee therefore further recommends that the matter may be taken up  with concerned 
Ministry to apply existing provisions more stringently on national especially local electronic 
media.    
(Para 3.2.7) 
Fast Track Courts 
 
 The Committee notes that against the target of 1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FTS Cs) 
including 389 exclusive POCSO Courts, 632 FTSCs including 340 exclusive POCSO courts have 
been made operational in 26 States/UTs which is 61.7% of the total FTSCs.  The Commit tee 
further recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Law & Justice  to remove 
bottlenecks and provide adequate financial resources for operationalizatio n of remaining fast 
track courts in a time bound manner. 
(Para 3.3.3) 
Helpline Numbers 
 
 The Committee notes the steps taken by MHA to popularise the 112 emer gency helpline 
numbers. The Committee further recommends that the MHA may advise Stat es/UTs to analyze 
the distress call data of ERSS 112 for deployment of PCR vehicles adjacent to areas f rom where 
more calls are received for quick reaction.  The MHA may share wit h all States/UTs the Crime 
Mapping Analytics and Predictive System (CMAPS) used by Delhi Police which is based on data 
of past crimes and provides inputs for policing activities such as planning of p ickets, patrolling 
etc.    
(Para 3.4.3) 
 
Women and Children Help Desks and All Women Police Stations  
 
 The Committee would like to be informed about the key findings of the study done by 
BPR&D on Performance Audit of Women Police Stations in India and the action taken/pro posed 
to be taken on the basis of said findings.  
(Para 3.5.3) 
 
 The Committee notes that the study of BPR&D has covered 22 police stations i n 13 States 
which is a very small sample size with respect to 15,890 police stations in the cou ntry as informed 
by the Ministry. The Committee would like to be informed about the r easons for selection of only 
22 police stations and the criteria used thereof. The Committee would also like to impress upon 
increasing sample size suitably for proper assessment. 
(Para 3.5.4) 
Nirbhaya Fund 
 

76 
 
 The Committee notes that till the FY 2020-21, the total allocation of funds in  the Nirbhaya 
Corpus is Rs.5712.85 crore and 60.00% amount (Rs.3581.11)  has been disbursed to all 
States/UTs which is still on the lower side. The Committee would like to be appr ised about the 
State-wise allocation and utilization of the fund
s for the specific purpose identified by the States 
and approved by the empowered committee. The Committee may also be informed about the cost 
initially proposed by State/UTs and steps taken to improve the utilization pattern. 
(Para 3.6.4) 
 
Safety of women and children in trains 
 
 The Committee notes that CCTV Cameras have been installed in 2931 coaches and 
observes that this is a very small number, if installation of CCTV cameras in trains and coaches 
are to be counted in view of the vast network of railways across the country. T he Committee 
further recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Railways to expedit e the 
installation of CCTV Cameras at remaining railway stations and trains. Also, the availability of 
FIR forms and RPF/GRP staff in trains may be publicized by displaying it on railway tickets, 
screens/ advertisement boards in the railway stations and other prominent places.  
(Para 3.7.3) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply that works for installation of CCTV cam eras in all 
the coaches of trains has been approved. The Committee further rec ommends that the same may 
be executed in a time bound manner and the Committee may be apprised of the same. 
 
(Para 3.7.4) 
 
 The Committee notes the steps taken for creation of a single platform for r egistration and 
resolution of rail passenger complaints. The Committee reiterates its recomme ndation at para 
3.7.5 of the Report and would like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 3.7.7) 
 
Role of NGOs in Assisting the Victimized Women and Children 
 
 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the MHA is very gener ic in nature and 
reiterates its recommendation at para 3.8.1 of the Report.
 
 
(Para 3.8.3) 
Conditions of Sex-Workers 
 
 The Committee is deeply concerned about the plight of sex workers an d their children 
who have not even been extended the basic rights enshrined in the Constitution of India and aims 
at ameliorating the suffering and hardship faced by them. The Comm ittee further notes that 
despite having laws/acts like Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Childre n) Act, 2015 and 
Children in Need of Care and Protection (CNCP) that can be used for their benefit, the situation 
has not improved. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation  at para 3.9.1 of the 
Report. The Committee further recommends that children of sex work ers must be covered and 
benefit extended to them under CNCP and Juvenile Justice (Care and Prot ection of 
Children) Act, 2015 on priority basis. The Committee would like to be apprised abou t the 
number of children of sex workers who have been extended the b enefits under JJ Act, 2015 and 

77 
 
steps taken/ proposed to ameliorate the plight of sex workers and to bring them  and their 
children to the mainstream of the society. 
(Para 3.9.4) 
 
Issue of Transgender 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Social Justice and Em powerment and 
would like to be informed in detail about the provisions to provide transgenders food, shelter, 
clothing, toilet etc. facilities in all public places and policies to bring them to the social 
mainstream. 
 
(Para 3.10.3) 
Atrocities and Crimes against Women and Children of SC/ST Community 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Education that the D epartment of 
Gender Studies of NCERT is in the process of reviewing its textbooks from a gender  perspective. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the changes made dur ing the last five years in 
the textbooks to promote gender equality. The Committee further rec ommends that the MHA 
may take up with the Ministry of Education to advise the SCERT/ State Boards of Education also 
to review their textbooks from gender perspective. 
(Para 3.11.4) 
 
Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
 
 The Committee notes that even after wide publicity, a total of 1,22,964 users have been 
registered on Himmat Plus Application which is still very low compared to the p opulation of 
Delhi. The Committee recommends that the Delhi Police may put more sincer e efforts to 
publicize the App in continuous aggressive manner particularly on social media platf orms and 
also conduct a survey to assess the effectiveness of the app in improving the respo nse time and 
extending help at the time of distress. The Committee would like to be app rised about the 
progress made in increasing the number of users of Himmat App. The Committee also observes 
that ERSS is more popular than Himmat App. Therefore, MHA and Delhi Police should explore 
the plausible reasons for the poor subscriber base of the App and if need b e to further upgrade 
and update the app. 
 
(Para 3.12.4) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply about the coordination of Delhi Police with RWAs/MWAs 
for installation, maintenance, etc., of CCTVs. The Committee further recommends that the MHA 
may issue directions to Delhi Police to coordinate with RWAs/MWAs to rectify/replace the 
damaged/defective CCTVs on priority and create a database of CCTVs includin g their location, 
working condition and storage, etc. so that there are no blind spots on t he streets, markets and 
other public places. This will also help in easy and speedy collection of video evidence in case a 
crime is committed. The Committee reiterates its recommendation at para 3.12.5 of the Report to 
publicize the installation of CCTVs which will act as a
 deterrence and help in prevention of 
crimes. 
 

78 
 
(Para 3.12.7) 
Challenges in dealing with Cyber Crimes 
 
 The Committee notes that seven Joint Cybercrime Coordination Teams (JCCTs) have 
been formed to prevent cyber crime in the country. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that 
the MHA may periodically assess the performance of JCCTs and upgrade them in view  of the 
advancement of technology and various types of new emerging cyber crimes. 
(Para 3.13.4) 
 
 The Committee also notes that Cyber forensic-cum-training laboratories have been 
commissioned in 18 States/UT which is only 50% of the total States/UTs. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may expedite the commissioning of the labs in remaining 
States/UTs and allocate necessary funds required for the set up. The Comm ittee would like to be 
apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 3.13.5) 
 
 The Committee notes the incomplete reply of the MeitY as no information has been 
provided on coordination mechanisms with international agencies to block VPNs p ermanently 
and initiatives taken/proposed to strengthen the tracking and surveillance m echanisms to put a 
check on the use of VPN and the dark web. The MHA may put its effor ts in getting such 
information from MeitY and furnish the same to the Committee. 
(Para 3.13.9) 
 
Interventions of the Ministry of Home Affairs in handling cyber crimes 
 
 The Committee notes that the MHA has not furnished the information  on the steps taken 
to include cyber-related crimes against women and children under  the Central Government-run 
helpline number 112 (ERSS) and State helpline numbers. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation at para 3.14.1 of the Report and would like to be apprised about the steps taken 
in this regard. 
(Para 3.14.5) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed ab out the funds allocated 
and progress made in establishment of forensic-cum-training laboratories in  the remaining 
States/UTs. 
(Para 3.14.9) 
 
Sensitization of the Police Personnel 
 
 The Committee notes the reply about the circulation of the “Women‟s Safety & Security- 
A Handbook for First Responders and Investigators in the Police” book to DGsP of all 
States/UTs and DGs of CPOs/CAPFs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
States/UTs may be advised to provide training to the ground level police person nel on said 
Report of BPR&D as they are the first point of contact with the victim/complainant. 
 
(Para 3.15.3) 
 

79 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the cryptic and evasive reply and is of th e opinion that 
Ministry of Home Affairs which provides assistance and funds to the State governm ents under 
the scheme for installation of CCTVs in police stations ha s every right to know about its 
utilization. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised about the allotment of funds for 
installation of CCTVs and number of States/UTs that have initiated/installed optimum number  
of CCTVs in police stations. 
(Para 3.15.6) 
Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes Against Women 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but still expresses its ser ious concern over 
the massive misuse of section 498A of IPC which is often reported through Med ia. Sometimes, it 
is also seen that Investigating Officers (IOs) are not extending positive support to innocent family 
members. The Committee, therefore, feels that some suitable amendme nt is required in 498A of 
IPC and reiterates its recommendation at para 3.16.1 of the Report to prevent t he harassment of 
the family members on the basis of false complaints. 
(Para 3.16.3) 
Conviction Rate 
 
 The Committee notes that Forensic Sciences Laboratories (FSLs) have b een setup in 32 
States/UTs. The Committee further recommends that the MHA may coordin ate with States/UTs 
to ensure timely upgradation/modernisation and availability of the state-of-art tec hnology in 
these labs which is essential for effective investigation and timely collection of evidenc e. The 
Committee further recommends that the MHA may take steps towards sett ing up of forensic 
laboratory in the big cities with population of more than one million. 
(Para 4.1.3) 
Safe City project 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of MHA and reiterates its recommendation  given in para 
No. 4.13.5 of the 224 th Report on Demands For Grants (2020-21) of the MHA to extend the Safe 
City Project to all the major cities including Capitals of all States/UTs in Phase II. The 
Committee would also like to be informed about the implementation status of phase II of Safe 
City Project. 
(Para 4.2.3) 
Shelter Homes 
 
 The Committee notes that no concrete reply has been given on efforts m ade for 
installation of CCTV cameras in all shelter homes. The Committee would like to be  apprised 
about the efforts made and timeframe fixed for installation of the CCTV Cameras and conduct of 
audit/survey in all the shelter homes.  
(Para 4.3.3) 
 
 
One-Stop Centres (OSCs) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed about the nu mber of women 
who have received medical and financial assistance whether pre or post viol ence during COVID-
19 Pandemic. 
(Para 4.4.3) 

80 
 
 
Safety of women and children in trains 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. The remaining states may also be advised to com e on 
board in this regard for which advisories/meetings may be issued/held. 
 
(Para 4.5.4) 
Strengthening of Institutions 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed abou t the key findings of 
the study undertaken by BPR&D on “A Study of Factors Responsible for Recidivism” and 
necessary actions initiated thereon. 
(Para 4.6.3) 
 
Atrocities and Crimes against Women and Children of SC/ST Community 
 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about the number of atrocity
 
prone areas, number of review of cases ending in acquittal reported after issuing of advisories by 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during the last three years. 
(Para 4.7.4) 
Percentage of women personnel in Delhi Police 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts of Delhi Police to increase representation  of 
women in Delhi Police. The Committee notes the reply of Delhi Police about the details of 
recruitment of women in Delhi Police and desires to be apprised about the in crease in percentage 
of women in Delhi Police after the ongoing recruitment process is complete. The Committee may 
also be informed about the timeline by when the target of 33 % reservation of women in Delhi 
Police is likely to be achieved. The Committee is also disappointed to note that no new  
recruitments have been made since 2018 which is more than three ye ars. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the reasons for delay in recruitment and step s taken to fast track the 
recruitment process. 
(Para 4.8.3) 
 
Initiatives of Delhi Police for safety and security of women and children in Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the achievements of Special Police Unit for Women and  Children 
(SPUWAC) of Delhi Police and persistent effort to impart self defence train ing to girls/women. 
The Committee would like to be informed about the view of Ministry of Education in the matter. 
(Para 4.9.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the effort of Delhi Police to prevent street 
crimes by crime mapping and identification of hot spots, dynamic d eployment, etc. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the implementation status of identification and 
mapping of crime hot spots in other Metropolitan cities. 
(Para 4.9.6) 
 
 

81 
 
Sensitization of the Police Personnel 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that ju st forwarding the 
Report is not going to serve the purpose. The Committee, therefore, r ecommends that the 
feedback on the BPR&D reports shared by MHA to States/UTs may be take n/ evaluated and 
furnished to the Committee. 
(Para 4.11.3) 
Gender Sensitization of Society 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Education about obse rving 'women 
Safety week, in educational institutions through various awareness programmes. However, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by other Ministries/De partments in 
this regard. 
(Para 4.12.3) 
Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes Against Women 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the o utcome of the review 
of implementation of women-centric laws. 
(Para 4.14.3) 
Legal Provisions to Prevent Crimes against Children 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be apprised about th e outcome of the study 
of constituted task force to examine the age of motherhood, legal age of marriage for girls and 
other associated issues and factors responsible for Child Marriages. 
(Para 4.15.3) 
***** 
 
  

82 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
  

83 
 
XIX 
 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:15 AM on Monday, the 9 th August, 2021 in Room No.63, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman    
2. Dr. Anil Jain  
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
7. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
11. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
12. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
13. Shrimati Sharmishta Sethi 
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
15. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the 
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following two draft Reports of the Committee:- 
(i) 233rd Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the Two Hundred Thirtieth Report on 'Atrocities and Crimes against Women and 
Children‟; and 

84 
 
(ii) xxx    xxx    xxx; 
 
3. The Chairman asked the Members to give their suggestions, if any, on the recommendations 
and observations given in the draft Reports, and mentioned that those suggestions would be 
incorporated suitably, if necessary.  
4. The Committee took up the draft 233 rd Report for consideration and adopted it without any 
change.  
5. xxx    xxx    xxx.  
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors and also 
to nominate Members for presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha on 10 th 
August, 2021 so that further necessary action can be initiated on the said Reports. 
7. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.  
8. The Committee then adjourned at 10.52 am. 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
xxx Relates to other matter. 
 

85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Recruitment of women after the decision of 33% reservation to the women candidates in Delhi 
Police as on 1st April, 2021  
 
S. No. Name of Post No. of vacancies Selected Status 
1.   Women Constable (Exe) SPl. Recruitment 
Drive 2015 
  
Nomination from Miroram& Nagaland 
(2015-16) & Assam 2018 
148 Spl. Rectt. 
Drive 
121 
+ 
Nomination 
from  
Mizoram 10 
Nagaland 8 
Assam  20 
Total  159 
157 candidates joined 
2.   Women Sub- Inspector (Exe.) Exam.-20 16 88 88 84 candidates joined 
3.   Women Constable (Exe) Exam-2016 2424 2424 2415 candidates joined 
4.   Women Sub-Inspector (Exe) Exam-2017 256 256 229 candidates joined 
5.   Women Constable (Exe) Spl. Recruitment 
Drive 2018 
190 190 182 candidates joined 
6.   Women Sub-Inspector (Exe) Exam-2018 123 Recruitment is underway through SSC 
7.   Women Sub-Inspector (Exe) Exam-2019 79 Recruitment is underway through SSC 
8.   Women Sub-Inspector (Exe) Exam-2020 78 Recruitment is underway through SSC 
9.   Women Constable (Exe) Exam-2020 1944 Recruitment will be conducted through 
SSC 
  
Apart from above, the following vacancies are to be advertised as per reservation policy i.e. 
33% for women:- 
 
S. No. Name of Post Vacancy  Status 
1.   Head Constable (Min.) Exam-2021 749 (Male-503 Female-246) Recruitment will 
be conducted 
through SSC. 
2.   Head Constable (AWO/TPO) Exam-2021 766 (Male-513 Female-253) 
3.   ASI(Steno) 26 (Male-18 Female-8) 
4.   ASI (Radio Technician) 52 (Male-35 Female-17) 
5.   HC (Store Clerk) 29 (Male-20 Female-9) 
6.   HC (Fitter Electrician Commn.) 29 (Male-19 Female-10) 
7.   HC (Fitter Battery) 05 (Male-3 Female-2) 
8.   HC (Telephone Exchange Operator) 6 (Male-4 Female-2) 
9.   Const. (Workshop Hand) 43 (Male-29 Female-14) 
10.   HC (Mast Lasker) 6 (Male-4 Female-2) 
11.   SI (Short Hand Reporter) 3 (Male-2 Female-1) 
12.   ASI (Short Hand Reporter) 3 (Male-2 Female-1) 
13.   SI (Computer) 4 (Male-3 Female-1) 
14.   ASI (Finger Print Bureau) 25 (Male-17 Female-8) 
15.   Constable (Exe) 2021 2785 (Male-1866 Female-919) 
  
 
***** 