PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 160
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011

107
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

C.S.(H.A.)-312
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—15
4. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 16
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 17—42
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 43 —60
I. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 .......................... 45—59
II. Press Communiqué dated 13 th February, 2012 on the Bill ............................. 60

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
♣5. Vacant
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
♣ Consequent upon resignation of Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 13th March, 2012.
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee
on Rural Development.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Sixtieth Report on the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment
Bill, 2011.
2.0 In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred
♣ the  Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment
Bill, 2011,  as introduced in Lok Sabha on 29 th December 2011 and pending therein, to the Committee
on Home Affairs on 13 th January, 2012, for examination and report thereon by 31 st March, 2012.
3.0 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 seeks to amend certain Sections
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), 1967 (as amended in 2004 and 2008).
4.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 13 th February, 2012, considered the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 and felt that the provisions and contents of the Bill have far
reaching implications. The Committee, therefore, decided to issue press release (Annexure-I)
inviting written memoranda from the individuals/organisations, etc. on the Bill. The Committee,
while taking into consideration the fact that the State Governments/UTs are also involved in
implementing the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, felt that it would be necessary to seek
comments from the various State Governments and Union Territories on the Bill to have
comprehensive and meaningful discussion on the Bill and accordingly, State/UT Governments were
requested to furnish their comments. However, in response to that, ten individuals/organizations and
only State Government of Karnataka, and Union Territory Administration of Daman and Diu
furnished their comments on the Bill. Out of ten, two public memoranda were found relevant
which, alongwith the views of the Government of Karnataka, were forwarded to the Ministry of
Home Affairs for furnishing comments thereon. The Government of Daman and Diu agreed to the
provisions of the Bill.
5.0 The Committee heard the official presentation of the Home Secretary on 21
st February,
2012. In the Committee’s next sitting held on 1 st March, 2012, the Home Secretary apprised the
Members that the proposed amendment in the principal Act is meant to comply with the guidelines
of Financial Action Task Force (FATF), an inter-governmental organization founded in 1989 on the
initiative of G-7 with the purpose to develop policies to combat money laundering and terrorist
financing. India got the membership of FATF in 2010 on the assurance that India would make
suitable amendments in the Act in consonance with the guidelines of the organization in the time
horizon i.e. by 31
st March, 2012. The Home Secretary, in the Committee’s next sitting held on
13th March, 2012, apprised the Committee that the non-compliance of India’s commitment to FATF
would lead to diminution in the stature of the country and India could be placed under the
‘enhanced follow up procedure’ which, in turn, would require giving a progress report every four
months to the FATF.
6.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 19
th March, 2012 took up the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
7.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 26 th March, 2012 considered and adopted this Report.
♣Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 492112 dated 16 th January, 2012.

8.0 As per practice, the Secretaries and senior officers of the Legislative Department and the
Department of Legal Affairs were also present in all the sittings to respond to the queries of the
Members.
9.0 For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
26th March,  2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
1.1 INTRODUCTION
1.1.1 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 seeks to make amendments in
the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 as amended in 2004 and 2008.
According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the proposed amendments to the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 aim to bring more clarity to the existing legal regime,
and remove the deficiencies identified in the implementation of the provisions of the said Act by
the Central and State intelligence and investigating agencies.
1.1.2 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 was enacted to provide for the more
effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for matters
connected therewith. The scope of the Act was widened in 2004 by bringing the terrorist activities
under its ambit. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA), now inter alia , deals with
matters relating to combating of terrorism in all its facets, including terrorist financing.
1.1.3 According to the background note as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the act
was amended in 2004 and 2008 to overcome some of the difficulties in its enforcement and to
bring/update the legislation at par with international commitments. The UAPA was amended in 2004
by criminalizing raising of funds for a terrorist act, holding proceeds of terrorism, membership of
a terrorist organization, support given to a terrorist organization and raising funds for a terrorist
organization by inserting specific chapters. The UAPA was further amended by the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2008 by enlarging the scope of the provision of “funds”
to ensure a broader coverage of the financing of terrorism offences. The definition of property was
expanded to bring the legislation in line with the requirements of the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (CFT). A new section 51A was inserted to give
effect to the United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1267 and 1373 and to establish a
mechanism for “freezing, seizing or attaching funds”.
1.1.4 According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the circumstances which
led to bring the Bill and the purpose of the proposed amendment are as under:–
“An Inter-Ministerial Group was constituted to evaluate the existing provisions of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and to recommend necessary amendments to the
said Act. In addition to the above, the Financial Action Task Force, an Inter-Governmental
organisation set-up to devise policies to combat money laundering and terror financing
admitted India as its 34th member. On the basis of commitment made by India at the time
of admission to the said Financial Action Task Force, various legislative and other legally
binding measures were required to be taken on a medium term basis, i.e., by 31st March,
2012. These recommendations, were examined and it is proposed to amend the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 to make it more effective in prevention of unlawful
activities and dealing with terrorist activities.”
1.1.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that FA TF is an inter-governmental
organization founded in 1989 on the initiative of the G-7. FATF is an inter-governmental body with
36 members, and with the participation of over 180 countries through an international network of
FATF-style regional bodies. The members comprise of 34 countries and two Regional bodies viz.
the EU and the GCC. Asian member countries are India, Japan, China, South Korea, Singapore and
Hong Kong.

2
1.1.6 The Committee was further apprised by the Ministry that after considering India’s Action
Plan to overcome the deficiencies identified in the Mutual Evaluation Report, and the significant
progress made by India and based on the modified Action Plan given by India, the member
countries supported India’s membership. Finally, India was admitted as 34th Member Country of
FATF in June, 2010.
1.1.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that India launched its bid to be admitted as
a member of FATF in 2009. To this end, mutual consultations between FATF and Government
of India were held in November-December 2009 and the mutual evaluation report was adopted on
25
th June, 2010 in FATF Plenary. As per the Mutual Evaluation Report (MER) some technical
concerns have been identified with regard to the “coverage” of the extant Indian legislation for
combating financing of terrorism.
1.1.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that the UAPA and the anti-
terrorist regime in India are comprehensive and basically all the concerns of FATF do stand
addressed. However, at par with the previously admitted countries viz. China and Korea, FA TF offered
membership to India on the conditional basis of India’s commitments to be contained in a ‘Plan of
Action’ by India, setting out the steps to be taken and time frame to “improve” the Anti-Money
Laundering (AML)/ International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (CFT)
regime in the country (as was done by the last two FATF admitted members viz., China and Korea).
1.1.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that as per FATF Membership Policy, a country
should score at least 8 Largely Compliant (LC) out of 14 key and core recommendations. India
was short of 3 Compliant/Largely Compliant (C/LC) in Core and Key recommendations to qualify
for membership of FA TF, which inter alia  include (a) Criminalization of Money Laundering;
(b) Criminalization of Terrorist Financing; and (c) Confiscation and provisional measures.
Therefore, India was required to send an Action Plan to bring its policies and standards closer to
the FATF compliance zone. Action Plan envisages three types of timeframe to fulfil the
commitments made, viz., Immediate, Short and Medium. The immediate plan was to be completed
by the end of June, 2010 and Short Term was to be completed by March, 2011 while Medium
Term is to be completed by March, 2012. The Ministry informed that the Immediate and Short
Term Action Plan items have been completed within the given timelines. The Ministry also informed
the Committee that major items for the Medium term are:–
(i) To amend UAPA to make it compliant with FT Convention. (Being undertaken by
MHA); and
(ii) To amend the PMLA to make it compliant with Vienna and Palermo Convention. (Being
undertaken by Dept. of Revenue, Ministry of Finance)
1.1.10 According to the Ministry, the purpose of the FATF is to develop policies to combat money
laundering and terrorist financing. The primary policies issued by the FATF are the forty
recommendations on money laundering and the nine special recommendations on terrorist financing.
Together, the 40+9 recommendations set the international standards on anti-money laundering
measures and combating the financing of terrorism acts. They set out the principles for actions
and implementation of these principles according to the particular circumstances and constitutional
framework of different countries. Both sets of FATF recommendations are intended to be
implemented at the national level through legislation and other legally binding measures. The
legislative framework dealing with terrorist activities and money laundering of all countries is being
continuously reviewed by the Financial Action Task Force.
1.2 OBJECTIVES OF THE BILL
1.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that proposals for amendments to

3
UAPA in order to account for implementation challenges, court interpretation etc., [independent of
the FATF discussions] were also being received in the MHA. Accordingly, an Inter-Ministerial
Group was constituted to evaluate the UAPA provisions as they stand in relation to both – the FATF
discussions and our own internal assessment. This process held that the proposed changes (as
recommended by FA TF) are relevant and required. It further, in addition, suggested certain other
amendments.
1.2.2 According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons, UAPA Bill, 2011 seeks to achieve to
following objectives:–
(1) Increase the period of declaration of an association as unlawful from two years to five
years as specified under section 6;
(2) Amendment in Section 15 of the principal act with a purpose of enlarging the ambit
of ‘terrorist act’ by incorporating the ‘economic security’ of the country and to
protect the monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling or
circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other
material. The international/intergovernmental organizations have been covered explicitly;
(3) To bring the cohesiveness in the legal framework, the provision of section 16A is
proposed to be brought as clause (d) after clause (c) of the section and the existing
16A is being deleted;
(4) Amendments are based on IMG recommendations in order to explicitly criminalise high
quality counterfeiting. Amendments are based on FATF recommendations to meet the
international commitment. All the nine Treaties annexed to the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) specifying various types of
terrorist acts which constitute an offence are now to be listed in Second Schedule to
this Act;
(5) Enlarging the scope of Section 17 of the Act relating to punishment for raising funds
for terrorist act and include within its scope, raising of funds, both from legitimate or
illegitimate sources, by a terrorist organization or by terrorist gang or by an individual
terrorist;
(6) Insert new sections 22A, 22B and 22C in the aforesaid Act to include within its scope,
offences by companies societies or trusts and provide punishment therefor;
(7) Insert a new section 24 in the aforesaid Act so as to enlarge the scope of proceeds
of terrorism to include therein any property intended to be used for terrorism; and
(8) Insert sub-sections (3) to (5) in section 33 of the aforesaid Act to confer power upon
the court by order to provide–
(i) for attachment or forfeiture of property equivalent to the counterfeit Indian
currency involved in the offence, including the face value of such currency which
are not defined to be of high quality but are part of the common seizure along
with the high quality counterfeit Indian currency;
(ii) for attachment or forfeiture of property equivalent to or the value of the proceeds
of terrorism involved in the offence; and
(iii) for confiscation of movable or immovable property on the basis of the material
evidence where the trial cannot be concluded on account of the death of the
accused or the accused being declared as a proclaimed offender or any other
reason.

4
1.3 PRESENTATION MADE BY THE MINISTRY
1.3.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 21 st February, 2012 heard the presentation of Home
Secretary on the Bill. As per practice, Secretaries, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice were also present.
1.3.2 During the course of the presentation, the concerned Joint Secretary dwelt on the salient
features of the Bill and briefed the Committee about the circumstances which led to the piloting
of the Bill. He briefed the Committee that the proposed amendment is intended to remove the
difficulties in the enforcement of the law and to update or bring the legislation at par with the
international commitment and to make the provisions of the Act more effective and stringent. He
also gave a detailed background and objectives sought to be achieved through the amendments
which have already been dealt in the preceding paragraphs.
1.3.3 The Home Secretary during his oral evidence before the Committee apprised the Committee
that basically three categories of amendments have been proposed in the Bill:–
(i) One major category pertains to the amendments that have been recommended by FATF.
After discussions with officers of Government of India and after having gone through
all laws of India, gaps in the legal framework were reviewed and accordingly proposed
to be filled up;
(ii) The second major category of amendments comes from the requirement to make high
quality fake Indian currency notes and the production and distribution thereof also a
terrorist offence. Government of India wants to do that because there is mounting
evidence to suggest that this high quality fake Indian currency note is actually being
printed across the border and being distributed from there, both for financing terrorism
as well as for disturbing the monetary stability of our country. With regard to high
quality Counterfeit Indian Currency, it is understood that it can only be breached by
sovereign support. Therefore, the Government wanted to make it a terrorist offence.
This necessitated some amendments and some insertions; and
(iii) The third category of amendments pertains to the amendments, which are felt
necessary on account of clarifying some issues. For example, the original Act had
provisions regarding confiscation of proceeds of terrorism. The original Act included
the funds for financing of terrorism also within the definition of proceeds of terrorism.
That led to this important aspect of funds being collected for financing of terrorism,
somehow escaping from the radar. So, the Government wants to make this more
explicit so that the law enforcement agencies would also be able to clearly cite these
provisions when seizing funds, which are meant for financing terrorism.
1.3.4 When the Committee sought to know as to whether the States have been consulted before
piloting the Bill, the Home Secretary replied as under:–
“I do not think so, Sir, because one category is the FICN, the other category pertains to
the amendments sought by the F ATF . So far as F ATF amendments are concerned, they
wanted to include threats from terrorism to international organizations or inter-governmental
bodies to be included. That is something which pertains to the Union Government. Then,
they wanted an insertion therein providing for confiscation of not only the proceeds of
terrorism or the funds meant for financing terrorism, but also the equivalent value thereof.
Then, they also wanted to bring in various bodies, which can be used to funnel terrorist
funds, also to be brought in. We said that that is already included in the juridical definition
of person. But they wanted explicit mentioning of those bodies, NGOs, etc.”

5
1.3.5 On a query as to whether the definition of the term ‘persons’ which includes an association
of person or a body of individual would also cover the trade unions which are registered under
the category of associations, the Home Secretary replied as under:–
“This refers to an association which is being used to funnel funds for terrorisim, which is
used to give funds or divert funds or provide funds or source funds for terrorism. So, that
is where this comes in. Apart from that, any association or a company or organisation which
is engaged in printing, distribution etc. of high quality fake Indian currency , this is only
with reference to that. UAP A refers to only such crimes.”
1.3.6 Clarifying further on a query as to why the Government does not mention the names of
the organizations falling under the Act, the Home Secretary stated as below:–
“….the associations and unions which are engaged in the normal activities don’t come
within the ambit of this Act at all. This Act is meant only for juridical persons, or natural-
born persons who are engaged in terrorism-related activities or unlawful activities.”
1.4. The members of the Committee during the course of the presentation on the Bill and the
subsequent sittings held on 1
st, 13 th and 19 th March, 2012 raised some queries which were
responded by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Since, the queries raised pertained to specific clauses,
the queries raised and the response of the Ministry thereto are being dealt under the clause-by-
clause consideration of the Bill. The suggestions received from individuals/organizations and views
of the State/UT Government also pertained to specific clauses. Therefore, such views and the
comments of the Ministry thereon are also being dealt under clause-by-clause consideration.
1.5 CLAUSE BY CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
1.5.1 The Committee, in its sitting held on 19
th March, 2012, took up the Clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill. Besides Home Secretary, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and Law
Secretary were also present during the course of the clause-by-clause consideration. The details of
the clause-wise discussion are enumerated below:–
Clause 2
1.5.2 Clause 2 seeks amendment in Section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA),
1967 which pertains to definitions of the select terms used in the Act. Under Clause 2 (i) after
clause (ea) of the principal Act, a new clause (eb) is proposed to be inserted to define the “person”
as an individual, a Hindu undivided family, a company, a firm, an association of persons or a body
of individuals, whether incorporated or not, every artificial juridical person, not falling within any
of the preceding sub-clauses and any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any person
falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses.
1.5.3 The Committee was apprised that under the existing definition of proceeds of terrorism, the
property belonging to an individual terrorist has not been explicitly covered. Further, at present the
definition of funds/property intended to be used for terrorism is embedded in the last clause of
definition of “proceeds of terrorism” i.e. existing Section 2(g). In order to make this, i.e. fund/
property intended to be used for terrorism more explicit/clear, existing sub-clause (g) is proposed
to be subdivided as proposed in clause 2 (ii) of the Bill. Similar cascading changes are proposed
in Chapter V dealing with “forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism” which will be discussed later.
1.5.4 Under Clause 2(iii) the definition of property under Section 2(h) is proposed to be further
refined in order to cover the entire range of property and assets by inserting the phrase ‘including
but not limited to’. The proposed amendment intends to facilitate to bring the definition of funds
in line with CFT .

6
Inclusion of Hindu Undivided Family under the definition of “Person”
1.5.5 The Committee discussed in detailed the definition of the term ‘person’ in the proposed
amendment particularly with reference to Hindu Undivided Family. Members expressed reservations
over bringing Hindu Undivided Family under the definition of person. The concerned Joint
Secretary in this regard clarified as under:–
“In the F ATF recommendations, one of the concerns is the non-profit organizations being
used as means for terrorist financing and funding. Therefore, there was a need to
categorically capture the definition of person consistent with PMLA, Income Tax Act. When
you talk of non-profit organizations, which become charitable organizations or trusts, all
these become germane to the assessment.”
1.5.6 The Committee pointed out that the definition of Hindu Undivided Family (HUF) is not
convincing as the issue connected with the Income Tax and Prevention of Money Laundering Act
are altogether different where there is a relevance for HUF. But UAPA the issue is connected with
terrorism where HUF does not come into the picture. Clarifying this, the Home Secretary stated
as under:–
“Under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, ‘terrorism’ is a predicate offence. That
means, the Prevention of Money Laundering Act will operate against the funds which arise
out of a category of crimes. There are a number of categories of crimes, one of which is
terrorism. So, if any fund which is generated by terrorism is involved, then, the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act operates and this Act also operates. Such actions come under
both the Acts. Therefore, there is a requirement to make sure that these sections correspond
to each other.”
1.5.7 On the Committee’s observation that the definition is not convincing and there is a need to
change the wordings, the concerned Joint Secretary stated as under:–
“As finance is the lifeline of terrorism, the endevaour of the Government is to also invoke
provisions of various relevant laws, such as PMLA, Income Tax Act, Foreign Exchange
Management Act to check financing of terrorism. It may kindly be noted that the offence
of financing of terrorism is a scheduled offence in the PMLA...... It is not about a
legitimate Hindu Undivided Family or Trade Unions; it is a game of misusing the Trust.
So, the entities may not know and they are exploited. So, what the F ATF said is, “Aim to
put in place such legal provisions that would prevent misuse of legal structures so that they
are not exploited for channelising funds for terrorism or money laundering. Special
recommendation no. 8 which relates to non-profit organisation reads as follows – it is a
recommendation — “Country should review the adequacy of law and regulation that relates
to entity, that can be abused for financing of terrorism. Non-profit organisations are,
particularly, vulnerable and country should ensure that they cannot be misused (i) by
terrorist organisations posing as legitimate entities; (2) to exploit legitimate entities as
conduit for terrorist financing, including for the purpose of escaping asset freezing
measures. Because when we come back to asset freezing, what they will do is, without the
Trust or the Association knowing, they will park the money as a chairtable donation and
park it there. (3) to conceal or obscure the clandestine diversion of funds intended for
legitimate purposes to various organizations. It is in this background that IMG felt that
while we strive to bring laws in consonance with international standard, it would only be
befitting to harmonize the definitions and provisions of related domestic laws and
accordingly suggested that a person may be defined in the Amendment Bill accordingly. So,
for all the three Acts which feed into the UAP A, we cannot have a distinct definition and
this is more in terms of a preventive measure because it is a game of misusing the trust
of a legitimate organization and using it to hide funds. That is the purpose.”

7
1.5.8 The Commi ttee sought the observation of the Law Secretary on the definition of the term
‘HUF’ in the proposed amendment. The Law Secretary stated that the Ministry of Law and Justice
had examined the issue and fully concurs with the viewpoints of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Thereon, the Home Secretary further clarified as under:–
“When we are criminalizing acts by persons, we include the following categories; and
persons includes both ‘a natural person’ as well as ‘a legal or juridical person’. The
categories of juridical persons are: company, firm, society, association, etc. These are all
categories of legal persons or juridical persons. Now, Hindu Undivided Families also in the
financial terms are legal/juridical persons. So, when you are expounding on that definition
of person or a juridical person, then you include all these categories. Now, this does not
mean that any firm will get prosecuted just because it is a firm, or, any company will get
prosecuted because it is a company, or, an association will get prosecuted because it is an
association. It only means that if that association or firm is used to park funds meant for
financing terrorism, if it is used to raise and collect funds for financing terrorism, then,
that firm will get prosecuted.”
1.5.9 The Members of the Committee felt that the definition of the term HUF in the Income Tax
Law is meant to give some relief in the Income Tax to the people belonging to that category, and
using HUF as an association or a firm is beyond convincing. The Home Secretary clarifying the
point replied as under:–
“The question is whether the funds, resources or property can be held in the name of a
Hindu Undivided Family or not. If funds can be held in the name of a Hindu Undivided
Family, then funds could be parked there without the Hindu Undivided Family knowing the
origin of those funds. And because those funds are parked in the name of a Hindu
Undivided Family, if it is not included, it will be outside the mischief of this law.”
1.5.10 The Committee wanted to know as per the provision of the proposed amendment whether
a criminal act committed by the head of the family and the funds parked under his name would
implicate the entire HUF, the Joint Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance made
the following observation:–
“In the Prevention of Money Laundering Act also, ‘person’ has been defined as an
individual, a Hindu Undivided Family, a company, a firm, an association of persons or a
body of individuals and every other artificial juridical persons, etc. We are in agreement
with the logic which has been given by the Home Secretary and officials of the Home
Ministry. Actually, certain measures are being taken to prevent money laundering. There are
certain obligations for the financial institutions, banking companies, etc. When they are
dealing with opening of accounts, etc., whether of an individual or a company, they are
subjected to certain rigors. They have to follow the ‘Know Your Customer’ norms and also
apply customer due diligence, etc. Now, it is only through these measures, whether it is
individual accounts or any company’ s accounts, that an oversight mechanism is put in place
by which it can be inferred whether any money laundering has taken place. So, these
entities are subjected to some kind of a reporting system. The financial institutions are
supposed to apply the same due diligence measures whether these are accounts of
individuals, companies or corporates, etc. So, because a large number of Hindu Undivided
Families were also holding bank accounts, they could not be separated. That is why, they
have also been kept under the purview of the definition of ‘persons’.”
1.5.11 Some Members pointed out that Income Tax Act, Prevention of the Money Laundering Act
and Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act have different scope and purpose, the later being related
to the criminal activities of a person. Therefore, it is necessary to bring in all other such

8
corporates, which are relevant in the case of financial matters, but not relevant insofar as individual
crimes are concerned.
1.5.12 The Home Secretary made an attempt to convince the Committee on bringing HUF under
the definition “Person” as under:–
“Our stand before the financial action taskforce was that ‘person’ includes a juridical
person and, therefore, no further exposition is necessary. The Financial Action Task Force
was not agreeable. They wanted a detailed definition that would include companies, firms
and all other juridical persons to be specified. Now how this Act is concerned with people
who are bodies, associations, etc., in two ways. One is with regard to attachment of
proceeds of terrorism or attachment of funds for financing terrorism or for future funds for
financing terrorism and for forfeiture of funds generated out of terrorism. The other is
through FIC, that is, Fake Indian Currency, distribution thereof, printing thereof, etc.”
1.5.13 The Home Secretary further opined that:–
“The term ‘HUF’ can be avoided by this mechanism by saying this will also include persons
as defined in section so and so of the PMLA Act. That is suffice.”
1.5.14 The reupon, some Members felt that the meaning would be the same. The Members also felt
that the term ‘person’ should be used in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act which
is generally used in the criminal law.
1.5.15 The Home Secretary, agreeing to the view of the Committee, subscribed as under:–
“There are two types of crimes. One is crime which can be committed only by an individual.
There a ‘person’ means an individual. The other types of crimes are those which can be
committed by an individual or by an association or a body of person or a firm. They can
also commit crime. The funds are parked many times in the names of some association,
some NGOs. In fact, Sir, we are now coming to the conclusion that cross-border trade,
which is happening, is somehow being used to finance terrorism in Kashmir through hawala.
……This has a relation to finance. We are seizing funds which have been generated by
terrorism and we are confiscating funds which have been generated by terrorism and we are
confiscating funds which have been collected to finance terrorism. We can consider
changing the definition accordingly.”
1.5.16 The Committee is not convinced by the inclusion of ‘Hindu Undivided Family’ under
the term ‘person’ in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill, 2011. Though the Home
Secretary has tried to convince the necessity of bringing HUF under the term ‘person’ in
view of the similar definition available in the Prevention of Money Laundering Act
(PMLA) and Income Tax Act, but the Committee feels that it should not be the reason
to bring the similar amendment in the UAPA Act. The Committee feels that a person
means a person only and the terminology should be so used which is generally used in
the criminal law. The Committee also feels that the suggestion of the Home Secretary
that instead of using the term ‘HUF’, it can be avoided by including persons, as defined
in the PMLA Act, is also not tenable because it would ultimately amount the same
interpretation. However, since the Home Secretary has agreed to change the definition,
the Committee suggests that a via media  may be found out under which HUF is not
brought under the purview of UAPA Act.
Definition of Associations
1.5.17 The Committee also discussed in detail the proposed amendment in Clause 2(i) where under
the term ‘person’ includes an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated

9
or not. The Committee apprehended that under the categorization of Associations, the Trade Unions
may also be included in such case they are likely to be harassed. The Home Secretary clarifying
this, stated as under:–
“This refers to an association which is being used to funnel funds for terrorisim, which is
used to give funds or divert funds or provide funds or source funds for terrorism. So, that
is where this comes in. Apart from that, any association or a company or organisation which
is engaged in printing, distribution etc. of high quality fake Indian currency , this is only
with reference to that. UAPA refers to only such crimes. …….The Associations and Unions
which are engaged in the normal activities don’t come within the ambit of this Act at all.
This Act is meant only for juridical persons, or natural-born persons who are engaged in
terrorism-related activities or unlawful activities.”
1.5.18 Some Members further pointed out that the term ‘an association of persons’
 or a body of
individual has been imported from Prevention of Money Laundering Act where the conditions and
circumstances are different whereas UAPA relates to terrorist activities. The Committee
apprehended that associations, which may be labor union, club association, football association etc.
and the proposed expression in the Bill gives leverage to the investigating officer and scope for
harassment of innocent persons. The Members also felt that there should be some parameters/
safeguards. The Members also referred to some cases where initially the wrong persons were
arrested, wrong people confessed, and the wrong trial started and wrong people punished. The
Members, therefore, felt that there should be some safeguard against such wrong proceedings.
Responding to the issue, the Home Secretary commented as under:–
“The expression ‘an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not’ is just to include those groups of people who are not incorporated according to the
companies law. This is to include those groups of people who may form a group or an
association which is not incorporated according to the company law or any other law.
Otherwise, if we had not included this, the liability would not have been fastened on that
group of persons because it has not been incorporated. So, that is a distinction between this
— a company and a firm. I would give you just one example; that would make things clear.
In the North East, there are some clubs; they call themselves ‘clubs’. They are not registered
anywhere. There are some unions; they call themselves ‘unions’, but they are not registered
under any law. But those clubs or unions get funds for terrorist groups for underground
groups and hold funds for underground groups. It is such bodies which are covered here.”
1.5.19 Further clarifying the issue, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“This whole Act is addressed towards fighting terrorism, and it is only when terrorist acts
are committed or are planned, organized or funded that this Act comes into force. About
the possibility of the Police misusing this law to harass innocent individuals, any criminal
action can be taken against any person or group of persons only when it is seen that that
person or that group has a common purpose of aiding terrorist activity or financing terrorist
activity. Unless and until that is proved or established, no crime is made out. It is only
when it is established that a person or a group or a group of persons or an association
has committed some act which is in violation of this law, that a person, association or
group becomes culpable. Now, there can be one question that there may be some members
of a association, group or a company who were not associated with that decision to keep
terrorist funds or with the decision of financing terrorism. It is possible, but there is also
a provision here that where any person, any member of a firm or any member of a company
is not associated with it, he can produce evidence for that purpose to show that he is not
associated with that. That is the safeguard. He can produce evidence to show that he is not
associated. By and large, what happens is that when a company, a firm, an association,

10
body of individuals or an individual commits a crime, he either receives funds which are
proceeds of terrorism, or collects funds for financing terrorism, or harbours funds for
financing terrorism, the presumption is that it is the office bearers, those who had in their
hands the management of that group or company or firm, who are liable, not every member.
There is no doubt that not in one case but in many cases there would have been instances
of people being accused without sufficient evidence. That is why the law says that whenever
a person is arrested he is to be produced before the Magistrate within 24 hours. If a person
is convicted of murder and this conviction has been upheld right up to the Supreme Court,
and that person has kept saying, ‘Look, I am innocent’. It is possible. What I am saying,
Sir, is that it is a question of some material or some evidence seeming to be sufficient
evidence to fasten the guilt, and some additional evidence not coming to light at that point
of time which comes to light later. So, it is not peculiar to a particular law. It is not only
an association or a firm, etc., which can be wrongly accused; individuals can also be
wrongly accused. And, there have been cases like that. So, it is not peculiar either to this
association or to this law. That is something for which the law has provided safeguards.
If a person is innocent, he has to bring that evidence before the Court. He has to be
presented before the Court. That is why, everything has not been left to the Police. That
is why, we have the courts.”
1.5.20 Money laundering and terrorism are very closely linked nowadays because a lot of
terrorism that the country faces is cross-border or international. A very large part of it is
funded through some kind of money laundering but the Committee agrees with the
apprehensions of some Members that bringing association of persons or a body of
individuals under the definition of ‘person’ gives a leverage to the investigating officer.
There could be a large number of cases of harassment of associations or unions due to
which innocent people could be affected. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry
may consider putting a rider and safeguards so that innocent people are not harassed.
1.5.21 Subject to the above observations, the Clause is adopted.
Clause 3
1.5.22 The Clause 3 intends to amend Section 6 of the principal Act with the purpose of increasing
the duration of declaring an association as unlawful from the existing two years to five years.
1.5.23 Giving the background on this, the Ministry stated that a necessity was felt to increase the
duration of declaring an association as unlawful from the existing two years to five years. In this
regard, in the background note the Ministry furnished the following justification:–
“Under Section 3 of UAP A, if the Central Government is of opinion that any association
is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may by notification in the official gazette
declare such association as “unlawful”. Further, under existing Section (6) of UAP A,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a notification issued under section (3) shall,
if the declaration made therein is confirmed by the tribunal by an order made under
section (4), remain in force for a period of 2 years from the date on which the
notification becomes effective. It is understood that several jurisdictions are imposing
such proscription for more than five years. This will give ample time to properly collect
and compile data, intelligence inputs, status of various cases filed in the court, status of
sanction obtained by the police from the State Government, etc. This will further
facilitate to reduce the cost of administering the ban. Accordingly, it is proposed to
amend the Section (6) suitably to enhance the period of ban from existing 2 years to 5
years under the said circumstances.”

11
1.5.24 A Member of the Committee felt that the duration of five years is not sufficient, and should
be increased. Replying to this, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“Right now, once you hold an association to be unlawful, and, after the tribunal has
upheld that finding, then, the association stays banned only for two years. Take for
example, SIMI. After every two years, we have to bring a fresh proposal. The whole exercise
itself takes a year, and, then, the Tribunal takes three, four months. So, that is why, it is
being increased to five years…… we are open but then there can be accusation from the
other parties that having a very long period will be draconian.”
1.5.25 The Clause is adopted without change.
Clause 4
1.5.26 The Clause 4 proposes amendment in Section 15 of chapter IV of the principal Act which
deals with punishment for terrorist activities. As per the existing provisions of UAPA under Section
15, an international/inter Governmental organization has not been covered explicitly. The same is
now proposed to be incorporated in the clause (c) of Section 15. Similarly, all the 9 treaties
annexed to the CFT have now been mentioned under a new Schedule to the Act to be read with
the proposed Section 15(2). A separate clause is proposed to be inserted after existing clause (c)
which will state “demands any bomb, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or fire arms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious or other chemicals or any
biological, radiological, nuclear material or device with the intention of aiding, abetting or
committing terrorism”.
1.5.27 The Ministry also stated that due consideration has also been given to economic security;
being an important dimension of national security. Accordingly, production or smuggling or
circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian currencies (paper, coin or of any other material) are
proposed to be explicitly criminalized. For this purpose, high quality counterfeit Indian currency is
proposed to be defined by providing a separate explanation under Section 15.
1.5.28 On being asked to clarify the reasons for inserting the words “economic security” after the
word “security” in the clause 1 of sub-section (1) of Section 15, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“Economic security is an aspect, which until now, in our common understanding of, and,
fight against terrorism, has been overlooked. Economic security or stability of a country is
not undermined only by the use of bombs and guns, and, we have associated terrorism only
with the use of bombs, guns, and, killing people, whereas the economic security of a
country is as important as other aspects of security.”
1.5.29 One Member pointed out that the Reserve Bank of India takes care of the economic stability
of the country through its Monetary Policy whereas the proposed amendment also talks of
economic security and wanted to know the source and reasons for bringing the term ‘economic
security’ in the proposed amendment. He also felt that the word ‘economic security’ should be
defined in the definition clause and only thereafter it should be inserted. Responding to that the
Home Secretary stated as under:–
“Let me explain as to why it has come. Sir, over the past many years, we have been seeing
that one particular country has been printing fake Indian currency notes in factories, which
we have reasons to believe, are sovereign factories belonging to that Government, and, they
have been determinedly pushing such fake Indian currency notes into our country for two
reasons. One, of course, is to finance terrorism directly, and, the other is to disturb our
economic security, and, the quantities are huge. So, that is something which we need to
fight against. That is another instrument, which one of our adversaries has hit upon.”

12
1.5.30 The Home Secretary clarifying that the provisions have been related with the sovereign
country or the nation which is involved in terrorist activities stated as under:–
“There are two things. One is the point which you made about some people being caught
because of some fake currency notes coming out, four or five. I think, what you wanted
to put across was that counterfeiting can also be for purposes other than terrorism. It need
not necessarily be associated with terrorism. That is why what we have criminalized here is
not counterfeiting which is done by other small-time groups. What we have criminalized here
is counterfeiting which can be done only by sovereign parties. That is why we have said
high quality counterfeit notes, and we have defined that high quality counterfeit notes will
be such counterfeit notes which have duplicated the features which have been mentioned in,
I think, Schedule 3. Basically, I would like to draw your attention to this. I will read out
the section again. “Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the
unity, integrity, security, economic security or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike
terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in
any foreign country” by doing any of these things, and one of the things is damage to the
monetary stability of India by way of production. That means clause 1 by itself is not
sufficient. You have to read it with sub-clauses (a), (i), (ii), (iii), (iiia), etc. Sir, sub-clause
(iiia) says, “damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling
or circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other
material.”
1.5.31 The Committee feels that the objective to provide definition is to relate economic
security with the terrorist organizations indulging in counterfeit currency and circulating
them in a big way. This is necessary to support the system.
1.5.32 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the term ‘economic security’ may be
defined in Section 2 of the Act before its insertion in Section 15.
1.5.33 Subject to the above observation, the Clause is adopted.
Clause 5
1.5.34 The Clause 5 seeks to omit Section 16A of the principal Act as first part of the provision
has been taken as new clause (d) of Section 15 and the punishment part is proposed to be covered
by Section 16 which is relating to punishment for terrorist act.
1.5.35 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 6
1.5.36 The Clause 6 seeks to amend Section 17 of the principal Act with the purpose of redefining
the criminalization of raising funds for terrorist act. The Section 17 of UAPA is proposed to be
amended by inserting following phrases in between, – ‘whether from a legitimate or illegitimate
source’, ‘or raise or collect’, ‘a legitimate or illegitimate source’, ‘in full or in part’, ‘or by a
terrorist organization or by a terrorist gang or by an individual terrorist’. For the sake of the clarity,
participating, organizing or directing in any of the acts mentioned in the Section is proposed to be
explicitly criminalized as an offence by providing an “Explanation” under section 17. Similarly,
raising funds through production or smuggling or circulation of counterfeit Indian currency note
is proposed to be explicitly criminalized by providing an “Explanation” under Section 17. Keeping
in view the ongoing trend of providing “Social Security” type support to the families of the
terrorists’ (killed/arrested or still active), raising or collecting or providing funds to an individual
terrorist, terrorist gang or terrorist organisation for the purpose not specifically defined under

13
Section 15 is also proposed to be criminalised as an offence under Section 17. Accordingly, an
“Explanation” is proposed to be added to section 17.
1.5.37 One of the Members pointed out that terrorists have been collecting lakhs of rupees for
terrorist activities. They also serve notices to the people, and shoot those who do not oblige. Even
the members of their family are killed and their houses are attacked. He, therefore, felt that in this
case, the minimum punishment should be ten years which may extend to imprisonment for life and
shall also be liable to fine and the amount of fine has not been defined here. Responding to the
query raised, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“The fine can be anything which the court, in its discretion, seeks to impose. It depends
upon the quantity of funds which are being collected or which have been collected. If the
funds collected are to the tune of Rs.50 crores or Rs.100 crores, the fine will be
proportionate. …….the maximum punishment for this is punishment for life. Five years is
the minimum punishment. So, that means, no court can give a punishment of less than five
years.”
1.5.38 The Committee, however, felt that the minimum punishment should be increased to
seven years.
1.5.39 The Ministry informed the Committee that the words ‘or provide funds’ in the
proposed Section 17 after the words ‘collect funds’ were erroneously omitted.
1.5.40 In view of the above, the Committee suggest the following amendments may be made
in the Clause 6 of the Bill:
(i) In line 13, after the words ‘collect funds’ add the words ‘or provide funds’;
(ii) In line 19, the words ‘five years’ be substituted by the words ‘seven years’.
1.5.41 The Committee further recommends that the quantum of fine may also be defined.
1.5.42 Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 7
1.5.43 Clause 7 seeks to insert fresh Sections 22A after Section 22 of the principal Act which
gives provision for offence by company. On the lines of the Coinage Bill, 2011 of Ministry of
Finance a new Section 22A is proposed to be incorporated in order to criminalise the offence
committed on behalf of company with regard to “counterfeiting” offences. The “Company” and
“Director” have been defined by giving a separate “explanation” under the proposed Section. A new
Section 22B is proposed to be incorporated in order to criminalise the offence committed by
Societies or Trusts. The “Society” and “Director” have been defined by giving a separate
explanation under the proposed Section. Moreover, the provision for punishment for offences by
Companies, Societies or Trusts is proposed to be incorporated as a new Section 22C. It is
proposed to impose to a minimum fine of Rs. 5 crore which may extend to Rs. 10 crore for
offences under the Act.
1.5.44 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 8
1.5.45 Clause 8 proposes to amend in Section 23 of the principal Act. In order to widen the scope
of enhanced penalties, unauthorized possession of high quality counterfeit Indian currency is also
proposed to be brought under the enhanced penalty category under Section 23.

14
1.5.46 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 9
1.5.47 Clause 9 proposes change in the heading of Chapter V of the principal Act by inserting the
words ‘or any property intended to be used for terrorism’ after the word ‘Terrorism’.
1.5.48 The Committee pointed out that according to the Government of Karnataka, the words ‘or
any property intended to be used for terrorism’ makes the heading of the chapter too long and
inconvenient to use. The Home Secretary replied that the proposed amendment is appropriate. The
Committee agreed to the viewpoint of the Home Secretary.
1.5.49 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 10
1.5.50 Clause 10 intends to substitute a Section 24 by two new sections 24 and 24A. The
proposed Section 24 provides for reference to proceeds of terrorism to include any property
intended to be used for terrorism. The proposed section 24A provides “confiscation of
corresponding value” and enabling the law enforcement agencies to forfeit/confiscate the property
of corresponding value.
1.5.51 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 11
1.5.52 Clause 11 seeks to add three new sub-Sections in Section 33 of the principal Act. Sub-
section (3) provides to empower the courts to forfeit property relating to offence of counterfeiting
sub-Section (4) is based on the recommendations of FA TF to empower the court for attachment/
forfeiture of the value of proceeds of terrorism. Sub-Section (5) is based on the recommendations
of FATF to empower the court on the basis of material evidence to confiscate the property of all
kind of the accused in case of death of a person or a person is declared a proclaimed offender.
1.5.53 The Committee sought to know whether the punishment provided in the proposed sub-
sections (3) and (4) of Section 33 would be as per the Indian Panel Code (IPC) as counterfeiting
of currency note comes under the IPC. Clarifying this, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“There are two sides to it. One is that if somebody is guilty of either collecting funds or
being involved in a terrorist act or providing funds to a terrorist, he will be punished and
he will have to go to jail or he will have to pay fine. That is one part of it. The other
part is that the property which he has amassed either through terrorism or the property
which he has collected for financing terrorism will be forfeited. Section 33 deals with that.
The forfeiture is against the funds and the punishment is against the persons involved…….
apart from the punishment prescribed under the Indian Penal Code, specific punishment has
been prescribed under the proposed amendment because we have taken this under the
definition of a terrorist act.”
1.5.54 When a Member sought to know whether the Ministry would define high quality counterfeit
Indian currency, the Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs responded as under:–
“The punishment which is prescribed in section 33 will be imposed only if it is a high
quality counterfeit Indian currency. This section deals with only forfeiture……we have
defined three features in the Third Schedule. If there is a violation of these three features,
it will be a high quality counterfeit currency and it will be attested by a notified expert of
a forensic laboratory.”

15
1.5.55 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 12
1.5.56 Clause 12 seeks to amend Section 35 of the principal Act in order to empower the Central
Government to add/remove or amend the contents of the Second and Third Schedule by
Notification. The Chairman sought to know as to after a legislation is passed, how can a schedule
be removed by an executive order. Clarifying this, the Home Secretary furnished the following
justifications for amendment:
“There are three Schedules. The First Schedule would have a list of organizations which are
proscribed under this Act. Now, we would need to either add to that list of organizations
if we proscribe any additional ones, or remove any organization from that list. That is an
existing provision. So, that shall be the provision for the First Schedule. Earlier, we had
only one Schedule. Now we are increasing it by two more. The Second Schedule is a list
of UN Conventions which we have acceded to and the offences under which we are
criminalizing under the amendment. So, if in future some additional Convention is added
and we accede to it – and one of the requirements would be that we criminalise it as a
terrorist act –Government will have this facility of adding to that….if we feel that some
terrorist organization or some organization that has been proscribed as a terrorist
organization for some reasons, either because it has gone to a court and that order of
proscription has been set aside or whatever, for any reason, if it is decided to remove a
terrorist organization from the Schedule, that provision has to be there. That is an existing
provision.”
1.5.57 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 13
1.5.58 Clause 13 perta ins to amendment in Section 40 of the principal Act which is intended to
extending the scope of offence of raising funds for a terrorist organization. Production or
smuggling or circulation of counterfeit Indian currency as a means of raising or collecting or
providing funds to terrorist organization is also proposed to be criminalized under section 40.
Accordingly, an explanation is proposed to be inserted to this effect.
1.5.59 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 14
1.5.60 Clause 14 seeks to make amendment to the effect that the existing Schedule shall be
renumbered as the First Schedule, and after the First Schedule as so renumbered, the Second and
the Third Schedules are also proposed to be inserted.
1.5.61 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Enacting Formula and the Title
1.5.62 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential/drafting nature, namely “2011” and ‘Sixty-Second’ to be substituted
by ‘2012’ and ‘Sixty-third’ year, respectively.
1.5.63 The Committee adopts the Bill as amended and commends that the Bill as amended
may be passed subject to other observations made by it.

16
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
The Committee is not convinced by the inclusion of ‘Hindu Undivided Family’ under the
term ‘person’ in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill, 2011. Though the Home Secretary has
tried to convince the necessity of bringing HUF under the term ‘person’ in view of the similar
definition available in the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) and Income Tax Act, but
the Committee feels that it should not be the reason to bring the similar amendment in the UAPA
Act. The Committee feels that a person means a person only and the terminology should be so
used which is generally used in the criminal law. The Committee also feels that the suggestion of
the Home Secretary that instead of using the term ‘HUF’, it can be avoided by including persons,
as defined in the PMLA Act, is also not tenable because it would ultimately amount the same
interpretation. However, since the Home Secretary has agreed to change the definition, the
Committee suggests that a via media may be found out under which HUF is not brought under the
purview of UAPA Act. (Para 1.5.16)
Money laundering and terrorism are very closely linked nowadays because a lot of
terrorism that the country faces is cross-border or international. A very large part of it is funded
through some kind of money laundering but the Committee agrees with the apprehensions of
some Members that bringing association of persons or a body of individuals under the definition of
‘person’ gives a leverage to the investigating officer. There could be a large number of cases of
harassment of associations or unions due to which innocent people could be affected. The
Committee is of the view that the Ministry may consider putting a rider and safeguards so that
innocent people are not harassed. (Para 1.5.20)
The Committee feels that the objective to provide definition is to relate economic
security with the terrorist organizations indulging in counterfeit currency and circulating them
in a big way. This is necessary to support the system. (Para 1.5.31)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the term ‘economic security’ may be
defined in Section 2 of the Act before its insertion in Section 15. (Para 1.5.32)
The Committee, however, felt that the minimum punishment should be increased to
seven years. (Para 1.5.38)
The Ministry informed the Committee that the words ‘or provide funds’ in the proposed
Section 17 after the words ‘collect funds’ were erroneously omitted. (Para 1.5.39)
In view of the above, the Committee suggests the following amendments may be made in
the Clause 6 of the Bill:
(i) In line 13, after the words ‘collect funds’ add the words ‘or provide funds’;
(ii) In line 19, the words ‘five years’ be substituted by the words ‘seven years’.  (Para 1.5.40)
The Committee further recommends that the quantum of fine may also be defined.
(Para 1.5.41)
Enacting Formula and the Title
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which are of
consequential/drafting nature, namely “2011” and ‘Sixty-Second’ to be substituted by ‘2012’ and
‘Sixty-third’ year, respectively. (Para 1.5.62)
The Committee adopts the Bill as amended and commends that the Bill as amended may
be passed subject to other observations made by it. (Para 1.5.63)

MINUTES

18

19
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st February, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L. K. Advani
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
12. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Babulal Marandi
15. Shri Baijayant Panda
16. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
17. Shri Adhi Sankar
18. Shri Ravneet Singh
19. Shri Harsh Vardhan
20. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
19

20
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Chadha, Special Secretary
3. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary
6. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary
7. Shri M. Gopala Reddy, Joint Secretary
8. Shri G.V .V. Sarma, Joint Secretary
9. Shri N. Sandhu, Director, Intelligence Bureau
10. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director, Intelligence Bureau
11. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
12. Shri Avinash Mishra, Director
13. Shri R.K. Suman, Director
14. Dr. V . Candavelou, Director
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
3. Shri S.R. Mishra, Deputy Legal Adviser
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
1. Shri P.K. Mishra, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
2. Shri Y .P. Singh, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
informed them that the meeting had been called to:
(i) hear the presentation of the Home Secretary on the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Bill, 2011; and
(ii) * * *
2.1–3.0 * * *
[At this stage the witnesses were called in]
3.1 The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary, Law Secretary and Legislative Secretary to
the meeting of the Committee. ***.
*** Relate to other matters.

21
3.2–3.4 * * *
II. Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
4.0 The Chairman then asked the Home Secretary to make presentation on the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill. The Joint Secretary of the Ministry while elaborating on the
salient features of the Bill briefed the Committee about the circumstances which led to bringing the
Bill. He submitted that the Financial Action Task Force, an Inter-Governmental organisation set up
to devise policies to combat money laundering and terror financing, admitted India as its
34th member in June, 2010 and on the basis of commitment made by India at the time of
admission to the said FA TF, various legislative and other legally binding measures were required to
be taken on a medium term basis, i.e., by 31
st March, 2012. Accordingly, an inter-ministerial Group
was constituted to evaluate the existing provisions of UAPA in relation to both –FA TF discussions
and internal assessment. The proposed changes (as recommended by FATF) were found to be
relevant and required.
4.1 He stated that the Bill seeks certain amendments in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
(UAPA), 1967. The Act deals with matters relating to combating of terrorism in all its facets,
including terrorist financing and raising funds for a terrorist act, holding proceeds of terrorism,
membership of a terrorist organization, support given to a terrorist organization and raising fund
for a terrorist organization.
4.2 He further stated that this Act also provides effective prevention of certain unlawful
activities of individuals and associations and for matters connected therewith. He added that the Act
was amended in 2004 to further criminalise various facets of terrorism and in 2008 to overcome
some of the difficulties in its enforcement and to update/bring the legislation at par with
international commitments and make certain provisions that made the Act more effective and
stringent. He further added that the proposed amendments to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1967, aim to bring more clarity to the existing legal regime, and remove the deficiencies
identified in the implementation of the provisions of the said Act by the Central and State
intelligence and investigating agencies. Then he elaborated upon the proposed amendments in the
Bill and the objective sought to be achieved through these amendments.
The Committee then decided to have further discussion on the Bill in the next sitting.
5.0–5.4 * * *
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.51 
P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 1 st March, 2012.
*** Relate to other matters.

22
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 1 st March, 2012 in Room No. 53,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
12. Shri Adhi Sankar
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
16. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
22

23
2. Shri Ajay Chadha, Special Secretary
3. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
5. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary
7. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary
8. Shri G.V .V. Sarma, Joint Secretary
9. Shri N. Sandhu, Director of Intelligence Bureau
10. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director, Intelligence Bureau
11. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
12. Shri Avinash Mishra, Director
13. Shri R.K. Suman, Director
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shrimati Sarda Jain, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
1. Shri P.K. Mishra, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
2. Shri Y .P. Singh, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
I. Introduction
2.0 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised the Members of the agenda of the day i.e.  clause-by-clause consideration of the
Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and to further hear the presentation of the Home Secretary on
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011.
2.1 * * *
2.2 * * *
2.3 Regarding the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011, the Chairman
recapitulated that the Committee heard presentation of the Ministry of Home Affairs on this Bill in
the last sitting held on 21
st February, 2012 and due to paucity of time, the Committee could not
seek clarifications from the Home Secretary on the provisions of the Bill. He added that the
Members may seek clarifications from the Home Secretary on the Bill in the sitting.
2.4 The Chairman apprised the Members that the Secretariat had received a communication from
the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice the previous day, wherein, the Legislative
Secretary had sought exemption from attending that day’s meeting on account of his pre-occupation
with the time bound Union Budget Work Finance Bill, 2012 and he has deputed the concerned Joint
Secretary and Legislative Counsel to represent the Legislative Department during the meeting.
*** Relate to other matters.

24
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3.0 The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Department of legal Affairs and Legislative Department. He asked the Home Secretary whether he
has come with the information assured in the last meeting on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill,
2011 and if not, how long it will take to come back to the Committee with the required
information. He added that the Committee would take up clause by clause consideration of the
Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and then discuss the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Bill, 2011.
4.0–5.4 * * *
III. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
6.0 The  Chairman stated that the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 has not
been discussed properly by the Committee and during the coming Parliament Session also it will
not be possible to focus enough attention on this Bill. He asked the Home Secretary whether it was
mandatory that has to be enacted by 31
st March, 2012 due to international obligation and what
would be the implication, if the Committee seeks further extension up to 30 th March, 2012. He
added that the Committee has not even heard anybody and has also not taken the opinion of the
States. He further added that the Finance Committee which is considering the Money Laundering
Bill, has also not done anything.
6.1 The Home Secretary replied that  India has got the membership of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) on the assurance that it will comply with certain conditions in the time horizons,
which the Government of India had committed to them and accordingly, the Government of India
had committed that it would legislate by 31
st March, 2012 and it was urgent. He assured the
Committee that he will let the Committee know about its urgency before the next meeting of the
Committee.
6.2 The Committee then decided to request the Chairman Rajya Sabha to give further extension
upto March 30, 2012 as 31
st is Saturday, for presentation of report on the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 and, for Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
6.3 The Home Secretary submitted that  the amendments proposed in the UAPA Bill are of two
categories. He added that some are basically clarificatory in nature, and, those clarifications have
been given. Though the Ministry felt that the Act, as it stood, was comprehensive and covered
those aspects, but FATF wanted them to be clarified further. He mentioned that some amendments
are only in respect of fake Indian currency.
6.4 The Committee then decided to take the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill,
2011 and the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011 in the next meeting.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 3.57 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

25
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13 th March, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri L.K. Advani
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
9. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Chadha, Special Secretary
3. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
5. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary
6. Shri M. Gopala Reddy, Joint Secretary
25

26
7. Shri G.V .V. Sarma, Joint Secretary
8. Shri Avinash Mishra, Director
9. Shri N. Sandhu, Director of Intelligence Bureau
10. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director, Intelligence Bureau
11. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
12. Dr. V . Candavelou, Director
13. Shri G.R. Taneja, Consultant
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
1. Shri Thomas Mathew, Joint Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs
2. Shri P.K. Mishra, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
3. Shri Y .P. Singh, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
4. Shrimati M.V . Bhanumathi, OSD, FATF Cell
2.0 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the  Members and apprised them about the agenda of
the day which was to adopt two reports namely, the draft 157
th Report on the Arms (Amendment)
Bill, 2011, and the draft 158 th Report on the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill,
2011. After some discussion, both the Reports were adopted with some changes.
2.1–4.0 * * *
5.0 Regarding the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011, the Home Secretary
clarified that about the timing, he had an interaction with the Ministry of Finance and if they do
not adhere to the timeline, then the country’s international commitment would be compromised. He
further informed that in the meeting of FATF in June, the country’s membership process would
not end but India will have to give fresh commitment on the timelines again. The non-compliance
with the action plan may also lead to India being placed under the ‘enhanced follow up procedure’
which, in turn, would require giving a progress report every four months to the FATF, which
would also be discussed in the FATF Plenary, which is held every four months. In case of
continuing non-compliance of a country to meet its commitment, FA TF may send a high level
mission to meet the senior political executive of the concerned country. The FATF Plenary has
recently endorsed sending a high level mission to Turkey, an FATF member country.
6.0 The Chairman then informed that since  in the House, the President’s Address, the Railway
Budget, the General Budget, all discussions are lined up, Members would not be able to come to
the meeting. Moreover, the Committee had called for response from the State Governments. None
of the State Governments had responded till then, though the time was given up to 5
th March. He
further added that since the Committee has to meet to discuss, and, then, come to the conclusion,
it was difficult to complete it before 30
th March. The Chairman, however requested th e Members
to go through the Bill and then come out with their suggestions so that the Committee could have
a discussion because none of the States have responded so far.
7.0 Thereafter, the representative from the Ministry of Finance  made a request that if this Bill
be passed by 31
st March, 2012 it would help India in many ways as India has already given an
*** Relate to other matterss.

27
action plan and was committed to passing the Bills by March 31, 2012. He also added that the
consequence of not passing this Bill would be that India would be put in the list of enhanced
‘follow-up’ of countries which would include countries like Pakistan and Argentina. He also pointed
out certain economic, political and security-related consequences of failure to pass the legislation.
8.0 The Chairman mentioned that when the Money Laundering Bill was also pending before the
Finance Committee, why there was insistence for UAPA Bill’s early passage.
9.0 Thereafter some Members sought clarifications which inter-alia included: definition of
‘Hindu Undivided Family’, definition of ‘Association’, role of States Governments etc.
9.1 Some more issues were raised during the sitting which were replied to accordingly.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. to meet again on 19 th March, 2012.

28
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 19 th March, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
11. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Shri Baijayant Panda
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Chadha, Special Secretary
3. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
28

29
4. Shri N. Sandhu, Director of Intelligence Bureau
5. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director, Intelligence Bureau
6. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
7. Dr. V . Candavelou, Director
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
3. Shri S.R. Mishra, Deputy Legal Adviser
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
1. Shri Thomas Mathew, Joint Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs
2. Shri P.K. Mishra, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
3. Shri Y .P. Singh, OSD, Department of Economic Affairs
4. Shrimati M.V . Bhanumathi, OSD, FATF Cell
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman  welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. He
apprised them the agenda of the day which was to take up the clause-by-clause consideration of
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011. He informed members that Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, has directed the Committee to present its Report on the Bill by 31
st March, 2012 and
requested them to complete clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on that day itself so that a
Report on the same could be presented to the House.
2.1 The Chairman, thereafter, asked the Members to give their views on the provisions of the
Bill and seek clarification from the Home Secretary thereon so that clause-by-clause consideration
of the Bill could be taken up.
[On Arrival of the Officials]
2.3  The Chairman then welcomed  the Home Secretary, the Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs, the Secretary, Legislative Department and other concerned officers. He asked the Home
Secretary to further present his views on the Bill after which clause-by-clause consideration of the
Bill could be taken up.
3.0 CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
3.0 The Committee, then, took up the Clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The details of
the clause-wise discussion are enumerated below:–
Clause 2
3.1 Clause 2 seeks amendment in Section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA),
1967 which pertains to definitions of the select terms used in the Act. Under Clause 2 (i) after
clause (ea) of the principal Act, a new clause (eb) is proposed to be inserted to define the “person”
as an individual, a Hindu undivided family, a company, a firm, an association of persons or a body

30
of individuals, whether incorporated or not, every artificial juridical person, not falling within any
of the preceding sub-clauses and any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any person
falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses.
3.1.1 The Committee was apprised that under the existing definition of proceeds of terrorism, the
property belonging to an individual terrorist has not been explicitly covered. Further, at present the
definition of funds/property intended to be used for terrorism is embedded in the last clause of
definition of “proceeds of terrorism” i.e. existing Section 2(g). In order to make this, i.e. fund/
property intended to be used for terrorism more explicit/clear, existing sub-clause (g) is proposed
to be subdivided as proposed in clause 2 (ii) of the Bill. Similar cascading changes are proposed
in Chapter V dealing with “forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism”
3.1.2 Under Clause 2(iii) the definition of property under Section 2(h) is proposed to be further
refined in order to cover the entire range of property and assets by inserting the phrase ‘including
but not limited to’. The proposed amendment intends to facilitate to bring the definition of funds
in line with CFT .
Inclusion of Hindu Undivided Family under the definition of “Person”
3.1.3 The Committee discussed in detailed the definition of the term ‘person’ in the proposed
amendment particularly with reference to Hindu Undivided Family. Members expressed reservations
over bringing Hindu Undivided Family under the definition of person. The concerned Joint
Secretary in this regard clarified as under:–
“In the F ATF recommendations, one of the concerns is the non-profit organizations being
used as means for terrorist financing and funding. Therefore, there was a need to
categorically capture the definition of person consistent with PMLA, Income Tax Act. When
you talk of non-profit organizations, which become charitable organizations or trusts, all
these become germane to the assessment.”
3.1.4 The Committee pointed out that the definition of Hindu Undivided Family (HUF) is not
convincing as the issue connected with the Income Tax and Prevention of Money Laundering Act
are altogether different where there is a relevance for HUF. But UAPA the issue is connected with
terrorism where HUF does not come into the picture. Clarifying this, the Home Secretary stated
as under:–
“Under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, ‘terrorism’ is a predicate offence. That
means, the Prevention of Money Laundering Act will operate against the funds which arise
out of a category of crimes. There are a number of categories of crimes, one of which is
terrorism. So, if any fund which is generated by terrorism is involved, then, the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act operates and this Act also operates. Such actions come under
both the Acts. Therefore, there is a requirement to make sure that these sections correspond
to each other.”
3.1.5 On the Committee’s observation that the definition is not convincing and there is a need to
change the wordings, the concerned Joint Secretary stated as under:–
“As finance is the lifeline of terrorism, the endevaour of the Government is to also invoke
provisions of various relevant laws, such as PMLA, Income Tax Act, Foreign Exchange
Management Act to check financing of terrorism. It may kindly be noted that the offence
of financing of terrorism is a scheduled offence in the PMLA...... It is not about a
legitimate Hindu Undivided Family or Trade Unions; it is a game of misusing the Trust. So,
the entities may not know and they are exploited. So, what the FATF said is, “Aim to put
in place such legal provisions that would prevent misuse of legal structures so that they are

31
not exploited for channelising funds for terrorism or money laundering. Special
recommendation no. 8 which relates to non-profit organisation reads as follows – it is a
recommendation — “Country should review the adequacy of law and regulation that relates
to entity, that can be abused for financing of terrorism. Non-profit organisations are,
particularly, vulnerable and country should ensure that they cannot be misused (i) by
terrorist organisations posing as legitimate entities; (2) to exploit legitimate entities as
conduit for terrorist financing, including for the purpose of escaping asset freezing
measures. Because when we come back to asset freezing, what they will do is, without the
Trust or the Association knowing, they will park the money as a chairtable donation and
park it there. (3) to conceal or obscure the clandestine diversion of funds intended for
legitimate purposes to various organizations. It is in this background that IMG felt that
while we strive to bring laws in consonance with international standard, it would only be
befitting to harmonize the definitions and provisions of related domestic laws and
accordingly suggested that a person may be defined in the Amendment Bill accordingly. So,
for all the three Acts which feed into the UAPA, we cannot have a distinct definition and
this is more in terms of a preventive measure because it is a game of misusing the trust
of a legitimate organization and using it to hide funds. That is the purpose.”
3.1.6 The Commi ttee sought the observation of the Law Secretary on the definition of the term
‘HUF’ in the proposed amendment. The Law Secretary stated that the Ministry of Law & Justice
had examined the issue and fully concurs with the viewpoints of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Thereon, the Home Secretary further clarified as under:–
“When we are criminalizing acts by persons, we include the following categories; and
persons includes both ‘a natural person’ as well as ‘a legal or juridical person’. The
categories of juridical persons are: company, firm, society, association, etc. These are all
categories of legal persons or juridical persons. Now, Hindu Undivided Families also in the
financial terms are legal/juridical persons. So, when you are expounding on that definition
of person or a juridical person, then you include all these categories. Now, this does not
mean that any firm will get prosecuted just because it is a firm, or, any company will get
prosecuted because it is a company, or, an association will get prosecuted because it is an
association. It only means that if that association or firm is used to park funds meant for
financing terrorism, if it is used to raise and collect funds for financing terrorism, then,
that firm will get prosecuted.”
3.1.7 The Members of the Committee felt that the definition of the term HUF in the Income Tax
Law is meant to give some relief in the Income Tax to the people belonging to that category, and
using HUF as an association or a firm is beyond convincing. The Home Secretary clarifying the
point replied as under:–
“The question is whether the funds, resources or property can be held in the name of a
Hindu Undivided Family or not. If funds can be held in the name of a Hindu Undivided
Family, then funds could be parked there without the Hindu Undivided Family knowing the
origin of those funds. And because those funds are parked in the name of a Hindu
Undivided Family, if it is not included, it will be outside the mischief of this law.”
3.1.8 The Committee wanted to know as per the provision of the proposed amendment whether
a criminal act committed by the head of the family and the funds parked under his name would
implicate the entire HUF, the Joint Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance made
the following observation:–
“In the Prevention of Money Laundering Act also, ‘person’ has been defined as an
individual, a Hindu Undivided Family, a company, a firm, an association of persons or a

32
body of individuals and every other artificial juridical persons, etc. We are in agreement
with the logic which has been given by the Home Secretary and officials of the Home
Ministry. Actually, certain measures are being taken to prevent money laundering. There are
certain obligations for the financial institutions, banking companies, etc. When they are
dealing with opening of accounts, etc., whether of an individual or a company, they are
subjected to certain rigors. They have to follow the ‘Know Your Customer’ norms and also
apply customer due diligence, etc. Now, it is only through these measures, whether it is
individual accounts or any company’ s accounts, that an oversight mechanism is put in place
by which it can be inferred whether any money laundering has taken place. So, these
entities are subjected to some kind of a reporting system. The financial institutions are
supposed to apply the same due diligence measures whether these are accounts of
individuals, companies or corporates, etc. So, because a large number of Hindu Undivided
Families were also holding bank accounts, they could not be separated. That is why, they
have also been kept under the purview of the definition of ‘persons’.”
3.1.9 Some Members pointed out that Income Tax Act, Prevention of the Money Laundering Act
and Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act have different scope and purpose, the later being related
to the criminal activities of a person. Therefore, it is necessary to bring in all other such
corporates, which are relevant in the case of financial matters, but not relevant insofar as individual
crimes are concerned.
3.1.10 The Home Secretary made an attempt to convince the Committee on bringing HUF under
the definition “Person” as under:–
“Our stand before the financial action taskforce was that ‘person’ includes a juridical
person and, therefore, no further exposition is necessary. The Financial Action Task Force
was not agreeable. They wanted a detailed definition that would include companies, firms
and all other juridical persons to be specified. Now how this Act is concerned with people
who are bodies, associations, etc., in two ways. One is with regard to attachment of
proceeds of terrorism or attachment of funds for financing terrorism or for future funds for
financing terrorism and for forfeiture of funds generated out of terrorism. The other is
through FIC, that is, Fake Indian Currency, distribution thereof, printing thereof, etc.”
3.1.11 The Home Secretary further opined that:–
“The term ‘HUF’ can be avoided by this mechanism by saying this will also include persons
as defined in section so and so of the PMLA Act. That is suffice.”
3.1.12 The reupon, some Members felt that the meaning would be the same. The Members also felt
that the term ‘person’ should be used in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act which
is generally used in the criminal law.
3.1.13 The Home Secretary, agreeing to the view of the Committee, subscribed as under:–
“There are two types of crimes. One is crime which can be committed only by an individual.
There a ‘person’ means an individual. The other types of crimes are those which can be
committed by an individual or by an association or a body of person or a firm. They can
also commit crime. The funds are parked many times in the names of some association,
some NGOs. In fact, Sir, we are now coming to the conclusion that cross-border trade,
which is happening, is somehow being used to finance terrorism in Kashmir through hawala.
……This has a relation to finance. We are seizing funds which have been generated by
terrorism and we are confiscating funds which have been generated by terrorism and we are
confiscating funds which have been collected to finance terrorism. We can consider
changing the definition accordingly.”

33
3.1.14 The Committee is not convinced by the inclusion of ‘Hindu Undivided Family’ under
the term ‘person’ in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill, 2011. Though the Home
Secretary has tried to convince the necessity of bringing HUF under the term ‘person’ in
view of the similar definition available in the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA)
and Income Tax Act, but the Committee feels that it should not be the reason to bring the
similar amendment in the UAPA Act. The Committee feels that a person means a person
only and the terminology should be so used which is generally used in the criminal law. The
Committee also feels that the suggestion of the Home Secretary that instead of using the
term ‘HUF’, it can be avoided by including persons, as defined in the PMLA Act, is also not
tenable because it would ultimately amount the same interpretation. However, since the
Home Secretary has agreed to change the definition, the Committee suggests that a via
media may be found out under which HUF is not brought under the purview of UAPA Act.
Definition of Associations
3.1.15 The Committee also discussed in detail the proposed amendment in Clause 2(i) where under
the term ‘person’ includes an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not. The Committee apprehended that under the categorization of Associations, the Trade Unions
may also be included in such case they are likely to be harassed. The Home Secretary clarifying
this, stated as under:–
“This refers to an association which is being used to funnel funds for terrorisim, which is
used to give funds or divert funds or provide funds or source funds for terrorism. So, that
is where this comes in. Apart from that, any association or a company or organisation which
is engaged in printing, distribution etc. of high quality fake Indian currency , this is only
with reference to that. UAPA refers to only such crimes. …….The Associations and Unions
which are engaged in the normal activities don’t come within the ambit of this Act at all.
This Act is meant only for juridical persons, or natural-born persons who are engaged in
terrorism-related activities or unlawful activities.”
3.1.16 Some Members further pointed out that the term ‘an association of persons or a body of
individual has been imported from Prevention of Money Laundering Act where the conditions and
circumstances are different whereas UAPA relates to terrorist activities. The Committee
apprehended that associations, which may be labor union, club association, football association etc.
and the proposed expression in the Bill gives leverage to the investigating officer and scope for
harassment of innocent persons. The Members also felt that there should be some parameters/
safeguards. The Members also referred to some cases where initially the wrong persons were
arrested, wrong people confessed, and the wrong trial started and wrong people punished. The
Members, therefore, felt that there should be some safeguard against such wrong proceedings.
Responding to the issue, the Home Secretary commented as under:–
“The expression ‘an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not’ is just to include those groups of people who are not incorporated according to the
companies law. This is to include those groups of people who may form a group or an
association which is not incorporated according to the company law or any other law.
Otherwise, if we had not included this, the liability would not have been fastened on that
group of persons because it has not been incorporated. So, that is a distinction between this
— a company and a firm. I would give you just one example; that would make things clear.
In the North East, there are some clubs; they call themselves ‘clubs’. They are not registered
anywhere. There are some unions; they call themselves ‘unions’, but they are not registered
under any law. But those clubs or unions get funds for terrorist groups for underground
groups and hold funds for underground groups. It is such bodies which are covered here.”

34
3.1.17 Further clarifying the issue, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“This whole Act is addressed towards fighting terrorism, and it is only when terrorist acts
are committed or are planned, organized or funded that this Act comes into force. About
the possibility of the Police misusing this law to harass innocent individuals, any criminal
action can be taken against any person or group of persons only when it is seen that that
person or that group has a common purpose of aiding terrorist activity or financing terrorist
activity. Unless and until that is proved or established, no crime is made out. It is only
when it is established that a person or a group or a group of persons or an association
has committed some act which is in violation of this law, that a person, association or
group becomes culpable. Now, there can be one question that there may be some members
of a association, group or a company who were not associated with that decision to keep
terrorist funds or with the decision of financing terrorism. It is possible, but there is also
a provision here that where any person, any member of a firm or any member of a company
is not associated with it, he can produce evidence for that purpose to show that he is not
associated with that. That is the safeguard. He can produce evidence to show that he is not
associated. By and large, what happens is that when a company, a firm, an association,
body of individuals or an individual commits a crime, he either receives funds which are
proceeds of terrorism, or collects funds for financing terrorism, or harbours funds for
financing terrorism, the presumption is that it is the office bearers, those who had in their
hands the management of that group or company or firm, who are liable, not every member.
There is no doubt that not in one case but in many cases there would have been instances
of people being accused without sufficient evidence. That is why the law says that whenever
a person is arrested he is to be produced before the Magistrate within 24 hours. If a person
is convicted of murder and this conviction has been upheld right up to the Supreme Court,
and that person has kept saying, ‘Look, I am innocent’. It is possible. What I am saying,
Sir, is that it is a question of some material or some evidence seeming to be sufficient
evidence to fasten the guilt, and some additional evidence not coming to light at that point
of time which comes to light later. So, it is not peculiar to a particular law. It is not only
an association or a firm, etc., which can be wrongly accused; individuals can also be
wrongly accused. And, there have been cases like that. So, it is not peculiar either to this
association or to this law. That is something for which the law has provided safeguards.
If a person is innocent, he has to bring that evidence before the Court. He has to be
presented before the Court. That is why, everything has not been left to the Police. That
is why, we have the courts.”
3.1.18 Money laundering and terrorism are very closely linked nowadays because a lot of
terrorism that the country faces is cross-border or international. A very large part of it is
funded through some kind of money laundering but the Committee agrees with the
apprehensions of some Members that bringing association of persons or a body of
individuals under the definition of ‘person’ gives a leverage to the investigating officer.
There could be a large number of cases of harassment of associations or unions due to
which innocent people could be affected. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry
may consider putting a rider and safeguards so that innocent people are not harassed.
3.1.19 Subject to the above observations, the Clause is adopted.
Clause 3
3.2. The Clause 3 intends to amend Section 6 of the principal Act with the purpose of
increasing the duration of declaring an association as unlawful from the existing two years to
five years.

35
3.2.1 Giving the background on this, the Ministry stated that a necessity was felt to increase the
duration of declaring an association as unlawful from the existing two years to five years. In this
regard, in the background note the Ministry furnished the following justification:–
“Under Section 3 of UAP A, if the Central Government is of opinion that any association
is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may by notification in the official gazette
declare such association as “unlawful”. Further, under existing Section (6) of UAP A,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a notification issued under section (3) shall,
if the declaration made therein is confirmed by the tribunal by an order made under section
(4), remain in force for a period of 2 years from the date on which the notification becomes
effective. It is understood that several jurisdictions are imposing such proscription for more
than five years. This will give ample time to properly collect and compile data, intelligence
inputs, status of various cases filed in the court, status of sanction obtained by the police
from the State Government, etc. This will further facilitate to reduce the cost of
administering the ban. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend the Section (6) suitably to
enhance the period of ban from existing 2 years to 5 years under the said circumstances.”
3.2.2 A Member of the Committee felt that the duration of five years is not sufficient, and should
be increased. Replying to this, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“Right now, once you hold an association to be unlawful, and, after the tribunal has
upheld that finding, then, the association stays banned only for two years. Take for
example, SIMI. After every two years, we have to bring a fresh proposal. The whole exercise
itself takes a year, and, then, the Tribunal takes three, four months. So, that is why, it is
being increased to five years…… we are open but then there can be accusation from the
other parties that having a very long period will be draconian.”
3.2.3 The Clause is adopted without change.
Clause 4
3.3.1 The Clause 4 proposes amendment in Section 15 of chapter IV of the principal Act which
deals with punishment for terrorist activities. As per the existing provisions of UAPA under Section
15, an international/inter Governmental organization has not been covered explicitly. The same is
now proposed to be incorporated in the clause (c) of Section 15. Similarly, all the 9 treaties
annexed to the CFT have now been mentioned under a new Schedule to the Act to be read with
the proposed Section 15(2). A separate clause is proposed to be inserted after existing clause (c)
which will state “demands any bomb, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or fire arms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious or other chemicals or any
biological, radiological, nuclear material or device with the intention of aiding, abetting or
committing terrorism”.
3.3.2 The Ministry also stated that due consideration has also been given to economic security;
being an important dimension of national security. Accordingly, production or smuggling or
circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian currencies (paper, coin or of any other material) are
proposed to be explicitly criminalized. For this purpose, high quality counterfeit Indian currency is
proposed to be defined by providing a separate explanation under Section 15.
3.3.3 On being asked to clarify the reasons for inserting the words “economic security” after the
word “security” in the clause 1 of sub-section (1) of Section 15, the Home Secretary stated as
under:–
“Economic security is an aspect, which until now, in our common understanding of, and,
fight against terrorism, has been overlooked. Economic security or stability of a country is

36
not undermined only by the use of bombs and guns, and, we have associated terrorism only
with the use of bombs, guns, and, killing people, whereas the economic security of a
country is as important as other aspects of security.”
3.3.4 One Member pointed out that the Reserve Bank of India takes care of the economic stability
of the country through its Monetary Policy whereas the proposed amendment also talks of
economic security and wanted to know the source and reasons for bringing the term ‘economic
security’ in the proposed amendment. He also felt that the word ‘economic security’ should be
defined in the definition clause and only thereafter it should be inserted. Responding to that the
Home Secretary stated as under:–
“Let me explain as to why it has come. Sir, over the past many years, we have been seeing
that one particular country has been printing fake Indian currency notes in factories, which
we have reasons to believe, are sovereign factories belonging to that Government, and, they
have been determinedly pushing such fake Indian currency notes into our country for two
reasons. One, of course, is to finance terrorism directly, and, the other is to disturb our
economic security, and, the quantities are huge. So, that is something which we need to
fight against. That is another instrument, which one of our adversaries has hit upon.”
3.3.5 The Home Secretary clarifying that the provisions have been related with the sovereign
country or the nation which is involved in terrorist activities stated as under:–
“There are two things. One is the point which you made about some people being caught
because of some fake currency notes coming out, four or five. I think, what you wanted
to put across was that counterfeiting can also be for purposes other than terrorism. It need
not necessarily be associated with terrorism. That is why what we have criminalized here is
not counterfeiting which is done by other small-time groups. What we have criminalized here
is counterfeiting which can be done only by sovereign parties. That is why we have said
high quality counterfeit notes, and we have defined that high quality counterfeit notes will
be such counterfeit notes which have duplicated the features which have been mentioned in,
I think, Schedule 3. Basically, I would like to draw your attention to this. I will read out
the section again. “Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the unity,
integrity, security, economic security or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike terror or
likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign
country” by doing any of these things, and one of the things is damage to the monetary stability
of India by way of production. That means clause 1 by itself is not sufficient. You have to read
it with sub-clauses (a), (i), (ii), (iii), (iiia), etc. Sir, sub-clause (iiia) says, “damage to, the
monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling or circulation of high quality
counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material.”
3.3.6 The Committee feels that the objective to provide definition is to relate economic
security with the terrorist organizations indulging in counterfeit currency and circulating
them in a big way. This is necessary to support the system.
3.3.7 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the term ‘economic security’ may be
defined in Section 2 of the Act before its insertion in Section 15.
3.3.8 Subject to the above observation, the Clause is adopted.
Clause 5
3.4.1 The Clause 5 seeks to omit Section 16A of the principal Act as first part of the provision
has been taken as new clause (d) of Section 15 and the punishment part is proposed to be covered
by Section 16 which is relating to punishment for terrorist act.

37
3.4.2 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 6
3.5.1 The Clause 6 seeks to amend Section 17 of the principal Act with the purpose of redefining
the criminalization of raising funds for terrorist act. The Section 17 of UAPA is proposed to be
amended by inserting following phrases in between, – ‘whether from a legitimate or illegitimate
source’, ‘or raise or collect’, ‘a legitimate or illegitimate source’,’ in full or in part’, ‘or by a
terrorist organization or by a terrorist gang or by an individual terrorist’. For the sake of the clarity,
participating, organizing or directing in any of the acts mentioned in the Section is proposed to be
explicitly criminalized as an offence by providing an “Explanation” under section 17. Similarly,
raising funds through production or smuggling or circulation of counterfeit Indian currency note
is proposed to be explicitly criminalized by providing an “Explanation” under Section 17. Keeping
in view the ongoing trend of providing “Social Security” type support to the families of the
terrorists’ (killed/arrested or still active), raising or collecting or providing funds to an individual
terrorist, terrorist gang or terrorist organisation for the purpose not specifically defined under
Section 15 is also proposed to be criminalised as an offence under Section 17. Accordingly, an
“Explanation” is proposed to be added to section 17.
3.5.2 One of the Members pointed out that terrorists have been collecting lakhs of rupees for
terrorist activities. They also serve notices to the people, and shoot those who do not oblige. Even
the members of their family are killed and their houses are attacked. He, therefore, felt that in this
case, the minimum punishment should be ten years which may extend to imprisonment for life and
shall also be liable to fine and the amount of fine has not been defined here. Responding to the
query raised, the Home Secretary stated as under:–
“The fine can be anything which the court, in its discretion, seeks to impose. It depends
upon the quantity of funds which are being collected or which have been collected. If the
funds collected are to the tune of Rs.50 crores or Rs.100 crores, the fine will be
proportionate. …….the maximum punishment for this is punishment for life. Five years is
the minimum punishment. So, that means, no court can give a punishment of less than five
years.”
3.5.3 The Committee, however, felt that the minimum punishment should be increased to
seven years.
3.5.4 The Ministry informed the Committee that the words ‘or provide funds’ in the
proposed Section 17 after the words ‘collect funds’ were erroneously omitted.
3.5.5 In view of the above, the Committee suggest the following amendments may be made
in the Clause 6 of the Bill:
(i) In line 13, after the words ‘collect funds’ add the words ‘or provide funds’;
(ii) In line 19, the words ‘five years’ be substituted by the words ‘seven years’.
3.5.6 The Committee further recommends that the quantum of fine may also be defined.
3.5.7 Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 7
3.6.1 Clause 7 seeks to insert fresh Sections 22A after Section 22 of the principal Act which
gives provision for offence by company. On the lines of the Coinage Bill, 2011 of Ministry of
Finance a new Section 22A is proposed to be incorporated in order to criminalise the offence

38
committed on behalf of company with regard to “counterfeiting” offences. The “Company” and
“Director” have been defined by giving a separate “explanation” under the proposed Section. A new
Section 22B is proposed to be incorporated in order to criminalise the offence committed by
Societies or Trusts. The “Society” and “Director” have been defined by giving a separate
explanation under the proposed Section. Moreover, the provision for punishment for offences by
Companies, Societies or Trusts is proposed to be incorporated as a new Section 22C. It is
proposed to impose to a minimum fine of Rs 5 crore which may extend to Rs. 10 crore for
offences under the Act.
3.6.2 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 8
3.7.1 Clause 8 proposes to amend in Section 23 of the principal Act. In order to widen the scope
of enhanced penalties, unauthorized possession of high quality counterfeit Indian currency is also
proposed to be brought under the enhanced penalty category under Section 23.
3.7.2 The Clause is adopted without any change .
Clause 9
3.8.1 Clause 9 proposes change in the heading of Chapter V of the principal Act by inserting the
words ‘or any property intended to be used for terrorism’ after the word ‘Terrorism’.
3.8.2 The Committee pointed out that according to the Government of Karnataka, the words ‘or
any property intended to be used for terrorism’ makes the heading of the chapter too long and
inconvenient to use. The Home Secretary replied that the proposed amendment is appropriate. The
Committee agreed to the viewpoint of the Home Secretary.
3.8.3 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 10
3.9.1 Clause 10 intends to substitute a Section 24 by two new sections 24 and 24A. The
proposed Section 24 provides for reference to proceeds of terrorism to include any property
intended to be used for terrorism. The proposed section 24A provides “confiscation of
corresponding value” and enabling the law enforcement agencies to forfeit/confiscate the property
of corresponding value.
3.9.2 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 11
3.10.1 Clause 11 seeks to add three new sub-Sections in Section 33 of the principal Act. Sub-
section (3) provides to empower the courts to forfeit property relating to offence of
counterfeiting.sub-Section (4) is based on the recommendations of FA TF to empower the court for
attachment/forfeiture of the value of proceeds of terrorism. Sub-Section (5) is based on the
recommendations of FA TF to empower the court on the basis of material evidence to confiscate
the property of all kind of the accused in case of death of a person or a person is declared a
proclaimed offender.
3.10.2 The Committee sought to know whether the punishment provided in the proposed sub-
sections (3) and (4) of Section 33 would be as per the Indian Panel Code (IPC) as counterfeiting
of currency note comes under the IPC. Clarifying this, the Home Secretary stated as under:–

39
“There are two sides to it. One is that if somebody is guilty of either collecting funds or
being involved in a terrorist act or providing funds to a terrorist, he will be punished and
he will have to go to jail or he will have to pay fine. That is one part of it. The other
part is that the property which he has amassed either through terrorism or the property
which he has collected for financing terrorism will be forfeited. Section 33 deals with that.
The forfeiture is against the funds and the punishment is against the persons involved…….
apart from the punishment prescribed under the Indian Penal Code, specific punishment has
been prescribed under the proposed amendment because we have taken this under the
definition of a terrorist act.”
3.10.3 When a Member sought to know whether the Ministry would define high quality counterfeit
Indian currency, the Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs responded as under:–
“The punishment which is prescribed in section 33 will be imposed only if it is a high
quality counterfeit Indian currency. This section deals with only forfeiture……we have
defined three features in the Third Schedule. If there is a violation of these three features,
it will be a high quality counterfeit currency and it will be attested by a notified expert
of a forensic laboratory.”
3.10.4 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 12
3.11.1 Clause 12 seeks to amend Section 35 of the principal Act in order to empower the Central
Government to add/remove or amend the contents of the Second and Third Schedule by
Notification. The Chairman sought to know as to after a legislation is passed, how can a schedule
be removed by an executive order. Clarifying this, the Home Secretary furnished the following
justifications for amendment
“There are three Schedules. The First Schedule would have a list of organizations which are
proscribed under this Act. Now, we would need to either add to that list of organizations
if we proscribe any additional ones, or remove any organization from that list. That is an
existing provision. So, that shall be the provision for the First Schedule. Earlier, we had
only one Schedule. Now we are increasing it by two more. The Second Schedule is a list
of UN Conventions which we have acceded to and the offences under which we are
criminalizing under the amendment. So, if in future some additional Convention is added
and we accede to it – and one of the requirements would be that we criminalise it as a
terrorist act –Government will have this facility of adding to that….if we feel that some
terrorist organization or some organization that has been proscribed as a terrorist
organization for some reasons, either because it has gone to a court and that order of
proscription has been set aside or whatever, for any reason, if it is decided to remove a
terrorist organization from the Schedule, that provision has to be there. That is an existing
provision.”
3.11.2 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 13
3.12.1 Clause 13 perta ins to amendment in Section 40 of the principal Act which is intended to
extending the scope of offence of raising funds for a terrorist organization. Production or
smuggling or circulation of counterfeit Indian currency as a means of raising or collecting or
providing funds to terrorist organization is also proposed to be criminalized under section 40.
Accordingly, an explanation is proposed to be inserted to this effect.

40
3.12.2 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 14
3.13.1 Clause 14 seeks to make amendment to the effect that the existing Schedule shall be
renumbered as the First Schedule, and after the First Schedule as so renumbered, the Second and
the Third Schedules are also proposed to be inserted.
3.13.2 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Enacting Formula and the Title
3.14.1 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential/drafting nature, namely “2011” and ‘Sixty-Second’ to be substituted by
‘2012’ and ‘Sixty-third’ year, respectively.
4.0 The Committee adopts the Bill as amended and commends that the Bill as amended
may be passed subject to other observations made by it.
5.0 The Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other officials and the Committee then
decided to meet again on 28
th March.
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.24 
P.M.

41
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th March, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Shri Babulal Marandi
11. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
12. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
13. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Gandhi, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the day which was to consider and adopt the draft 159
th Report
on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and draft 160 th Report on the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011.
3. * * *
41
*** Relate to other matter.

42
3.1 The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 160 th Report on the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011. After a brief discussion, the report was adopted with
minor modifications.
4. The Committee then decided to present the 157
th, 158 th, 159 th and 160 th Reports of the
Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 28 th March,
2012.
4.1 The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence nominated Dr. V . Maitreyan and
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, Members, Rajya Sabha to the present the 157 th, 158 th, 159 th and 160 th Reports
of the Committee in the Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar and in her absence Shri
Ramen Deka to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.15 
P.M.

43
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
29 Dec., 2011
Bill No. 138 of 201 1
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:–
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Amendment Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(i) after clause ( ea), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(eb) “person” includes,—
(i) an individual,
(ii) a Hindu undivided family,
45
Short title
and commen-
cement.
Amendment
of section 2.37 of 1967.

46
(iii) a company,
(iv) a firm,
(v) an association of persons or a body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not,
(vi) every artificial juridical person, not
falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses,
and
(vii) any agency, office or branch owned
or controlled by any person falling within any of
the preceding sub-clauses;’;
(ii) for clause ( g), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘(g) “proceeds of terrorism” means,—
(i) all kinds of properties which have been
derived or obtained from commission of any
terrorist act or have been acquired through funds
traceable to a terrorist act, irrespective of person
in whose name such proceeds are standing or in
whose possession they are found; or
(ii) any property which is being used, or is
intended to be used, for a terrorist act or for the
purpose of an individual terrorist or a terrorist
gang or a terrorist organisation.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act, it is
hereby decalred that the expression “proceeds of
terrorism” includes any property intended to be used
for terrorism;’;
(iii ) in clause ( h), for the words
“instruments in any form including”, the words
“instruments in any form including but not limited
to” shall be substituted.
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the
words “two years”, the words “five years” shall be substituted.
4. Section 15 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-
section ( 1) thereof and in sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered,—
(i) in the opening portion, after the word “security”, the
words, “economic security”, shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause ( a); after sub-clause ( iii), the following
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iiia) damage to, the monetary stability of India
by way of production or smuggling or circulation of
high, quality counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or
of any other material; or
Amendment of
section 6.
Amendment of
section 15.

47
(iii) in clause ( c), for the words “any other person to
do or abstain from doing any act,”, the words “an
international or inter-governmental organisation or any other
person to do or abstain from doing any act; or” shall be
substituted;”;
(iv) after clause ( c), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(d) demands any bomb, dynamite or other
explosive substances or inflammable substances or fire
arms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious
or other chemicals or any biological, radiological,
nuclear material or device with the intention of aiding,
abetting or committing terrorism.”;
(v) for the Explanation , the following Explanation  shall
be substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation .—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “public functionary” means the
constitutional authorities or any other functionary
notified in the Official Gazette by the Central
Government as public functionary;
(b) “high quality counterfeit currency”
means the counterfeit currency as may be
declared after examination by an authorised or
notified forensic authority that such currency
imitates or compromises with the key security
features as specified in the Third Schedule.’;
(v) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The terrorist act under sub-section ( 1)
includes an act which constitutes an offence within the
scope of, and as defined in any of the treaties specified
in the Second Schedule.”.
5. Section 16A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
6. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“17. Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly
or indirectly, raises or collects funds, whether from a
legitimate or illegitimate source, from any person or persons
or attempts to provide to, or raises or collects funds for any
person or persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be
used, in full or in part by such person or persons or by a
Omission of
section 16A.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 17.
Punishment
for raising
funds for
terrorist act.

48
terrorist organisation or by a terrorist gang or by an individual
terrorist to commit a terrorist act, notwithstanding whether
such funds were actually used or not for commission of such
act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) participating, organising or directing in any of
the acts stated therein shall constitute an offence;
(b) raising funds shall include raising or collecting
or providing funds through production or smuggling or
circulation of counterfeit Indian currency; and
(c) raising or collecting or providing funds, in any
manner for the benefit of, or, to an individual terrorist,
terrorist gang or terrorist organisation for the purpose
not specifically covered under section 15 shall also be
construed as an offence:”.
7. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘22A. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been
committed by a company, every person (including promoters
of the company) who, at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person (including promoters) liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any promoter,
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such promoter, director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this. section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and
includes a firm or other association of individuals; and
Insertion of new
sections 22A,
22B and 22C
Offences by
companies.

49
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a
partner in the firm.
22B. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been
committed by a society or trust, every person (including the
promoter of society or settlor of the trust) who at the time
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the
business of the society or the trust, as well as the society or
trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in
this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been
committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance
of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any
promoter, director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer
of the society or trust, such promoter, director, manager,
secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section;—
(a) “society” means any body corporate
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or
any other State Act governing the registration of
societies;
(b) “trust” means any body registered under the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other State Act
governing the registration of trusts;
(c) “director”, in relation to a society or trust,
means a member of its governing board other than an
ex officio member representing the interests of the
Central or State Government or the appropriate statutory
authority.
22C.Where any offence under the Act has been
committed by a company or a society or a trust, as the case
may be, every person (including promoter of company or
trust or settlor of the trust) who at the time of the offence
was either in charge or responsible for the conduct of the
business shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable with
Offences by
societies or
trust.
Punishment
for offences
by companies,
societies or
trusts.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.

50
fine which shall not be less than five crore rupees and which
may extend to ten crore rupees.”.
8. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for
the words “chemical substance of warfare, he shall”, the words
“chemical substance of warfare or high quality counterfeit Indian
currency, he shall” shall be substituted.
9. In CHAPTER V of the principal Act, in the heading thereof,
after the word “TERRORISM”, the words “OR ANY PROPERTY
INTENDED TO BE USED FOR TERRORISM” shall be inserted.
10. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘24. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires, all references to “proceeds of terrorism” shall
include any property intended to be used for terrorism.
24A. ( 1) No person shall hold or be in possession of
any proceeds of terrorism.
(2) Proceeds of terrorism, whether held by a terrorist
organisation or terrorist gang or by any other person and
whether or not such terrorist or other person is prosecuted or
convicted for any offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI,
shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central Government or the
State Government; as the case may be, in the manner
provided tinder this Chapter.
(3) Where proceedings have been commenced under this
section, the court may pass an order directing attachment or
forfeitunre, as the case may be, of property equivalent to, or, the
value of the proceeds of terrorism involved in the offence.’.
11. In section 33 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2),
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
“(3) Where any person is accused of an offence
concerning counterfeit Indian currency, the court may pass an
order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be,
of property equivalent to the value of the counterfeit Indian
currency involved in the offence including the face value of
such currency which are not defined to be of high quality,
but are part of the common seizure along with the high
quality counterfeit Indian currency.
(4) Where a person is accused of an offence punishable
under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, the court may pass an order
directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of
property equivalent to or the value of the proceeds of
terrorism involved in the offence.
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
heading of
Chapter V .
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 24.
Reference to
proceeds of
terrorism to
include any
property
intended to be
used for
terrorism.
Forfeiture of
proceeds of
terrorism.
Amendment of
section 33.

51
(5) Where any person is accused of an offence under
Chapter IV or Chapter VI, it shall be open to the court to
pass an order that all or any of the property, movable or
immovable or both, belonging to him shall, where the trial
under the Act cannot be concluded on account of the death
of the accused or being declared a proclaimed offender or for
any other reason, be confiscated on the basis of material
evidence produced before the court.”.
12. In section 35 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the word “order”, the word “notification”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word “Schedule”, wherever it occurs,
the words “First Schedule” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, add to or remove or amend the
Second Schedule or Third Schedule and thereupon the
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to have been amended
accordingly.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 4) shall, as soon as may be
after it is issued, be laid before Parliament.”.
13. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for
Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, a
reference to provide money or other property includes-—
(a) of its being given, lent or otherwise made available,
whether or not for consideration; or
(b) raising, collecting or providing funds through
production or smuggling or circulation of counterfeit Indian
currency.”.
14. In the principal Act, the existing Schedule shall be
renumbered as the First Schedule thereof, and after the First
Schedule as so renumbered, the following Schedules shall be
inserted, namely:—
“THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 15( 2)]
(i) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of
Aircraft (1970);
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 40.
Amendment
of Schedule.

52
(ii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Civil Aviation (1971);
(iii) Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes
against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents (1973);
(iv) International Convention against the Taking of Hostages
(1979);
(v) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
(1980);
(vi) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of
Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation,
supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation (1988);
(vii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the safety of Maritime Navigation (1988);
(viii) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on the Continental Shelf
(1988); and
(ix) International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings (1997).
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 15( 1) ( d)]
Security features to define high quality counterfeit currency
notes
(a) watermark;
(b) latent image; and
(c) see through registration in the currency notes.”.

53
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 has been
enacted to provide for the more effective prevention of certain
unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for matters
connected therewith. The scope of the Act was widened in 2004
and the terrorist activities were brought within the scope of the said
Act.
2. An Inter-Ministerial Group was constituted to evaluate the
existing provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
and to recommend necessary amendments to the said Act. In
addition to the above, the Financial Action Task Force, an Inter-
Governmental organisation set-up to devise policies to combat
money laundering and terror financing admitted India as its 34
th
member. On the basis of commitment made by India at the time of
admission to the said Financial Action Task Force, various legislative
and; other legally binding measures were required to be taken
on a medium term basis, i.e., by 31
st March, 2012. These
recommendations, were examined and it is proposed to amend the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 to make it more effective
in prevention of unlawful activities and dealing with terrorist
activities.
3. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011,
inter alia, provides to—
(a) increase the period of declaration of an association
as unlawful from two years to five years as specified under
section 6;
(b) amend section 15 of the aforesaid Act (which
defines Terrorist act) and include therein—
(i) economic security and damage to the
monetary stability of India by way of production or
smuggling or circulation of high quality counterfeit
Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material as
the existing provisions of the aforesaid Act do not
include within their scope an act done with an intent to
threaten or threaten likely to economic security of India
and counterfeiting Indian paper currency or coin;
(ii ) any international or inter-governmental
organisation against which any person indulges in acts
described in clause (c) of section 15, since the existing
provision does not explicitly mention such international
or inter-governmental organisation.
53

54
(iii) act of demanding any bomb, dynamite or
other explosive substances or inflammable substances
or fire arms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or
noxious or other chemicals or any biological,
radiological, nuclear material or device with the
intention of aiding, abetting or committing terrorism;
(c) enlarge the scope of section 17 of the aforesaid Act
relating to punishment for raising funds for terrorist act and
include within its scope, raising of funds, both from legitimate
or illegitimate sources, by a terrorist organization or by
terrorist gang or by an individual terrorist;
(d) insert new sections 22A, 22B and 22C in the
aforesaid Act to include within its scope, offences by
companies societies or trusts and provide punishment therefor;
(e) insert a new section 24 in the aforesaid Act so as
to enlarge the scope of proceeds of terrorism to include
therein any property intended to be used for terrorism;
(f) insert sub-sections (3) to (5) in section 33 of the
aforesaid Act to confer power upon the court by order to
provide—
(i) for attachment or forfeiture of property
equivalent to the counterfeit Indian currency involved
in the offence, including the face value of such
currency which are not defined to be of high quality
but are part of the common seizure along with the high
quality counterfeit Indian currency;
(ii) for attachment or forfeiture of property
equivalent to or the value of the proceeds of terrorism
involved in the offence;
(iii) for confiscation of movable or immovable
property on the basis of the material evidence where
the trial cannot be concluded on account of the death
of the accused or the accused being declared as a
proclaimed offender or any other reason.
4. The proposed amendments to the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967, aim to bring more clarity to the existing
legal regime, and remove the deficiencies identified in the
implementation of the provisions of the said Act by the Central and
State intelligence and investigating agencies.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM
Dated the 15th December, 2011.

55
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE U NLAWFUL A CTIVITIES (P REVENTION) A CT, 1967
(37 OF 1967)
** * * *
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
** * * *
(g) “proceeds of terrorism” means all kinds of
properties which have been derived or obtained from
commission of any terrorist act or have been acquired
through funds traceable to a terrorist act, irrespective of
person in whose name such proceeds are standing or in
whose possession they are found, and includes any property
which is being used, or is intended to be used, for the
purpose of a terrorist organisation or terrorist gang;
(h) “property” means property and assets of every
description whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or
immovable, tangible or intangible and legal documents, deeds
and instruments in any form including electronic or digital,
evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets by
means of bank credits, travellers’ cheques, bank cheques,
money orders, shares, securities, bond, drafts, letter of
credit, cash and bank account including fund, however
acquired;
** * * *
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), a
notification issued under section 3 shall, if the declaration made
therein is confirmed by the Tribunal by an order made under section
4, remain in force for a period of two years from the date on which
the notification becomes effective.
** * * *
CHAPTER IV
P
UNISHMENT  FOR T ERRORIST  A CTIVITIES
15. Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to
threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with
intent to strike terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any
section of the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a) by using bomb, dynamite or other explosive
substances or inflammable substances or firearms or other
55
Definitions.
Period of
operation and
cancellation of
notification.
Terrorist act.

56
lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or other
chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological
radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by
any other means of whatever nature to cause or likely to
cause
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or
persons; or
(ii)  loss of, or damage to, or destruction of,
property; or
(iii ) disruption of any supplies or services
essential to the life of the community in India or in any
foreign country; or
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in
India or in a foreign country used or intended to be
used for the defence of India or in connection with any
other purposes of the Government of India, any State
Government or any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show
of criminal force or attempts to do so or causes death of any
public functionary or attempts to cause death of any public
functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and
threatens to kill or injure such person or does any other
act in order to compel the Government of India, any State
Government or the Government of a foreign country or any
other person to do or abstain from doing any act.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, public
functionary means the constitutional authorities and any other
functionary notified in the Official Gazette by the Central
Government as a public functionary.
16A. Whoever intentionally, by use of force or threat of use
of force or by any other means, demands any bomb, dynamite or
other explosive substance or inflammable substances or fire arms or
other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious or other chemicals or
any biological, radiological, nuclear material or device, with the
intention of aiding, abetting or committing a terrorist act, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
17. Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly or
indirectly, raises or collects funds or provides funds to any person
or persons or attempts to provide funds to any person or persons,
knowing that such funds are likely to be used by such person or
persons to commit a terrorist act, notwithstanding whether such
funds were actually used to not for commission of such act, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
Punishment for
making demands
of radioactive
substances,
nuclear devices,
etc.
Punishment for
raising funds for
terrorist act.

57
than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.
** * * *
23.  ( 1) If any person with intent to aid any terrorist
contravenes any provision of, or any rule made under the Explosive
Act, 1884 or the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 or the
Inflammable Substances Act, 1952 or the Arms Act, 1959, or is in
unauthorised possession of any bomb, dynamite or hazardous
explosive substance or other lethal weapons or substance capable of
mass destruction or biological or chemical substance of warfare, he
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid
Acts or the rules made thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
** * * *
CHAPTER V
F
ORFEITURE  OF PROCEEDS  OF TERRORISM
24. (1) No person shall hold or be in possession of any
proceeds of terrorism.
(2) Proceeds of terrorism, whether held by a terrorist or by
any other person and whether or not such terrorist or other person
is prosecuted or convicted for any offence under Chapter IV or
Chapter VI, shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, in the manner
provided under this Chapter.
** * * *
CHAPTER VI
T
ERRORIST  ORGANISATION
35. (1) The Central Government may, by order, in the Official
Gazette,—
(a) add an organisation to the Schedule;
(b) add also an organisation to the Schedule, which is
identified as a terrorist organisation in a resolution adopted by
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, to combat international terrorism;
(c) remove an organisation from the Schedule;
(d) amend the Schedule in some other way.
** * * *
4 of 1884.
6 of 1908.
20 of 1952.
54 of 1959.
Enhanced
punishment.
Forfeiture of
proceeds of
terrorism.
Amendment of
Schedule etc.

58
40. ( 1) A person commits the offence of raising fund for a
terrorist organisation, who, with intention to further the activity of
a terrorist organisation,—
** * * *
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, a
reference to provide money or other property includes of its being
given, lent or otherwise made available, whether or not for
consideration.
** * * *
Offence of
raising fund
for a terrorist
organisation.

59
59
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

60
ANNEXURE-II
PRESS RELEASE
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HOME AFFAIRS INVITES SUGGESTIONS ON UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
(PREVENTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011 as introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 29 th December 2011 and pending therein, has been referred to Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs, headed by Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu, M.P. Rajya Sabha for
examination and report. This Bill seeks to make certain amendments in the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.
2. The Committee has decided to invite written memoranda from the individuals/organisations
on the Bill.
3. Those desirous of submitting written memoranda to the Committee on the provisions of the
Bill, may send the same latest by 5
th March, 2012 to Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, Room No. 142, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-l10001 giving their
views and also indicating whether they would be interested in giving oral evidence before the
Committee. Memoranda may also be emailed at rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in.
4. The memorandum which might be submitted to the Committee, would form part of its
records and treated as confidential and, therefore, should not be printed, circulated or published by
anyone, as such an act would constitute breach of privilege of the Committee.
5. Individuals/stakeholders may obtain, on written request, a copy of the Bill, from
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Cabin ‘A’, Basement,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-l10001 (Telephone No. 011-23034034). The electronic text of
the Bill can also be down loaded from the official website available on Rajya Sabha Website
www.rajyasabha.nic.in. /c3right Bills with Committees.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.