PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report on Disaster
in Chennai caused by Torrential Rainfall and
Consequent Flooding
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
208
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S.(H.A.)-408
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report on Disaster
in Chennai caused by Torrential Rainfall and
Consequent Flooding
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-20
Chapter- I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government....................................................................................... 2-8
Chapter- II Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government's reply ............. 9-11
Chapter- III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee........................ 12-15
Chapter- IV Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the
Government have not been received.................................................... 16-20
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................... 21-22
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 23-26

COMPOITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Keshari Deb
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Derek O'Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
9. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
10. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri P . Nagarajan
23. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda
24. Shri Dilip Patel
(i)

(ii)
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
31. Shri B. Sriramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the
One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report on Disaster in Chennai Caused by Torrential Rainfall and Consequent
Flooding.
2. The One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 12th August, 2016 and laid on the Table of
the Lok Sabha on the 12th August, 2016. After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were
sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations
of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said
report to the Committee on 12th June, 2017.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha
in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Eighth Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 8th February, 2018.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
N
EW DELHI; P . CHIDAMBARAM
8 February, 2018 Chairman,
Magha 19, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
CLSS : Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme
CMDA : Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority
CMWSS : Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board
CPHEEO : Centre for Public Health and Environmental Engineering
Organisation
CRRT : Chennai River & Restoration Trust
CSWDNS : City Storm Water Drainage Network System
CWC : Central Water Commission
DMS : Disaster Management Support
DPRs : Detailed Project Reports
DSC : Decision Support Centre
GoTN : Government of Tamil Nadu
HLC : High Level Committee
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organisation
ISWDN : Integrated Storm Water Drain Network
JNNURM : Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
M/o HUPA : Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
MLD : Million litres per day
MoUD : Ministry of Urban Development
MSME : Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NRSC : National Remote Sensing Centre
PMAY(U) : Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban)
RA Y : Rajiv Awas Yojana
RBI : Reserve Bank of India
SDRF : State Disaster Response Force
(iv)

(v)
SLBC : State Level Bankers' Committee
SOP : Standard Operating Procedures
STB : Sewage Treatment Plants
TNSCB : T amil Nadu Slum Clearance Board
TNSDMA : T amil Nadu State Disaster Management Agency
ULBs : Urban Local Bodies

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report of the Committee
on Disaster in Chennai Caused by Torrential Rainfall and Consequent Flooding. The One Hundred Ninety
Eighth Report was presented to Rajya Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on 12th August, 2016.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 7.1.3, 7.2.5, 8.7, 8.11, 10.2.3, 11.7 and 11.8 (of One Hundred Ninety
Eighth Report)
Total recommendations- 7
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter II: The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies: Para Nos. 8.6, 8.9, 8.10 and 9.3 (ibid)
Total recommendations - 4
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 7.1.5, 8.5 and 9.2 (ibid)
Total recommendations - 3
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action taken steps
in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter IV: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 7.1.4, 7.2.3, 7.2.4, 8.8 and 11.9, (ibid)
Total recommendations - 5
In respect of 5 recommendations in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished interim reply or
couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish
pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized in Chapters III
and IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendation.
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD
Carrying Capacity of the Water Bodies
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Water Resources that the encroachment
of lakes and river beds played a major role in causing massive flood in Chennai. The Committee feels
that the State Government should check mafia involved in illegal construction for business and usurping
water bodies for their real estate business. The flood channels and riverbed should be cleared as soon
as possible by removing illegal/ unauthorized constructions. (Para 7.1.3 of 198th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Government of Tamil Nadu informed the Committee that they fully accept the recommendations
that the flood channels, river beds as well as other water bodies should be cleared by removing the
encroachments. Further, it is informed that most of these encroachments are by landless migrant labours
that come in search of employment to urban local bodies. Those encroachments made by real estate
business operators and other institutional land grabbers in the water bodies are not significant and
evictions are carried out without much difficulty as and when it is identified. (For instance, the illegal
constructions in the major riverbeds i.e. Kosasthalayar, Coovam and Adayar River by some of the
educational institutions were evicted during the year 2005-06).
1.1.3 The State Government also informed that the unprecedented floods during the year 2015 was due
to multiple factors, the major reason being the extremely heavy rains in the catchment areas and in the
urban areas. The actual rainfall in Chennai district during 01st December, 2015 to 5th December, 2015
was 399 mm as against normal rainfall of 40.6 mm during the same days which is excess of 883
percentage. During the same period the Kancheepuram district received rainfall of 467.2 mm as against
the normal rain fall of 34.5 mm which is excess of 1254 percentage. The problem was accentuated due
to breach of systems tanks and choking of river canals due to siltation, shoal formation and encroachments.
1.1.4 The Government of Tamil Nadu stated that they had launched a major drive during 2015 and 2016
for desiltation and removal of shoals and encroachments to ensure that the water courses are clear.
During the flood period itself 7170 number of encroachments were evicted in Adayar River and 4239
families have been accommodated in 4239 tenements of Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board (TNSCB) and
each rehabilitated encroacher was given a flat costing ` 8 lakh free of cost.
1.1.5 In addition, a large number of encroachments (by people living in below poverty line) have been
identified for removal and the families are being convinced to shift to tenements constructed by Government
of Tamil Nadu through Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board. In spite of the best efforts of the State
2

3
Government, the time consuming process of rehabilitation of evicted families is resulting in delays in
removal of encroachments. However, it was also mentioned that the Hon'ble high court of Madras is
directly monitoring the progress of encroachment removal and rehabilitation of the evicted families.
1.1.6 The Government of Tamil Nadu always emphasizes the need for removal of encroachments and
protection of water bodies and it may not be out of place to place on record that Government of Tamil
Nadu has enacted Tanks Protection Act, 2007 and Tamil Nadu Land Encroachment Act, 1905 is being
followed for removal of encroachments from rivers and channels.
1.1.7 During the year 2016, a major drive was launched for desilting 22,899 tanks, 11,446 km. length
of river courses and canals, 14,112 encroachments were removed from water bodies. 6,960 recharge
pits were created and 8,657 defunct bore wells were converted as recharge wells. A special drive was
launched to clear the blockages under and on either side of the culverts and bridges and total blockages
under 15,870 bridges and 1,41,633 culverts were removed. 500 meters upstream & downstream bridges/
culverts were also desilted in several areas.
Recommendation
1.1.8 The Committee is given to understand that unplanned urbanisation and growth of cities are also
the main contributing factors for floods in and around Chennai. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Centre should come out with a proper long-term master plan for metro cities to prevent such
disasters in future. The committee is also of the opinion that it is an eye opener and other metro cities
must also learn from it. (Para 7.2.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.1.9 The concern of the Committee has been communicated to the Ministry of Urban Development and
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation in the matter. Accordingly, they have initiated aforesaid
(Sl. No. 7.2.4) actions in the matter.
1.2 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED AGENCIES
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee also observes that the NDMA plays a very crucial role in mitigating problems of
disaster victims. Therefore, its vacant posts should be filled up on priority. The Committee also recommends
that after any disaster in future, the NDMA should meet urgently. (Para 8.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 As per Disaster Management Act, 2005, the National Authority shall consist of the Chairperson and
such number of other Members, not exceeding nine as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Presently, four Members are working in NDMA. One Member has been vested with administrative/
financial powers, necessary to run the Authority. The Members have been meeting very frequently.
However, observation/ concern of the Committee have been noted.

4
Recommendation
1.2.3 The Committee is of the considered view that there should be an emphasis on pre-disaster preparedness
in disaster management set up of the State as the same would minimize the loss of lives and property
in the situation of any unforeseen eventuality. Had this mechanism of prevention and mitigation been
in place in the State to the required extent, the loss of lives and property could have been minimized.
(Para 8.11 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.4 There is well established institutional mechanism at National, State and District level in the country
to develop appropriate prevention, preparedness and mitigation measures in disaster situation.
1.2.5 Disaster Management is multi-disciplinary subject, which require coordinated and holistic approach
from all Ministries/ Departments of Central and State level. The DM Act envisage that every Ministry/
Department of Central and State Governments shall make provisions, in its annual budget and take all
necessary measures for prevention, mitigation, response and capacity building for disaster management
and allocate sufficient funds for carrying out the such long/ medium term works activities.
1.2.6 However, Government of India has accepted the 14th Finance Commission recommendation to
devolve 42% of the divisible pool to States during 2015-16 to 2019-20. Earlier it was 32%. Accordingly,
all the Centrally Sponsored Schemes have now been subsumed into State Funds. Accordingly, State
Governments are required to undertake all necessary measures for prevention, mitigation of long/ medium
term works activities and allocate sufficient funds for carrying out such activities as per their State
specific requirement and magnitude of ground situation.
1.2.7 The Government of Tamil Nadu informed that they are taking elaborate preparative measures to
face North East Monsoon every year and because of the extensive preparedness arrangements made by
the State during September-October 2015 large scale evacuation was possible during flood of December,
2015 and large number of relief centers were arranged for the evacuated people from the affected area
which resulted in minimizing the loss of lives.
1.2.8 In all, lakhs of people were rescued, evacuated or moved to safer places throughout state and
accommodated in 7069 relief camps. Not only food and drinking water, but also basic amenities were
ensured to the people accommodated in relief centers.
1.2.9 In order to preserve public health and prevent outbreak of epidemic diseases, State Government
had spread bleaching powder and other disinfectants in the streets and half a kilo bleaching powder were
provided to each household. Double the usual dosage of chlorination has been done. Diseases surveillance
has been done by the dedicated teams, round the clock during calamity period.
1.2.10 Accordingly, State Government has stated that they had taken aforesaid major initiatives through
Public health department and awareness generation among the general public in the aftermath of December,
2015 floods, the outbreak of epidemics in the flood affected area were completely prevented.

5
High Priority for preparedness during NEM 2016
1.2.11 The Government of Tamil Nadu has also informed that they always accord high priority to
preparedness in disaster management and taking into account the lessons learned from the floods of
2015, a massive exercise was initiated from the month of September, 2016 to face the North East
Monsoon which is associated with floods on the one hand due to cyclonic storms, excessive downpour,
cloudburst and drought on the other in case of failure of monsoon. The key measures adopted for
disaster preparedness to face North East Monsoon 2016 are detailed below:
1. Identification of vulnerable areas, mapping and analysis of vulnerability.  The identified
areas were classified into
(i) Areas of Very High vulnerability 7- 572 (Above 5 feet)
(ii) Areas of High vulnerability- 804 (3 to 5 feet)
(iii) Areas of Moderate vulnerability- 1145 (2 to 3 feet)
(iv) Areas of Low vulnerab ility- 1671 (below 2 feet)
Vulnerability maps were prepared at the rate of 3 vulnerable areas in each map at Firk (Rural
areas)/ Ward (Urban areas) level incorporating vulnerability analysis, details of escape routes
and relief centers in the map itself.
2. Unification of efforts of multi sectoral items at field level: Constitution of 498 Inter
Departmental Zonal Teams led by Revenue Authority. The team members are drawn from
Policy, Fire Services, Rural Development and Agriculture Departments etc. Each team is to
closely monitor 5 to 7 vulnerable areas.
3. Community participation: Community participation at grass root level through enrolment
of 11,479 able bodied volunteers, with skills of swimming and climbing, as First Responders
(10 per vulnerable area) 1499 First Responder Teams were formed in very highly and highly
vulnerable areas. The first responders were trained by Fire services/SDRF and Red Cross
Society. Mobile teams of first responders and Snake catchers were also formed at Block/
Taluk/Sub-Divisional and District levels for deployment based on need.
4. Prepositioning: Prepositioning of rescue teams and relief materials in the vulnerable areas
to ensure rescue and relief operations.
5. Strengthening of SDRF and coordination between Central and State agencies: State
Disaster Response Force was strengthened by training 1275 police personnel from Special
Forces (70 to 80 in each coastal district) increasing the SDRF strength from about 100
during the previous years. Coordination between Central and State Agencies as well as
unified action by multiple agencies of Government of Tamil Nadu was given top priority.

6
Arrangements were made for establishing green corridors to facilitate quick movement of
rescue teams and relief materials.
6. Involvement of multiple stakeholders: To sensitize the Private Institutions, series of
meetings were held at District/ State level with Hospital/ Educational organizations/
Communication Service providers and Oil Companies to develop institutional level strategies
and to ensure round the clock functioning of emergency services.
7. Communication through multiple channels: Usage of multiple channels such as print/
electronic/social media/wireless systems to spread awareness among the community on the
Do's and Don'ts during disasters. Multiple mock exercises were organized on different days
including on International Disaster Reduction day.
8. Preparedness to manage flood through de-siltation & eviction of encroachments and
removal of blockages under bridges and culverts was accorded high priority: A major
drive was launched for de-silting 22,899 tanks, 11,446 Km. of river courses and canals.
14,112 encroachments were removed from water bodies. 6960 recharge pits were created
and 8657 defunct bore wells were converted as recharge wells. A special drive was launched
to clear the blockages on either side of the culverts and bridges and total blockages under
15,870 bridges and 1,41,633 culverts were removed. 500 meters upstream and downstream
of bridges/ culverts were also desilted in several areas.
1.2.12 In view of the aforesaid measures taken/initiated by the State Government it is expected to improve
the existing disaster management practices including the preparedness and minimizing the loss of lives
and property in the situation of any unforeseen eventuality in the State. The efforts of the State
Government in facing North East Monsoon 2016 based on the lessons learnt in the previous year resulted
in deft handling of the very severe Cyclone Vardah. However, the strengthening of the disaster management
including pre-disaster preparedness is a continuing process of the governance.
1.3 RELIEF & REHABILITATION EFFORTS AND MEASURES
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee emphasizes that disaster management requires coordinated and holistic approach
from all Ministries, Departments of Central as well as State level. The Committee notes that the Central
Government extended support to the Government of Tamil Nadu by providing timely support to supplement
the efforts of the State Government for tackling the situation effectively in the wake of flood situation
in Chennai during 2015. But at the same time, the Committee observes that the NDMA meetings should
take place immediately to monitor the situation depending upon the gravity of the disaster, since they
only play the most crucial role in coordinating multiple agencies belonging to the Centre and the State
who are involved in mitigating the disaster. The Committee however, appreciates the work done by the
state Government as well as Chennai Corporation, in terms of relief and rehabilitation works.
(Para 10.2.3 ibid)

7
Action Taken
1.3.2 Obs ervation of the Committee is noted by NDMA. However, it is informed that Members of
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) meet regularly for coordinating multiple agencies of
Central and State those are involved in mitigating the disaster situation in the country.
1.4 FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee notes that there is significant gap between the demand for financial assistance
made by the State and the actual help extended to them by the Centre. In this context, the Committee
takes note of the statement of the representative of the Ministry of Finance while deposing before the
Committee which is as follow:
"The State Government normally gives the Memorandum that includes damages, infrastructure and
long-term mitigation also. The assistance normally from the Government under the NDRF is for
the short-term repair and relief only. We only supplement the short-term measures because it is a
supplementary approach. Normally, there is a gap between the demand of the State Government
and the actual assistance. There is an Inter-Ministerial Committee which gives its comments on
the report and then this Executive Committee and the high level Committee see to it that it is as
per the set norms. The norms have been set by the Government as to which are the items that are
admissible for relief from the NDRF. So, normally, this difference takes place. But, in this case,
for Tamil Nadu, still that document has not been examined." (Para 11.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 In this case, it is stated that the High Level Committee (HLC), in its meetings held on 15th
February, 2016 approved the assistance of `1737.65 crore from NDRF, subject to adjustment of 50%
of balance available in the SDRF account of the State for the instant disaster.
1.4.3 It is stated that the Government of India had released the 1st installments of Central Share of State
Disaster Response Fund amounting to ` 254.625 crore for the year 2015-16, to the State on 27th May,
2015. Further, in order to support the affected people of the State, the Government of India had released
assistance of `388.42 crore ( ` 133.795 cr. + ` 254.625 crore) from SDRF and ` 552.00 crore from
Special Assistance of central plan schemes to Tamil Nadu on 23rd November, 2015. Besides, an amount
of `1000 crore ( ` 866.31 cr. + ` 133.69 cr.) released, 'on account' basis from NDRF to the State
Government on 3rd December, 2015 and 16th December, 2015 respectively. As such, Government of
India has released ` 2195.045 crore from SDRF/ NDRF and Special Assistance to Tamil Nadu for
management of relief necessitated by natural disasters during 2015-16.
Recommendation
1.4.5 However, the Committee recommends that in view of the extraordinary circumstances and the huge
damage caused to the State, particularly to the Chennai city, necessary assistance may be provided

8
without further delay. The Committee feels that huge damage has occurred to the road infrastructure and
restoration thereof is a gigantic task. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that adequate grant should
be given to the State for this purpose. (Para 11.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.6 Observation is noted and communicated to Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Road
Transport. In this context, it is mentioned that Section 49 and Section 39 of DM Act, 2005, envisage
to every Ministries or Department of the Government of India and State Governments that it shall make
provision, in its annual budget, for funds for the purpose of carrying out the activities and programs set
up in its disaster management plan. Disaster management is multi-discipline subject, which require
coordinated and holistic approach from all Ministries/ Departments of Central as well as State level.
However, the Government of India will continue to extend all possible support to the State Government
in their endeavour.

9
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
2.1 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED AGENCIES
Recommendation
2.1.1 In the opinion of the Committee, any natural disaster of bigger intensity has the propensity to
cause extensive damage. Thus, instead of putting the blame on the forces of nature, we should use
advanced technology to fight it out. Moreover, the administration of both Centre and State should work
together and remain vigilant to tackle the situation. The Committee also observes that natural disaster
of high magnitude will always adversely affect people in large number and the administration has to
respond in a fastest possible manner. Accordingly, the NDMA and all concerned bodies of Central and
State Governments should have established procedures so that vital time is not lost in wriggling out
procedural delays. (Para 8.6 of 198th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.2 There are institutional mechanisms at the National and State level for effective management of
natural disasters. There have been significant improvements in the overall system and procedures in Tamil
Nadu. In order to strengthen the existing disaster management system, the Disaster Management Act,
2005 was enacted and notified on December 26, 2005. The Act provides for institutional mechanisms
for drawing up and monitoring the implementation of the disaster management plans, which includes
holistic, coordinated, and prompt response to any calamity situation in the country and ensures measures
by various wings of government for prevention, mitigation and for minimizing the effects of calamities.
Further, the strengthening of the disaster management is a continuing process of the governance.
2.1.3 NDMA has issued guidelines for management of floods in 2008 and for management of Urban
Flooding in 2010. Implementation of the same is required to be done by the State Government. NDMA
has also issued detailed advisories to all the State Governments for taking necessary timely measures
during the monsoon season. 10-point advisory has been issued for immediate attention on urban flood
preparedness and mitigation. Formulation of roadmap strategies for medium term and long term mitigation
measures is under process.
2.1.4 The Government of Tamil Nadu has informed that they have well established procedures for
effective co-ordination and preparedness to face the events during North East Monsoon. TNSDMA have
close co-ordination with NDMA in the event of disasters. However, events of December, 2015 should
be analyzed taking into account the unprecedented down pour of gigantic proportion which was unheard
in the history of Chennai city.
2.1.5 In spite of the mammoth task that was faced, Government of Tamil Nadu had acted with great
alacrity in implementing restoration measures and it was possible due to the established procedures
9

10
followed by the Government of Tamil Nadu in close co-ordination with Central agencies and Government
of India.
2.1.6 However, the State Government has stated that the 2015 experience did impart certain lessons for
being imbibed to face unprecedented disasters. Government of Tamil Nadu have identified the gaps and
strengthened its preparedness measures and co-ordination mechanism which resulted in deft handling of
the very severe cyclone Vardha during December, 2016.
Recommendation
2.1.7 The Committee impresses on the fact that scientists all over the world are now highlighting on
global warming and its consequences like, unusually high rain fall and sea cyclones. These would be
rather more common phenomena and happen frequently in coastal states then a rare instance. Therefore,
the Committee recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs and NDMA to keep their preparedness at
optimum level. (Para 8.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.8 The concern of the Committee has been noted in the matter. In this context it is pertinent to state
that the primary responsibility for disaster management including preparedness rests with the States.
Appropriate institutional mechanisms in the form of National Disaster Management Authority, State
Disaster Management Authority and District Disaster Management Authority have been setup in the
country to develop appropriate preparedness and response mechanism in disaster situation. These setups
have also been networked with the early warning system and also with the National Emergency Operation
Centre for receiving and dissemination of alerts/ advisories/ information relating to the natural calamities.
As a part of institutional mechanism, this Ministry and NDMA coordinate with the State Government and
other stakeholders.
Recommendation
2.1.9 The Committee observes that there are multiple agencies involved in the disaster management
process and feels that despite the best efforts all these take lot of time and consequently the administration
fails to reach out to the victims. The Committee recommends that there should not be so many layers and
NDMA has to revamp the process in co-ordination with the Centre and the State. (Para 8.10 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.10 Observation is noted. Since, Disaster management is multi-discipline subject, it requires coordinated
and holistic approach from all Ministries/ Departments of Central as well as State level. However, NDMA
is responsible for laying down guidelines for management of various types of disasters, natural as well
as manmade. Guidelines for management of Floods and Urban Flooding have been issued by NDMA in
the past. Efficient implementation of the same by coordinating the actions of all the agencies under them
is the responsibility of the State Government.
2.1.11 Further, the strengthening of the disaster management including revamping the process in coordination
with Center and the State is a continuing process of the governance.

11
2.2 EXTENT OF DAMAGE DUE TO FLOODING
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee understands that damage to social and physical infrastructure and financial loss
to individuals and micro and small industries due to unprecedented torrential downpour in Chennai and
other parts of Tamil Nadu if calculated properly, may run into thousands of crores. The Committee,
therefore, urges upon the Central Government to look sympathetically into the needs of the State
Government in terms of reconstruction and rehabilitation and immediately announce a special relief and
rehabilitation package which is in consonance with the demands of the State. (Para 9.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises has informed that the relief package was
drafted in accordance with RBI master circular on natural calamities with reference to Micro, Small &
Medium Enterprises (MSME) Sector. The following relief package was endorsed in the 144th SLBC
meeting held on 18th December, 2015 at Chennai.
(i) Extending Moratorium period of two years.
(ii) Converting existing term loan and interest as converted term loan.
(iii) Rescheduling of term loan.
(iv) Extending fresh loan facilities.

12
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD
Recommendation
3.1.1 In view of the above, the Committee recommends that regular maintenance of the drainage system
should get top most priority however daunting the task may be. The Chennai Metropolitan Development
Authority and Chennai Municipal Corporation should pay attention to this issue seriously and act
accordingly. The drainage system of the city should be flawless so as to prevent any kind of water
logging. (Para 7.1.5 of 198th Report)
Action Taken
3.1.2 The State Government of Tamil Nadu has informed that Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and
Sewerage Board (CMWSS) are maintaining the network of Sewerage collection system for a length of
about 4444 Km. in Chennai City. The sewage collected is pumped to Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs)
through 250 Sewage Pumping Stations. The capacity of the Sewage Treatment Plant is 769 Million Liters
per day which is located at six different places. The existing sewerage system in Chennai city is very
old.
3.1.3 CMWSS Board has taken up various improvement measures to rehabilitate the old sewer system
by increasing the sizes of pipes, increasing the pumps capacity in the existing sewage pumping stations
and increasing the size of sewage pumping mains etc. These improvement works were done under
various schemes viz. plugging sewage outfalls under Phase-I and II and Chennai Rivers Restoration Trust
(CRRT) for which the Government has provided an amount of ` 493 crore.
3.1.4 Apart from this, for the areas included during the year 2011 with Chennai City Corporation under
expansion of city limit by adding 42 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), separate action has been taken to
provide new sewerage infrastructures. Out of the 42 ULBs, in four ULBs work has been completed at
a cost of ` 93.34 crore. In 17 ULBs works are under progress at ` 950.08 crore, for 2 ULBs tenders
are under evaluation, DPRs for 8 ULBs were prepared and posed for funding and for balance 13 ULBs
DPR is under preparation.
3.1.5 The maintenance structure available in CMWSS Board for Operation and Maintenance of the
existing sewerage system was already strengthened by inducting 43 numbers of Sewer Sucker machines,
30 numbers of Jetting cum Suction machines, 112 numbers of Jet Rodding machines and 235 numbers
of Desilting machines on daily basis. A System is in place in CMWSS Board for periodical monitoring
of O&M of sewers through scheduled preventive measures in every zone.
3.1.6 During heavy down pour, CMWSS Board engage additional manpower in co-ordination with
Greater Chennai Corporation in removing blocks in drainage system. All the sewage pumping stations are
12

13
kept in running condition round the clock by providing 100% DG sets as standby. Pumping stations are
operated continuously to pump out rain water along with sewage during rainy days.
3.1.7 All the field staff in all the 15 zones of Chennai City are on field and their works are monitored
by senior officials of the rank of Superintending Engineers posted as Nodal Offices during monsoon for
each Zone. The complaint monitoring cell at Head Office and all the Zonal offices will be functioning
round the clock with adequate officers and staff in 3 shifts to monitor the complaints received from the
public during heavy rainfall related to water supply and sewage disposal. For uninterrupted functioning
of sewage system, field officials are provided with Wireless sets for taking up immediate restoration
activities wherever breakdown of the system occurs.
3.1.8 Further, State Government has also stated that the City Storm Water Drainage Network System
has been constructed after preparing a DPR through a Hydrological consultant and it was vetted by
Center for Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO) of Government of India
for Hydrological design and the works are completed. The Greater Chennai Corporation also has taken
up several long term measures and is currently planning to execute an Integrated Storm Water Drain
Network to cover the extended areas of Greater Chennai City. The first phase of the project is being
implemented at a cost of ` 1101.43 crore in Coovam and Adayar basins and will be completed by
February 2018. During the second and third phase, Storm Water Drains will be executed in Kovalam and
Kosasthalayar basins at a cost of ` 1243.15 crore covering a length of 360 Km. in Kovalam basin and
at a cost of ` 1881.66 crore covering a length of 429 Km. in Kosasthalayar basin respectively. The
project proposals are under various stages of approval and financial closure. Hence, it is ascertained that
the networking has been done as per the design. Also, every year the Storm Water Drain in the City to
a length of 1894 Km. is being periodically desilted before onset of every monsoon.
Further Recommendation
3.1.9 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that out of the 42 Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) work on new sewerage infrastructure has been completed in only 4 ULBs at a cost of
````` 93.34 crore and for the remaining 38 ULBs work is yet to be completed. Though the work in
17 other ULBs have been undertaken at the cost of ````` 950.08 crore, the progress of work
undertaken is not satisfactory and is at a very low pace. The Committee further notes the reply
submitted by the Ministry that the project proposals are under various stages of approval and
financial evaluation. In view of the same, the Committee recommends that the reinforcement
and up-gradation of the existing old drainage system and provisioning of new sewerage
infrastructure should be completed in a time bound manner and desires that the Committee be
apprised of the updated status.
3.2 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED AGENCIES
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs through its subordinate
concerned agencies has to bolster its disaster preparedness. The Committee suggests that separate action
should be taken to prepare calamity map of all important cities by developing standard vulnerability

14
indices so as to minimize loss of life, loss of private and public property and vital installation. The
Committee does not quite accept the argument that since the rainfall was unprecedented and was more
than the hundred years average therefore, the damage was also huge. In this context exact statement of
the Home Secretary while deposing before the Committee is reproduced below:
"So, basically there can be no preparation for a disaster that occurs once in hundred years,
because the cost of preparing for the disaster would be disproportionately high."
(Para 8.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 The concern of the Committee has been noted. However, it is pertinent to mention that as per the
constitutional provisions, Flood Management is a state subject and the primary responsibility for flood
management lies with the states. The Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India is the nodal
Ministry dealing with flood-management in the country through "Central Water Commission" whereas,
the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India is the nodal Ministry for urban flooding in the
country. National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) under Department of Space in cooperation with
Central Water Commission have been involved in flood risk management and flood plain zonation activities,
which mainly includes Hazard Zonation mapping and preparation of flood hazard maps. NRSC has a
dedicated Decision Support Centre (DSC) under ISRO's Disaster Management Support (DMS) Program.
3.2.3 Over a period, NRSC/ ISRO have created a repository of large data pertaining to the floods in
different areas of the Country with the support of Central Water Commission (CWC). These datasets
generated by NRSC/ ISRO, are useful for identification of the flood-prone areas and risk assessment.
The information thus generated is very useful to the planners for devising area specific mitigation
measures.
3.2.4 NRSC in coordination with CWC has initiated Flood Hazard Zonation mapping in 2009 using
satellite data acquired during floods of different magnitudes. Flood Hazard Zonation Mapping and District-
Wise Flood Hazard Atlases have been prepared by NRSC for Assam and Bihar, whereas, work is in
progress for Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
3.2.5 As regards to the possibility of preparing calamity map for each of the important cities with
reference to urban/ riverine floods caused due to natural or manmade reasons, the time frame involved
and the cost thereof, may be worked out by NRSC and CWC and any other expert organization in the
field.
3.2.6 The aforesaid measures as taken/ initiated by the Government of India and the State Governments
are expected to improve the existing disaster management practices including the preparedness and
minimizing the effects of calamities ( i.e. loss of life, loss of private and public property and vital
installation) in the country including Tamil Nadu. Further, the strengthening of the disaster management
including preparing calamity specific maps of all important cities is a continuing process of the governance.
Further Recommendation
3.2.7 The Committee notes the measures taken by the Government and the progress made by
the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) under Department of Space in cooperation with

15
Central Water Commission in flood-risk management and flood plain zonation activities. However,
in view of the recent spate of floods in the States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, North
Eastern States and cities like Chandigarh and Mumbai the Committee feels that the people at
large have not benefitted from the efforts made so far by the Central and State Governments
and the technological advancement has not found its way in planning for the crisis of this nature.
The Committee strongly recommends that Flood Hazard Zonation Mapping of all the States and
UTs should be completed at the earliest and information thus gathered should be made central
to the planning for handling situation and vagaries of this intensity and resolving crisis in an
efficient manner.
3.3 EXTENT OF DAMAGE DUE TO FLOODING
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee is appalled by the extensive damage caused to social and physical infrastructure
such as roads, drinking water, sewerage, drainage systems, health centers, schools and colleges in flood-
affected areas of the state. Considering the severity and extent of the damage caused by torrential rains
and consequent floods to the State of Tamil Nadu, the Committee is of the opinion that the Centre should
bolster its support and does not quite agree with the view that the primary responsibility and the first
response for disaster management rests with the State. (Para 9.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 Opinion is noted. However, to supplement the efforts of the State Government, the Government
of India extends all possible logistics and financial support to the State Government in their endeavor
related to disaster management in accordance with the established procedure.
Further Recommendation
3.3.3 The Committee further recommends that guidelines issued by the NDMA for management
of floods in 2008 and for management of urban flooding in 2010 should be given the highest
importance and implemented by all means, at the earliest, by the State Government concerned.
The road map strategies for medium term and long-term mitigation measures that are in the
process of formulation, as stated by the Ministry, should be finalized and implemented. As a part
of institutional mechanism, the Ministry of Home Affairs, NDMA, State Government and other
stakeholders should follow these strategies. The Committee may also be informed about the
action taken there under.
3.3.4 The Committee observes that the Disaster Management Division (DM Division) of the
MHA needs to be dynamic and adaptive in its approach to disaster management and keep an open
mind to the new elements, institutional complexity and the specific measures arising out of
diverse geographies and situations existing in the country at large.
3.3.5 The Committee further desires that the Ministry should inform the Committee as to how
many State Governments have made provisions in their annual budgets for funds for the purpose
of carrying out the activities and programmes set up in the disaster management plan alongwith
the trend of expenditure for the financial year 2016-17 and 2017-18.

16
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee also observes that the drainage system got chocked in Chennai and the city was
flooded badly in the aftermath of heavy torrential rainfall. The Committee notes that the Ministry while
deposing before the Committee too had admitted on 28th January, 2016 to the fact that, "there is a need
to keep all our drains clean, there is need to make sure that all the storm water drains function and the
outlets function... " (Para 7.1.4 of 198th Report)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The concern raised by the Committee has been noted. The State Government has stated that
recognizing such need, the Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC) has an annual drill of desilting the entire
drainage system prior to North East Monsoon to keep the storm water drains clean, to carry the flood
waters. However, during 2015 the downpour in the upstream areas was so heavy that the inundation level
of flood was in the range of 3 to 12 feet above the road level in most of the areas of the city. The
quantity of standing water was so huge to be carried through the storm water drains. In addition to the
heavy down pour, the flow from the river mouth was impacted due to the high tide during the flood
period.
4.1.3 Further, it is stated that the Chennai Corporation has undertaken desilting operations of the entire
drainage system, the standing rain water of 3-12 feet above the road level was drained through the storm
water drains and river channels within 3 days, which would not have been possible if the drainage system
was chocked.
4.1.4 The Greater Chennai Corporation also has taken up several long term measures and is currently
planning to execute an integrated Storm Water Drain Network to cover the extended areas of Greater
Chennai City. The first phase of the project is being implemented at a cost of ` 1101.43 crores in Coovam
and Adayar basins, the first phase will be completed by February 2018.
4.1.5 During the second and third phase, Storm Water Drains will be executed in Kovalam and
Kosasthalayar Basins at a cost of ` 1243.15 crore covering a length of 360 Km. in Kovalam basin, at
a cost of ` 1881.66 crore covering a length of 429 Km. in Kosasthalayar Basin. The project proposals
are under various stages of approval and financial closure.
Further Recommendation
4.1.6 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken for laying of the Integrated Storm
Water Drain Network (ISWDN) by the Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC) and desires to know
16

17
the status of the first phase which should be completed by February, 2018. The Committee would
also like to be informed of the status of the proposed second and third phases of the project.
4.2 ILLEGAL CONSTRUCTION AND ENCROACHMENT
Recommendation
4.2.1 About illegal encroachment and faulty town planning, the Committee observes that these are the
major causes behind the havoc that was wreaked by floods in the year 2015 in the city of Chennai. The
Committee appreciates the action taken by the State Government to remove the unauthorized constructions
but still feels that this is inadequate and all illegal encroachment and construction should be removed.
However, the Committee is of the view that the process of removing encroachment should be a balanced
one as it has human and social consequences. There should be proper blue print and planning for
rehabilitating and resettling those who are living on encroached settlements before removing encroachment.
(Para 7.2.3 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The State Government has informed that Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA)
have a Master Plan prescribing land use for all the lands for the entire Chennai metropolitan areas, which
was approved by the Government of Tamil Nadu under the provisions in Town and Country Planning
Act. The Master plan not only has land use zoning for all the lands within the planning area but also
have policies, plans and strategies for implementation in various sectors like economy, transport, housing,
infrastructure etc. by different sector agencies to endure plan and orderly development of urban areas.
The Master Plan has exclusive chapter on macro drainage system in CMA (Chapter 9) and Disaster
management (Chapter 10).
4.2.3 Further, the State Government stated that major reasons for floods were as follows:—
'The unprecedented floods during the year 2015 were due to multiple factors, the major reason
being the extremely heavy rains in the catchment areas and in the urban areas. The actual rainfall
in Chennai district during 1st December, 2015 to 5th December, 2015 was 399 mm as against
normal rainfall of 40.6 mm during the same days which were in excess of 883 percentage. During
the same period the Kancheepuram district received rainfall of 467.2 mm as against the normal
rainfall of 34.5 mm which was in excess of 1254 percentage. The problem was accentuated due
to breach of systems tanks and choking of river canals due to siltation, shoal formation and
encroachments.
The Government of Tamil Nadu has launched a major drive during 2015 and 2016 for desiltation
and removal of shoals and encroachments to ensure that the water courses are clear. During the
flood period itself 7170 numbers of encroachments were evicted in Adayar River and 16956
numbers of peoples have been accommodated in 4239 numbers of tenements and each rehabilitated
encroachers was given a flat coasting ` 8 lakh free of cost.
In addition, a large number of encroachments (by people living in below poverty line) have been
identified for removal. The families are being convinced to shift to tenements constructed by

18
GoTN through Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board. In spite of the best efforts of the State
Government, the time consuming process of rehabilitation of evicted families is resulting in delays
in removal of encroachments. However, it is also to be noted that the Hon'ble Court of Madras
is directly monitoring the process of encroachments removal and rehabilitation of the evicted
families.
The Government of Tamil Nadu always emphasizes the need for removal of encroachments and
protection of water bodies and it may not be out of place, to place on record that Government
of Tamil Nadu has enacted Tanks Protection Act, 2007 and the Tamil Nadu Land Encroachment
Act, 1905 for removal of encroachments from rivers and channels. At the same time very high
priority is accorded for rehabilitating and resettling the poor in tenements constructed by Tamil
Nadu Slum Clearance Board.'
Further Recommendation
4.2.4 The Committee would like to be informed about the status of process of removing
encroachments, siltation and shoal from all the identified areas. The number of families that
were shifted to the tenements constructed may also be furnished to this Committee at the
earliest.
Recommendation
4.2.5 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) had issued an Action
Plan to all States and Union territories for "Flood Proofing of Cities/Towns " well in advance i.e., on
3rd September, 2013 itself. The MoUD should also play a pro-active role in ensuring its implementation
as well, in terms of urban planning and development especially of metro cities. (Para 7.2.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.6 The Ministry of Urban Development has informed that they have finalized the Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) for Management of Urban Flooding for the guidance of State Government agencies
like Urban Local Bodies, Urban Development Agencies like Indian Meteorological Development, National
Disaster Response Force etc. to take necessary steps for mitigating the urban flooding. The SOP is being
circulated to State/ UT Governments.
4.3 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED AGENCIES
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee further observes that as per the submission of the Member Secretary, NDMA they
have already issued guidelines on mitigating and managing floods and urban floods. In this context the
Committee notes that since now urban floods are taking place more frequently in the Country, i.e.,
Mumbai, Surat, Srinagar, and then Chennai all these in tandem indicate that the problem may further
escalate in future. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the guidelines prepared by NDMA should
be scrupulously followed and they should also review town planning of each city by giving due importance
to clear flood channels, proper drainage, safe-passage to excess water in lakes, other water bodies,
de-siltation of river bed, removal of illegal encroachment, etc. (Para 8.8 ibid)

19
Action Taken
4.3.2 The concern of the Committee has been communicated to the NDMA and Ministry of Urban
Development. However, NDMA informed that the town planning of the cities needs to be reviewed/
commented upon by the State Government in consultation with Ministry of Urban Development.
4.3.3 For this purpose the Ministry of Urban Development has informed that they have finalized Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) for Management of Urban Flooding for the guidance of State Government
agencies like Urban Local Bodies, Urban Development Agencies like Indian Meteorological Department,
National Disaster Response Force etc. to take necessary steps for mitigating the urban flooding. The SOP
is being circulated to State/UT Governments.
Further Recommendation
4.3.4 The Committee considered both the reply given to para 7.2.4 and 8.8 ibid and further
recommendations have been given at paras below.
4.3.5 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in
the finalization and issuing of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for Management of
Urban Flooding for the guidance of State/UT Governments and its agencies like Urban Local
Bodies, Urban Development Agencies like Indian Meteorological Department, National Disaster
Response Force etc. for mitigating urban flooding. The Committee, however, would like to be
informed about the changes brought in by the SOPs and its effectiveness at ground level in
mitigating urban flooding. The Committee may also be informed when the said SOP was circulated
to all States/UTs, and, if not done so far, by what date it will be circulated.
4.3.6 The Committee hopes that SOP circulated to the State/UT Governments would be helpful
guidance for mitigating urban flooding. The Committee strongly recommends that review of town
planning of the cities must be undertaken on priority basis. The Committee also desires that
final reply in regard to review of town planning of the cities may be furnished at the earliest.
4.4 FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Recommendation
4.4.1 Besides, the Central Urban Development Ministry should also provide a special package for
rehabilitation and restoration work in the urban local bodies including Chennai Municipal Corporation
of the State which have been severely affected due to torrential rains and consequent floods. Since, these
local bodies are dependent on their own small sources of tax revenue, they require substantial amount
for restoration and rehabilitation works. The Committee while considering the magnitude of the devastation
caused also recommends the Central Government to consider granting a sufficient sum for construction
of houses for the people who lost their dwellings in the flood devastation. (Para 11.9 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 The concern raised by the Committee has been noted by the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has informed that a request

20
was made in December, 2015 by State Government of Tamil Nadu for grant of special package of
` 5,000 crore for construction of 50,000 houses for the families living along the banks of Adayar River,
Coovam and Buckingham Canal and other water bodies in Chennai city and its sub-urban areas at a unit
cost of ` 10 lakh each. The State Government had also requested for sanction of additional grant of
` 750 crore under "Housing for All" Mission during the financial year 2015-16 for construction of another
50,000 houses in Chennai and adjoining urban areas for the slum dwellers whose dwelling units have
severely been damaged/lost due to floods. Further, M/o HUPA stated that the sanction of special package
is beyond the scope of the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) {PMAY(U)} mission, and the State
Government of Tamil Nadu was requested by the Ministry to approach appropriate authorities in this
regard.
4.4.3 In so far as additional grant under "Housing for All" is concerned, M/o HUPA stated that a total
of 989 housing projects have been considered involving central assistance of ` 3,325.38 crore for
construction of 2,21,692 houses for urban poor in the State of Tamil Nadu under the Pradhan Mantri
Awas Yojana (Urban). Central Assistance of ` 630.43 crore has been released so far as part of 1st
instalment for these projects.
4.4.4 The Ministry of HUPA also informed that for construction of houses for urban poor in Tamil Nadu,
a total of 1149 projects have been approved for construction of 3,54,007 houses under Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) and PMAY(U) so far involving
Central Assistance of ` 4883.23 crore of which ` 2163.72 crore has been released. In addition, under
the Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) of PMAY (U), Central assistance in the form of interest
subsidy of ` 18.80 crore has been credited to the loan account of 1128 beneficiaries for acquiring new
houses.
4.4.5 Further, M/o HUPA has also requested State Government of Tamil Nadu to complete demand
assessment and submit project proposals to the Ministry for availing Central assistance for construction
of houses under PMAY(U) to meet housing requirement for its urban poor including those whose
dwellings were lost in the flood devastation.
Further Recommendation
4.4.6 The Committee desires that MHA in coordination with Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation and the State Government may complete the projects related to construction
of houses under central assistance. The status of completion of demand assessment, project
proposals and action taken thereunder may also be intimated to this Committee.

21
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A  GLANCE
REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD
The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that out of the 42 Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) work on new sewerage infrastructure has been completed in only 4 ULBs at a cost of
````` 93.34 crore and for the remaining 38 ULBs work is yet to be completed. Though the work in
17 other ULBs have been undertaken at the cost of ````` 950.08 crore, the progress of work
undertaken is not satisfactory and is at a very low pace. The Committee further notes the reply
submitted by the Ministry that the project proposals are under various stages of approval and
financial evaluation. In view of the same, the Committee recommends that the reinforcement
and up-gradation of the existing old drainage system and provisioning of new sewerage
infrastructure should be completed in a time bound manner and desires that the Committee be
apprised of the updated status. (Para 3.1.9)
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED AGENCIES
The Committee notes the measures taken by the Government and the progress made by
the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) under Department of Space in cooperation with
Central Water Commission in flood-risk management and flood plain zonation activities. However,
in view of the recent spate of floods in the States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, North
Eastern States and cities like Chandigarh and Mumbai the Committee feels that the people at
large have not benefited from the efforts made so far by the Central and State Governments and
the technological advancement has not found its way in planning for the crisis of this nature.
The Committee strongly recommends that Flood Hazard Zonation Mapping of all the States and
UTs should be completed at the earliest and information thus gathered should be made central
to the planning for handling situation and vagaries of this intensity and resolving crisis in an
efficient manner. (Para 3.2.7)
EXTENT OF DAMAGE DUE TO FLOODING
The Committee further recommends that guidelines issued by the NDMA for management
of floods in 2008 and for management of urban flooding in 2010 should be given the highest
importance and implemented by all means, at the earliest, by the State Government concerned.
The road map strategies for medium term and long-term mitigation measures that are in the
process of formulation, as stated by the Ministry, should be finalized and implemented. As a part
of institutional mechanism, the Ministry of Home Affairs, NDMA, State Government and other
stakeholders should follow these strategies. The Committee may also be informed about the
action taken there under. (Para 3.3.3)
The Committee observes that the Disaster Management Division (DM Division) of the
MHA needs to be dynamic and adaptive in its approach to disaster management and keep an open
mind to the new elements, institutional complexity and the specific measures arising out of
diverse geographies and situations existing in the country at large. (Para 3.3.4)
21

22
The Committee further desires that the Ministry should inform the Committee as to how
many State Governments have made provisions in their annual budgets for funds for the purpose
of carrying out the activities and programmes set up in the disaster management plan alongwith
the trend of expenditure for the financial year 2016-17 and 2017-18. (Para 3.3.5)
REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken for laying of the Integrated Storm
Water Drain Network (ISWDN) by the Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC) and desires to know
the status of the first phase which should be completed by February, 2018. The Committee would
also like to be informed of the status of the proposed second and third phases of the project.
(Para 4.1.6)
ILLEGAL CONSTRUCTION AND ENCROACHMENT
The Committee would like to be informed about the status of process of removing
encroachments, siltation and shoal from all the identified areas. The number of families that
were shifted to the tenements constructed may also be furnished to this Committee at the
earliest. (Para 4.2.4)
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED AGENCIES
The Committee considered both the reply given to para 7.2.4 and 8.8 ibid and the further
recommendations have been given at paras below. (Para 4.3.4)
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in
the finalization and issuing of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for Management of
Urban Flooding for the guidance of State/UT Governments and its agencies like Urban Local
Bodies, Urban Development Agencies like Indian Meteorological Department, National Disaster
Response Force etc. for mitigating urban flooding. The Committee, however, would like to be
informed about the changes brought in by the SOPs and its effectiveness at ground level in
mitigating urban flooding. The Committee may also be informed when the said SOP was circulated
to all States/UTs, and, if not done so far, by what date it will be circulated. (Para 4.3.5)
The Committee hopes that SOP circulated to the State/UT Governments would be helpful
guidance for mitigating urban flooding. The Committee strongly recommends that review of town
planning of the cities must be undertaken on priority basis. The Committee also desires that
final reply in regard to review of town planning of the cities may be furnished at the earliest.
(Para 4.3.6)
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
The Committee desires that MHA in coordination with Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation and the State Government may complete the projects related to construction
of houses under central assistance. The status of completion of demand assessment, project
proposals and action taken thereunder may also be intimated to this Committee. (Para 4.4.6)

23
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 8th February, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Derek O' Brien
5. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shrimati Kirron Kher
10. Shri P . Nagarajan
11. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda
12. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
14. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and adopt the following four draft Reports of the
25

26
Committee:
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) 208th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report on Disaster in Chennai Caused by
Torrential Rainfall and Consequent Flooding.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee, then, took up draft 208th Report for consideration. The draft Report was adopted
without any changes by the Committee.
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if any and
if necessary further vetting of the Reports.
7.1 The Committee also decided to present/lay these Reports in both the Houses of Parliament during
the second part of this current Session.
8. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 
P.M.
***Relate to other Mathers.