SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
EIGHTY-FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
LAW’S DELAYS: ARREARS IN COURTS
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 31 DECEMBER, 2001)
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER ON 31 DECEMBER ,  2001)
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON  7TH MARCH,  2002)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF  LOK SABHA   26TH FEBRUARY,  2002)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2001/PAUSA 1923 (SAKA)
 
 
CS (HA)-161
               
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1999-2000)
                                                   
2.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2001)                                                
3.         COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE  (2000)                                                
4.         COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE  (2001)                                                    
5.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                               
6.         REPORT
                                                                                            
Law’s Delays & Delays in Disposal of Cases                                                   
Proposed Amendments in Criminal Procedure Code                                        
Amendments in Civil Procedure Code                                                              
Pendency   Malimath Committee Report  on the Problem of Arrears                                          
Vacancies of Judges                                                                                        
Strength of Judges                                                                                           
Case load and Judicial Manpower Requirement                                                
Liquidation of pendency in High Courts Alternative Mode of Dispute Settlement                                             
                    
Suggestion received from individuals/lawyers/retired judges                              
Other Initiative towards Judicial Reforms                                                        

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
Law Commission of India                                                                                
Legal Education in India                                                                                  
National Judicial Academy                                                                             
Computerisation of Courts                                                                             
Fast Track Courts                                                                                         
 
7.         
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONSCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
                                                                                               
 
8.         RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE                
 
9.         RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                         
 
10.         APPENDICES
 
I.          A Background note on Law’s Delay, Delay in the Disposal of Cases, Long Pendency of Cases and Arrears
received from the Department of Justice.
II.         A status note on the implementation of judicial reforms based on the recommendations made by various
Committees, Law Commissions etc. received from the Department of Justice.
III.      Press-Release
IV.       List of Documents/Papers/Reports used by the Sub- Committee.
IV-A.   Note on Judicial Reforms submitted by Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj, M..P.
IV-B    Speech of Chief Justice of India on Law Day ( 26 November,2001).
IV-C    Newspaper Clipping; Hindustan Times, 4 October, 2001.
IV-D    Newspaper Clipping, Apex Court on a fast track : Clearing Arrears.
V.       Pendency in the High Courts as on 31 October, 2001
.
VI.       Cases pending for 7-10 yrs in Supreme Court & High Courts   
VII.      No. of cases pending in the District/Sub-ordinate courts           
VIII.     No. of cases pending over 10 years in the District/Sub-ordinate Courts
IX.       Details of vacancies in the High Courts                                     
X.        State wise details of vacant posts of judicial officers                              
XI.       Details of Hyderabad Resolution on the Reforms in Legal Education and entry into Legal Profession .
XII.      Number of Under-trials in Different jails ( State-wise) at the end of 1999.
XIII.     Statement showing No. of fast track courts set-up in the country (State-wise).
XIV.    Statement showing No. of fast track courts functioning in various States in the country (State-wise).
 
                                   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (1999-2000)
 
 
1.       Shri Pranab Mukherjee ¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.       Shri Hiphei                                                    
§ 3.  Shri Surender Kumar Singh  
4.      Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5.      Dr. L. M. Singhvi                  
6.      Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai  
7.
            Shri K. M. Saifullah              
8.            Shri C. M. Ibrahim
9.            Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
10.    Shri C. P. Thirunavukkarasu 
11.    Shri Drupad Borgohain         

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
12.    Shri Kuldip Nayyar               
j  13 .   Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
o  14.    Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
%  15.    Shri Jayant Bhattacharya
        LOK SABHA
16.    Shri Manabendra Shah         
17.    Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari            
18.
        Shri Vinay Katiyar                
19.        Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi    
20.        Shri Anadi Sahu                    
* 21.    Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri                
22.    Shri Ram Nagina Mishra       
23.    Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt        
24.    Smt. Jayashree Banerjee       
25.    Shri Rajen Gohain                 
26.    Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
27.    Shri Rajkumar Wangcha       
28.    Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
29.    Smt. Nisha Chaudhary          
30.    Shri Jitendra Prasada            
31.    Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel        
32.    Shri M. O. H. Farook
33.    Shri Samar Choudhury          
34.    Shri Subodh Roy                  
35.
        Dr. S. Venugopalachari
36.        Shri Beni Prasad Verma        
37.        Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
38.        Shri Arun Kumar                  
39.    Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
40.    Shri P. H. Pandian                
41.    Shri Shriniwas Patil               
42.
        Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh                         
43.        Dr. Jayanta Rongpi               
44.        Shri S. K. Bwiswmuthiary
* 45.     Shri Vijay Goel
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 6th April, 2000.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2001)
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee-   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Hiphei
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
7.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8.         Shri K.M, Saifullah
9.         Shri C.M. Ibrahim

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
f 10.    Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
11.       Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
12.       Shri Drupad Borgohain
13.       Shri Kuldip Nayyar
* 14.        Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
15.        Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
©16.        Shri Pritish Nandy
®17.    Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan
LOK SABHA
18.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
19.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
ª20.    Shrimati  Nisha Chaudhary
**21.               Shri Samar Chaudhary
22.       Shri M.O.H. Farook
# 23.        Shri Vijay Goel
24.       Shri Rajen Gohain
25.       Shri  Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
26.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
27.       Shri Arun Kumar
28.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
29.       Shri P.H. Pandian
30.       Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel
31.       Shri Shriniwas Patil
*** 32.            Shri Jitendra Prasada
33.       Shri Subodh Ray
34..      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
35.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
____________________________________________________________________
f     Ceased  to be Member   w.e.f. 1
st  March, 2001.
*     Ceased to be Member w.e.f 14th  June,  2001 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya Sabha.
©    Nominated w.e.f. 3rd  August,  2001.
®    Nominated w.e.f. 20th  August,  2001.
ª    Expired on 30th  January,2001.
**   Expired on  10th  September,  2001.
#    Ceased to be Member w.e.f  1st   September,  2001 on being appointed Minister.
*** Expired on 16th  January, 2001.
36.       Shri Anadi  Sahu
37.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
38.       Shri Manabendra Shah
39.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
$ 40.        Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
41.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
42.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
43.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
f 44.   Dr. S. Venugopal
45.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
46.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
¨47.    Shri  Harin Pathak
©48.    Shri E. Ponnuswamy
##  49.        Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
$   Expired on 27th  November,  2001.
f   Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19th  March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on  Human Resource Development.
¨  Ceased to be Member  w.e.f 15th  October, 2001on being appointed as Minister.
©  Nominated w.e.f. 8 th  March, 2001.
## Nominated w.e.f. 21st  November,  2001.
 
SUB-COMMITTEE ON JUDICIAL REFORMS (2000)
 
1.         Dr. L.M.Singhvi - Convener
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.         Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
6.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
7.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
8.         Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
9.         Shri P.H. Pandian
10.       Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhai Patel
11.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
12.       Shri Anadi Sahu
13.       Shri Manabendra Shah
14.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
15.       Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
 
 
            SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
SUB-COMMITTEE ON JUDICIAL REFORMS (2001)
 
1.         Dr. L.M.Singhvi - Convener
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
6.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
7.         Smt. Jayashree Banerjee

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
8.         Shri P.H. Pandian
9.         Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhai Patel
10.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
11.       Shri Anadi Sahu
12.       Shri Manabendra Shah
13.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
14.       Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
15.       Shri Pritish Nandy
 
 
            SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri  Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
                        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorised by  the Committee to submit  the Report on its behalf, do hereby present  this Eighty-fifth  Report of the
Committee   on “Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts”.  This comprehensive  report dealing with the Judicial Reforms
purports to go a long way in improving our Judicial system.
2.0       The Indian Judicial System may be one of the best judicial systems in the world, but the figures, which follow,
raise questions which cause anxiety.  The bewildering statistics reveal the magnitude of the problem: over 20 million
cases pending in the District/Subordinate Courts;  3.5 million cases pending in High Courts; Madhya Pradesh, Patna,
Rajsthan, and Calcutta High Courts have cases pending since 1950, 1951, 1956 and 1955 respectively; percentage of
under-trials in India is 73% of our total jail population; inhuman conditions of women under-trials; no separate jail
rooms for women except in Tihar Jail in the entire country, to give only a few examples.  There are only 10.5  Judges per
million of our  population, and that is  one of the lowest in the world;  the number of vacancies in the Subordinate Courts
is  1900 against the total strength of 12500 (about 15% of the total strength) and  170  in High Courts as against  the total
strength of 647 (about 26% of the total strength). The budget allocation for judiciary is only 0.2 percent of the GNP, out
of which 50 percent i.e. 0.1 percent is realised from the court revenues.
2.1       The situation in Committee’s opinion is alarming. Preparing and implementing a blueprint of comprehensive
reform should be regarded as one of the highest priorities on our national agenda.
2.2       Considering the immense scope and the wide ambit of Judicial Reforms, it was necessary to identify a specific
problem area.  The issues which arose for  the Committee’s deliberations, included inter alia vacancies of judges;
pendency of cases in courts; specific action plans to tackle them; centrally sponsored scheme for infrastructural 
development  of the judiciary;  need for amendment in the  Memorandum of Procedure of Appointment  of Judges of
Supreme Court and High Courts; improvement  in the quality of judgements;  and the need to tune our  legal system  to
the  post-WTO and the international  patent  regime;  increasing the sanctioned strength of Judges  of High Courts and
Subordinate  Courts; setting up of benches of Supreme Court and High Courts; setting up of  tribunals  to decide 
disputes  relating to  matrimony, education, elections petitions, company matters; increase in the age of retirement of
High Court and Supreme Court Judges; adjournments; provision of loans to young lawyers  for libraries and computers; 
use of retired judicial human resource to dispose of pending  cases;  procedural  reforms  to curb delays;  providing
modern infrastructural facilities up to the subordinate courts;  alternative  dispute  resolution  mechanism;  introduction
of case management  system  in the courts; and  classification,  categorization  and bunching of cases.
3.0       To do justice to the subject of judicial reforms I, on behalf of  the  Committee on Home Affairs,  reconstituted
 the   Sub-Committee  on Judicial Reforms on 17 May, 2000 with Dr. L.M. Singhvi, a Member of the Committee and
Senior Advocate, as its Convenor and Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj, Shri Sangh Priya Gautam, Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai,
Shri Raj Mohinder Singh, Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu, Shri Kuldip Nayyar, Smt. Jayashree Banerjee, Shri P.H. Pandian,

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhai Patel, Dr. Jayanta Rongpi, Shri Anadi Sahu, Shri Manabendra Shah, Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari,
and Shri Rajkumar Wangcha as its Members.    
The Sub-Committee held its meeting on 24 July, 2000 in which the following areas were identified by broad
consensus for detailed study:-
(a)    Law’s Delays, Delay in the disposal of cases, Long Pendency of Cases and Arrears (case load, judicial
manpower assessment, case management and statutory time limit for  disposal of cases, etc.);
(b)   Legal Education;
(c)    Alternative Dispute Resolution  (ADR); and
(d)   Criminal Justice System.
 
4.0              The Sub-Committee then met on 22 September, 2000.
4.1   In order to ensure  the optimum efficiency of the judicial system,  to improve the access of the litigants to speedy,
inexpensive and substantial justice the Sub-Committee decided to take up the subject of “ Law’s delays:  Arrears in
Courts” and the need for reforms on a priority basis.  The Sub-Committee would consider the remaining subjects at the
later stage.  A background note on ‘Law’s delays, Delays in disposal of cases, Long Pendency of cases and Arrears’
received from the Department of Justice  is (Appendix I).
5. Reform is a continuous process and the judicial reforms is no exception. Various committees and commissions have
studied the subject and given their suggestions and recommendations. A status note on the implementation of judicial
reforms based on the recommendations made by various Committees, Law Commissions etc. received from the
Department of Justice is at (Appendix II).
6.0  The Sub-Committee was again reconstituted on 17 February 2001 with Dr. L.M. Singhvi as its Convenor and
ShriHansraj Bhardwaj, Shri Sangh Priya Gautam, Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai, Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu, Shri Kuldip
Nayyar, Smt. Jayashree Banerjee, Shri P.H. Pandian, Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhai Patel, Dr. Jayanta Rongpi, Shri Anadi
Sahu, Shri Manabendra Shah, Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari, Shri Rajkumar Wangcha and Shri Pritish Nandy as its Members.
6.1       The Sub-Committee decided that a Press Release be issued for obtaining views/comments/suggestions from
experts and others.        In its meeting held on 5 February 2001, the Sub-Committee approved the draft of the Press
Release.
6.2       Accordingly, a Press Release (Appendix  III  ) was issued on  January 2001 inviting views and suggestions of
institutions, organizations, associations, concerned citizens and eminent experts which would facilitate the Sub-
Committee in  formulating its recommendations on the subject of speedy justice in the courts as well as tribunals.
6.2       The overwhelming response to the Press Release issued by the Secretariat inviting public opinion on Judicial
Reforms is a pointer to the pressing urgent need for reforms in our judicial system.  As  expected, the  majority of the
responses  have been received from retired judges and practising  lawyers.  A large number of suggestions have also
been received from individuals as well which are based on their personal experiences vis-à-vis the system.  A list of the
suggestions gleaned out from the representations is given in the body of the Report under the caption ‘Suggestions
Received from Individuals, Lawyers and Retired Judges.’
6.3  The  Sub-Committee met on 5 November, 2001 to consider the preliminary draft report on the  “ Law’s Delays:
Arrears in Courts”.
6.4 The Sub-Committee considered and adopted its report with some modifications in its meeting held on 4 December
2001 in Delhi. The Sub-Committee also authorized its Convenor to present the report to the Chairman of the Main
Committee for consideration.
7.0   In course of the study of the subject and while preparing this Report, the Sub-Committee relied upon large number
of notes, voluminous reports, documents and inputs received from various quarters. A list of such
papers/documents/reports is placed at (Appendix- IV).
7.1  A particular reference may be made here to the Note on Judicial Reforms submitted by Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, former
Union Law Minister and presently Member, Rajya Sabha and member of the Committee and also of this Sub-Committee
and the Note of Dr. Abhishek Singhvi, Sr. Advocate  with regard to the highly successful initiative launched under the
stewardship of Shri Justice A.M. Ahmadi, Chief Justice of India.   We found them to be of invaluable assistance to us. 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
7.2       Judicial reform is a continuing process.  The responsibility to implement judicial reforms has to be shared  by
both the Central and State  Governments and the Supreme Court and the High Courts.   Many reports and
recommendations have been made in conferences of Chief Ministers and the Chief Justices during the last two decades. 
Our path has been paved with good intentions without the resolve and resources to adopt and translate an integrated and
adequately funded programme of reforms.
7.3       Shri Justice S.P. Bharucha, Chief Justice of  India, spoke at length about the judicial  administration in the
country on the occasion of Law Day in the Supreme Court on 26 November, 2001.  He touched upon  subjects like
pendency of cases, unfilled vacancies, low judge-population ratio, condition of  under-trials, conduct  of Judges,
unnecessary and frequent adjournments.  A copy of his speech is annexed  at (Appendix- IV-A).  
7.4       The Committee is  the view that the country and the Government should address those areas of concern urgently. 
The system is in peril.  The Committee felt  any delay could  no longer be afforded.
7.5       The Committee recorded its sincere  acknowledgement  for the comprehensive  report  prepared by the Sub-
Committee on Judicial Reforms under the Convenership of Dr. L.M.Singhvi, and wished this report to be a major
landmark in the process of Judicial Reforms.
7.6       The Committee  considered  and adopted the report in its meeting held on 19 December  2001. 
 
 
New Delhi;
                                                                           PRANAB MUKHERJEE
December 19, 2001                                                                                      Chairman                                                      
                     Committee on Home Affairs
 REPORT
1.         The dictum ‘Justice Delayed Is Justice Denied’ postulates that an unreasonable delay in the administration of
justice constitutes an unconscionable denial of justice.    The mounting arrears in the trial and appellate courts  coupled
with increased institution of court cases on account of the awareness of rights on the part of the citizens, enactment of
numerous laws creating new rights and obligations, industrial development in the country, increased trade and
commerce  and legislative and administrative measures touching  the lives  of citizens at all levels, have assumed 
serious proportions.   The total number of pending cases at present amount to a staggering 24 million [1]
 in all the courts
taken together in the country.  A large number of unfilled vacancies of Judges and a  low Judge-population ratio across
the board have caused a formidable accumulation of arrears and shockingly inordinate delays in the disposal of cases
with the result that at the zenith of its many outstanding achievements in aid of Democracy and Rule of Law, the Indian
judiciary is face to face with an incipient darkness at noon and with challenges which can only be met with constructive
cooperation between the three branches of the Government, the fourth estate, and we, the people of India.
 
Law’s Delays & Delays in Disposal of Cases
2.         The expression ‘Judicial Reforms’ involves a critical appreciation and assessment of the existing system of laws
and administration of justice with a view to make it more vibrant, receptive and enable it to meet the demand of the
time.  The courts in India function according to the procedure laid down in the Criminal Procedure Code, Civil
Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act and procedures laid down in Parliamentary and delegated legislation.
 
3.0 A classic case, one among several cases,  which epitomizes the Law’s delays and delay in the disposal of cases is the
one related to assassination of late Shri  L.N.Mishra, the then Union Minister for Railways who was killed in an
explosion in a public meeting at Samastipur on January 2, 1975. Since the trial proceedings started the case has been 
transferred to as many as nine judges.  The trial court has so far been able to record the statements of only two accused
persons out of seven despite a court’s directive for a day-to-day hearing to expedite the matter. Many important
witnesses had to be dropped either because they remained untraced or because they did not come forward for deposition.
The protracted proceedings inevitably  create a tangled web of anomalies.2
 
3.1   To remove the bottlenecks arising out of the inherent deficiencies in law which results in the law’s delays and

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
accelerate the disposal of cases, there is a need to amend the existing statutes i.e. the High Court Acts and Rules, Civil
Procedure Code, Criminal Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act and other procedural laws.  It is also imperative to
augment the strength of courts to provide them full physical and functional facilities, institute alternative modes of
disposal and provide modern information technology to courts.
 
Proposed Amendments in Criminal Procedure Code            
 
4.         The Law Commission of India in its 154
th Report (1996)  has made a number of  recommendations for speedy
disposal of criminal cases. The Committee requested the Ministry of Home Affairs to apprise it of the status of
implementation of the recommendations. The Ministry informed the Sub-Committee that the report was referred to all
the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations for their views/comments as the Criminal Law and Criminal
Procedure are on the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule  to the Constitution of India and Criminal laws are
administered by the State Governments. After repeated reminders and convening regional meetings, views of the State
Governments may be summed up as follows:
 
(i)         Most of the States  appreciated the recommendations of the Law Commission contained in its 154
th
Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  Some of the States have set up Committees to consider the
implications of  the Law Commission’s Report.
 
(ii)
                On the point of separate investigating Agency, while the states commended the idea behind the proposal,
they expressed apprehensions as to its practicability on account of financial implications.
 
(iii)     Some States  expressed the view that the provisions relating to anticipatory bail should be restricted in its
application.  There should be no bar to arrest  the person by the police during the pendency of the application for
anticipatory bail.  After charge sheet  is filed, anticipatory bail should not be granted.
 
(iv)
              There was general agreement that many more offences be made compoundable.
 
(v)
                On the subject of maintenance of wife, children and parents, the proposal of the Law Commission to
raise the maximum ceiling from the present Rs.500 to Rs.5000 was welcomed by all except Meghalaya which
said that this proposed ceiling should be reconsidered.  One State expressed the view that some minimum amount
of maintenance should also be prescribed. However, in view of the cost of living index rising constantly,
retention of a maximum ceiling is not justified. If a ceiling is prescribed and retained, it would require periodic
revision taking into account the inflation and rise in the cost of living as well as amendment of provisions of the
Act from time to time. This would consume time. Accordingly the Government had introduced a Bill i.e. The
Code of Criminal Procedure ( Amendment) Bill, 2001, in the Rajya sabha on 7 August, 2001, to amend section
125 and make consequential changes in section 127 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to remove the ceiling in
maintenance allowance. This Bill has since been passed by Parliament and enacted as Act No. 50 of 2001. 
 
 
(vi)
              Concept of plea bargaining found favour with most of the States.[2]
 ( vii)  As regards victimology,  control of victimization  and protection of victims of crimes,   there was general
agreement, but it was considered necessary that nature of the crime, victim and amount of compensation for each
offence should be duly considered and laid down.
 
(viii) Some States expressed the view that for minor offences of regulatory nature, there need not be strict
separation between the Judiciary and the Executive.  The Executive Magistrates may be given the power to try
and dispose them of.  Such offences are generally victimless crimes.  One State suggested that cases of
maintenance may be given to Executive Magistrates, for granting interim relief after a short inquiry and
thereafter the case may be passed on to the Judicial Magistrate concerned.
 
(ix)              One State suggested that Section 9 of the Cr.P.C. be amended on the lines of Section 11 thereof with a

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
view to enable the State Government to establish Special Courts of Sessions Judges.  It further suggested that in
cases triable by Sessions Court, there should not be any committal proceeding of cases triable by them.
 
(x)                The concept of Nyaya Panchayat [3] was welcomed by most of the States.
(xi)              Almost all the States agreed on the concept of establishing independent Directorate of Prosecution. 
Most of them, already have them.  States were also of the view that the Directorate of Prosecution should be
neither under the police nor under the Home Department.  It should only be under the Department of Law to
ensure its independence.
 
(xii)      One State noting that the subject matter of penal law and criminal procedure is in the Concurrent List,
expressed the view that there need not be uniform law for the whole country.  States may have their own
amendments, suitable to their needs.
 
 5.        The Home Ministry further informed that some other  recommendations  of the Commission did not call for an
amendment to the Code and, accordingly, were referred to the State Governments for implementation in November,
1997.
 
6.       The Committee was further informed that in the meanwhile, the Government has constituted a Committee in
January 2001, under the Chairmanship of Shri Justice V.S. Malimath, formerly Chief Justice of Karnataka/Kerala High
Courts, to suggest measures to revamp Criminal Justice System.   The terms of reference of the Committee are :-
 
(i)
                  To examine the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence, including the
constitutional provisions relating to criminal jurisprudence and see if any modifications or
amendments are required thereto;
 
(ii)
                To examine in the light of findings on fundamental principles and aspects of criminal
jurisprudence as to whether there is a need to rewrite the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
Indian Penal Code and the Indian Evidence Act to bring them in tune with the demand of the
times and in harmony with the aspirations of the people of India;
 
(iii)
               To make specific recommendations on simplifying judicial procedures and practices and
making the delivery of justice to the common man closer, faster, uncomplicated and
inexpensive;
 
(iv)              To suggest ways and means of developing such synergy among the judiciary, the
prosecution and the police as restores the confidence of the common man in the criminal
justice system by protecting the innocent and the victim and by punishing unsparingly the
guilty and the criminal;
 
(v)
                To suggest sound system of managing, on professional lines, the pendency of cases at
investigation and trial stages and making the police, the prosecution and the judiciary
accountable for delays in their respective domains; and      
 
(vi)
              To examine the feasibility of introducing the concept of “federal crime” which can be put on
List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
 
  7.       The Committee has been informed that the Malimath Committee was asked to submit  its report within six
months. However, it has now been given extension up to 31 March 2002. The Committee welcomes the setting up of this
Committee to go into the revamping of the criminal justice system and  is hopeful that its recommendations would be far
reaching as far as revamping of the criminal justice system is concerned. The Committee would also expect of the
Government to speedily process the recommendations and thereafter implement those which are found acceptable.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
Amendment in the Civil Procedure Code
 
8.0       The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which contains the law relating to the procedure in suits and civil
proceedings, has been amended from time to time. Of late, Parliament has enacted the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1999, with a view to cutting short the delays at various levels. After the Bill was enacted, the same
could not be brought into force in view of the lawyers’ protests and agitations. Subsequently the Government while
reconsidering the matter regarding reduction in delay in the disposal of civil cases, after consultation with legal
luminaries and Bar Council of India and other concerned, has proposed to further amend the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in the form of the Code of Civil Procedure, (Amendment) Bill, 2000, which was referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home  Affairs, which has since presented its report to the Parliament on 20
November,2001.
 
8.1    The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 would be given simultaneous effect after the enactment of
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000.  Both the legislations will go a long way in expediting the disposal
of cases.  Major provisions contained in the said Act/Bill are as follows:
 
(i)
                  No Letters Patent Appeal (LPA) against the decree pronounced by the High Court in the exercise of its
original power is permissible under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure;
 
(ii)
                Introduction of  approved modern means of transmission (i.e. speed post, fax, courier, electronic mail)
for sending summons through the process server at the expense of plaintiff.  In addition, summons can
also be served by the plaintiff on defendants;
 
(iii)               Prescription of time limit of thirty days from the date of summons for submitting written argument by
the defendant in his defence, which could be extended upto the maximum period of ninety days by the
Court for reasons to be recorded;
 
(iv)              Requirement of filing document in support of evidence at the time of filing of suit.  New document can
be produced in support of evidence subsequent to commencement of trial with the leave of the Court;
 
(v)                Conditional amendments to the plaint after the commencement of trial in case of (a) change in law
subsequent to the framing of the issues and (b) new fact coming to knowledge of the applicant which
could not have been discovered by him with due diligence before framing the issue);
 
(vi)
              A few measures to check prolix oral argument:
(a)                submission of concise written argument by the party before the argument, which would form part
of record of the court and submitted to the opposite party;
(b)               no adjournment to be granted for filing written argument unless permitted by the court for reasons
to be recorded;
(c)                time limit to be fixed by the court for oral argument.
(vii)             Examination-in-Chief of a witness in the form of affidavit and the admissibility of the document filed in
affidavit lies with the court.  
 
9. Coming to the core theme of this report, a brief analysis of pendency of cases in various courts and their efforts,
successful or otherwise, to reduce it have been given in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Pendency of Cases
10.       Long pendency of cases in Supreme Court, High Courts and Sub-ordinate Courts has become a matter of serious
concern.  A statistical presentation of number of pending cases relating to Supreme Court, High Courts and Subordinate
Courts and analysis thereof is given below:-

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
Pendency in the Supreme Court
 
11.       The pendency of cases in the Supreme Court has shown a downward trend.  The pendency of cases which was
1,04,936 as on 31.12.1991 came down to 58,794 in 1994 and further  down to 21, 995 as on 31 October, 2001.[4]
 
Supreme Court’s Tryst with Pendency
12.       The Supreme Court has taken certain steps which have resulted in a substantial reduction in accumulated arrears.
It has successfully implemented the cardinal principles of Active Case Flow Management Technique (ACMT) by
creating dual tracks, one for keeping abreast of current filings and the other to deal with old pending matters.[5]  It is a
model which commends itself to us and which can be replicated for dealing with the arrears in the High Courts and
Subordinate Courts.  A report on “Modernisation of Civil Justice System in India: Implementation Plan”, prepared by
The Study Team constituted by the National Judicial Academy and submitted to the Hon’ble Cheif Justice of India, may
be referred to for detail discussion on the monitoring, co-ordination and case-flow tracking.
 
13.       Another area where the Apex Court has concentrated its energy is on adjournments.  Adjournments have been
made an exception.  Adjournments in the Supreme Court can never be taken for granted and cases scheduled for a
particular date are invariably listed on that day.  Indeed, listing is entirely computer-managed, except for extremely
urgent listing required within less than 15 days for which a special oral mention has to be made to the Chief Justice.
 
14.       In the Apex Court, the cases listed for a day which were earlier adjourned owing to the absence of any Judge are
now immediately redistributed on the very day over the remaining benches and thus dealt with or disposed of on the
same day, despite an inevitably enhanced work load for each bench.
 
15.       Bench stabilization in the Apex Court over three-month or six-month periods ensures that the same or similar
subjects out of the 56 computer classified subjects go to the same benches as far as possible, thus expediting disposal.
 
16.       On the Human Resource front, the Apex Court has made efforts to streamline the distribution of work in all the
departments  in  such  a way  that  intra-departmental  and inter-departmental file movement can be minimized.  It has
reorganized the staff strength depending on the filings and pendency.
 
17.       The Apex Court has made use of the computer in the most effective way.  Computerization at every level in the
Department of Registry has considerably increased efficiency.  Maximum information covering numerous fields and
criteria are fed into the computer in respect of each case, thus ensuring maximum information retrieval at the touch of a
button and a Judis Programme has already incorporated all Supreme Court judgements into the computer.
 
18.       In addition, the following steps have also been taken in the Apex Court:
a)         More practical categorization and grouping of cases involving similar questions of law.
 
b)
                  No accumulation of defective matters;
 
c)                  Reservation of sufficient slots for old, pending, miscellaneous and SLP matters so that they are listed in
chronological order in sufficient numbers.
 
Pendency in  High Courts
19.       The pendency  of cases in the High Courts which was 26.51 lakh as on  31.12.1993 increased to 29.81 lakh by 31
December 1995 and further increased to about 31.81 lakh  in December 1997.  The actual pendency of cases as on
31.12.99 was 33.65 lakh  and it was 35.41 lakh  on December, 2000. The latest figures of pendency in the High Courts as
[6]

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
on 31 October,2001 are 35,54,687( for High Court-wise details please see Appendix- V).
 
20. The Committee notes that various measures have been adopted in the High Courts for expeditious disposal of cases
including classification and grouping of cases, computerization of records in all the High Courts, (except the newly
created High Courts of Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand and Uttaranchal) identification and listing of cases covered by the
decisions finally made by the Supreme Court  and the High Courts on the same point.  In addition, many High Courts
have taken steps to amend their rules of procedure in order to simplify  legal proceedings and to achieve expeditious
disposal of cases.
 
21.  The Committee is impressed by the various steps taken by the Supreme Court towards reducing the arrears
successfully.  Though similar methods are said to have been applied by various High Courts also,  similar results have
not been achieved. The Committee is particularly perturbed to note that cases are pending for over 50 years, 40 years and
30 years in certain High Courts.  As per the data furnished by the Government, M.P. High Court has a case pending since
1950, Patna High Court has a case pending since 1951, Rajasthan since 1956, Kolkata since 1955. The Committee is
equally disturbed to note that over 5 lakh cases are pending in the High Courts for over 10 years. And the number of
cases pending for 7-10 years are also as high as over 3 lakh (See Appendix-VI).
22.       The magnitude of arrears in Allahabad High Court is disquieting.  Out of total cases pending in all the 18 High
Courts in India i.e. 35.4 lakh, Allahabad alone has more than 8 lakh cases pending.  Out of 8 lakh cases pending in
Allahabad High Court, about 2 lakh cases ( 25%) are pending for over 10 years and about 1.36 lakh (17%) are pending
for 7-10 years. Madras, Calcutta, Kerala and  Bombay High Courts are not far behind where pending cases as on
December, 1999 are 3.55 lakh, 3.10 lakh, 3.08 lakh, 2.84 lakh respectively.  In these High Courts, cases pending over 10
years amount to 5050, 146476, 533 and 28404, respectively.
23.       The Committee strongly feels that urgent steps are needed to be taken for the disposal of huge pendency of  cases
in the High Courts, especially  of Allahabad, Madras, Calcutta, Kerala and Bombay.  The Committee would like that the
Government be urged upon to take up this matter with the Chief Justice of India, Chief Justices of the concerned High
Courts and the State Governments with a view to work out or devise special plans to reduce the pendency and revive
public confidence  in the judiciary with regard to delays in the disposal of cases and accumulation of arrears.
 
Pendency in Subordinate Courts
 
24.       As per available information, the pendency of cases in District/ Subordinate Courts as on 31.12.1995 was 2.18
crore.  The pendency decreased to 1.99 crore as on 31.12.1996. The overall disposal of cases during the year  1996 was 
1.44 crore  while the institution of  cases for the same period was 1.25 crore.  The pendency increased to about 2 crore as
on 31.12.1997 and then  to  2.02  crore  as  on 31.12.98.  As  per  latest  available   information,   the pendency is 2.01
crore (SeeAppendix –VII).
 
25.   The slight decrease in pendency of cases appears, inter-alia, due  to the directions given by the Supreme Court in its
judgement dated 1.5.1996 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1128 for closing of cases involving minor offences pending for 2
years or more in which proceedings have not commenced and also due to appointment of Special Judicial
Magistrates/Special Metropolitan Magistrates under Sections 13 and 18 of the Cr. P.C. for the disposal  of traffic and
petty cases. A tabular representation showing number of cases pending over 10 years in the District/ Subordinate courts
is placed at (SeeAppendix – VIII).
 
26.       On 24 August, 2001, the Union Law Minister while speaking on a debate  in the Rajya Sabha on a Private
Member’s Bill - The High Court of Gujarat ( Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Rajkot) Bill,2000 – observed: 
“The problem at the lower courts level was not so grave. The figure of 2 crore had been static. At least the figure is not
increasing. The filing in 12000  District Courts all over the country and the disposal every year is practically the same.”
The Minister further observed: “The slowest layer of litigation in this country is the High Courts. Ten Years ago, there
were 19 lakh pending cases. Today   it   has crossed the 34 lakh mark.  On an average, it is rising at a pace of about 1.5 to
2 lakh  cases per year. Therefore, the filing in most of the High Courts is much more than the disposal though with some
exceptions.” [7]

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
27.   The Committee notes that the problem of pendency in the High Courts is the most acute.   It fully agrees with the
observation of the Law Minister that the High Courts have become the slowest layer in the judicial process. It is
significant that despite poor infrastructure and other constraints in lower courts they have made a dent, howsoever small,
on the problem of arrears.  Those courts deserve better facilities and better working conditions The Committee, also
recommends that all necessary steps may be taken to secure expeditious handling of cases in the High Courts and the
Subordinate Courts by filling the vacancies of Judges in High Courts; application of Active Case Flow Management
Technique (ACMT); stricter control over adjournments; reallocation of cases, when a bench is unable to sit; Bench
stabilization; and Man-power management to reduce time taken in file movement.  The Committee also recommends to
the Government to accord top priority to improve manpower and infrastructural facilities at the Subordinate/district court
levels so as to facilitate wiping out of the arrears and swift disposal of cases.   Budgetary allocations have to be
augmented substantially.  There is need for a greater sense of purpose.
 
The Malimath Committee Report on the Problem of Arrear
 
27.1   To study the problem of arrears in courts and to suggest steps for their expeditious disposal, a Committee headed
by Shri Justice V.S. Malimath, the then Chief Justice of Kerala High Court, popularly known as Malimath Committee
was constituted in January, 1989.  In all, 177 recommendations were made by the Malimath Committee in its report in
1990.  The recommendations were forwarded by the Department of Justice to the concerned central Ministries, all the
State Governments/UT Administrations and High Courts for necessary follow-up action in December, 1990.
 
27.2   A few of the recommendations made by the Malimath Committee are listed here which have been by and large
accepted and implemented in  majority of the States  and which are likely to expedite the disposal of cases:
 
 
1.
                  Abolition of Original Civil Jurisdiction of the High Court. [8]
2.                  Abolition of Letters Patent Appeals. [9]
3.                  Filing  of certified copy of decree to be dispensed with.[10]
4.                  High Courts to specify categories of cases which could be heard by Single Judge, or by a Division
Bench.[11]
 
5.                  Magisterial Courts to try in a summary way the offences specified in Sections 260. [12] and 261 of the
Cr.P.C.
6.                  Work of serving summons and notices should be entrusted to the process servers of the courts in addition
to the police at present. [13]
7.                  Convention to be evolved that would discourage granting adjournments.[14]
8.                  Court should avoid writing long and elaborate judgements.[15]
9.                  Reserved judgements should ordinarily be delivered within a reasonable time.[16]
10.              Court to prepare lists of old cases and arrange their early disposal. [17]
           
28.       The Committee feels that the recommendations of the Malimath Committee, especially those cited above when
implemented in all the States/UTs, will definitely expedite the disposal of cases and suggests that the Government may
persuade the States/Union Territories with all sincerity, which are still in the process of implementing them, to complete
the process without further delay.
 
29.       The Malimath Committee made another set of recommendations in the same report for setting up of Alternative

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
Tribunals to reduce pendency in High Courts.
 
1.                  Setting up of Industrial Relations Commission.
2.                  Setting up of Rent Tribunals.
3.                  Extension of jurisdiction of Central Administrative Tribunals to the teaching and non-teaching staff of
universities. Earlier the teaching and non-teaching staff were not covered by the CAT’s jurisdiction.
4.                  Setting up of tribunal/machinery for early disposal of cases concerning students admissions/examination
malpractices, educational programmes, affiliation and de-affiliation of colleges, election to universities/
bodies etc.
 
30.       The Committee is of the firm view that setting up of alternative tribunals viz; Industrial Relations Commissions;
Rent Tribunals; and setting up of tribunals with jurisdiction on various educational malpractices are likely to help reduce
the burden on courts.  The Committee recommends that Government may take  necessary steps to set up these Tribunals
at the earliest.
 
Vacancies of Judges
 
31.0   The following procedure was followed for filling up of vacancies of judges before the judgement of the Supreme
Court.: Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be  appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal after
consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may
deem necessary for the purpose.  In the case of appointment of a judge other than the Chief Justice of India, the Chief
Justice of India was always required to be consulted vide article 124 of the Constitution.
 
31.1     The Judges of the High Courts were appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
the Governor of the State and in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the
High Court Vide article 217 (1) of the Constitution.
 
31.2     Pre-1993 Status: Before 1993, the process of appointment of Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court was
required to be initiated by the Executive i.e. Department of Justice, as far as possible  6 months prior to the date of
vacancy.  There were delays in filling the vacancies during that period also but the Government was answerable and
accountable to Parliament.
 
31.3 Post-1993 Scenario: After the Judgement of the Supreme Court in Advocates-on-Record Association vs. Union of
India and others on October 6, 1993, a proposal for appointment of a Judge cannot be initiated by the Government.
According to the Judgement of October 6, 1993, read with the Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998, of the Supreme
Court of India, the initiation of the proposal for appointment of a Judge in the Supreme Courtmust be by the Chief
Justice of India and in the case of a High Court by the Chief Justice of that High Court.  For transfer of a Judge/Chief
Justice of a High Court to another High Court, the proposal has to be initiated by the Chief Justice of India. 
 
31.4     As per the Revised Memorandum of Procedure for the appointment of Chief Justices and judges of the High
Courts, the Governor, as advised by the Chief Minister,  was required to forward his recommendation to the Union 
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs an as early as possible but not later than six weeks from the date of
receipt of the proposal from the Chief Justice of the High Court.  If the comments were not received within that time
frame, it was to be presumed by the Union Minister of Law, Justices and Company Affairs that the constitutional
authorities of the State (i.e. Governor or Chief Minister) have nothing to add to the proposal.  The Union Minister of
Law, Justice and Company affairs was then to consider the recommendations in the light of such other reports as might
be available to the Government in respect of the names under consideration.
 
31.5.   The complete material would then be forwarded to the Chief Justice of India for his advice.  The Chief Justice of
India would,  in consultation with two senior most Judges of the Supreme Court, form his opinion in regard to a person
to be recommended for appointment to the High Court.  The Chief Justice of India and the collegium of two Judges of

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
the Supreme Court were to take into account the views of the Chief Justice of the High Court and of those Judges of the
High Court who have been consulted by the Chief Justice as well as views of those Judges in the Supreme Court who are
conversant with the affairs of that High Court.  After consultations, the Chief Justice of India was expected to send his
recommendation to the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs within four weeks.  The Union Minister of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs was required to put up as early as possible, preferably, within three weeks, the
recommendation of the Chief Justice of India to the Prime Minister who would then  advise the President in the matter of
appointment.
 
Inordinate delay in filling up of vacancies
           
31.6     After the Judgement of the Supreme Court in 1993, the Government is bereft of  role in initiating the process of
filling up of the vacancies.   The maximum the Government can do is to addresses letters to the Chief Minister of the
States and the Chief Justices of the High Courts, from time to time requesting them to make their recommendations for
appointment of judges in the High Courts to fill up vacancies expeditiously.   There appears to be a widespread non-
observance of any strict time frame at different levels in respect of filling up vacancies.
 
 
31.7     The judiciary in whom the power and the responsibility now vest has failed to fill up the vacancies in judicial
posts promptly and punctually and those vacancies of judges in all courts contribute to the huge pendency in a big way.
Though the vacancies in the Supreme Court have been filled up recently, but the situation has not improved in the High
Courts and Subordinate Courts. Tabular presentation of status of vacancies of Judges in Supreme Court, High Court and
Sub-ordinate Courts is given below.  It is for the judiciary to identify and rectify the causes of delay in the existing
system.  It may be that the modes of collegiate consultation have led to a peculiar species of “the politics of the
judiciary”.  Members of the collegium are prone to filed candidates of their choice.  The give and take in the collegiate
consultation has the potential of undermining merit.  It is also fraught with the potential of undermining the office of the
Chief Justice and his primacy.  On the other hand, the Executive is unable to secure due consideration of its own inputs
in respect of the personal and professional standing of the candidate.  More often than not a transferred Chief Justice in a
High Court is unfamiliar with the situation.  As a result, there are unacceptable delay witout the benefit of a higher
quality in the intake.  The challenge is for
the judiciary, the Parliament and the Executive is to find a viable solution within the framework of “independence” and
“accountability”.  
 
31.8     As on  21 November, 2001 [18]
  the position of vacancies in all the courts was as follows:
 
Judges in Position         Vacancies                 Total approved         Strength
Supreme Court     25                           1                                  26
High Court                       465                         170 [19]
                          647
Sub-ordinate Courts [20]   10,705                         1500                       12205
32.       The Committee finds that one of the main reason for the accumulation of arrears in the High Courts is unfilled
vacancies of Judges.  The process of filling up a vacancy should start practically six months before the actual date of
retirement of a judge.   As the Union Law Minister candidly conceded in the Rajya Sabha on 3 rd December, 2001 while
replying to a Starred Question(No. 185), that he had not come across a single case where the process had been initiated
six months before the actual date of retirement.  In fact, out of 170 vacancies in the High Courts at present, the process to
fill up the vacancies had started only in 64 cases; the process has not yet been initiated for remaining 106 vacancies. [21]
 
32.1     TheCommittee is aware that for this state of affairs the Union Law Ministry is not blameworthy, as the entire
process of initiation of proposal for appointment of new judges is no longer the responsibility of the Executive as a result
of a decision of the Supreme Court.  Though it was not contemplated in the Constitution, responsibility for judicial

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
appointments now rests in the domain of the judiciary.  The Union Law Minister is accountable to Parliament for the
delay in filling up of the vacancies of judges but  he has functionally no contribution to make.  The Supreme Court read
into the Constitution a power to appoint judges that was not conferred upon it by the text or the context.  The underlying
purpose of securing judicial independence was salutary but the method of acquiring for the Court the exclusive power to
appoint judges by the process of judicial interpretation is open to question.  Against this backdrop the Committee recalls
a recent discussion in the Rajya Sabha in which the Government was asked regarding alternate arrangements to fill up
the vacancies and whether there was any scope for having a freshreview of the Supreme Court’s judgement.
 
32.2     The Committee is of the view that the delays in judicial appointments is a matter of serious public concern.  The
Committee is duty bound to point out that the failure to fill judicial vacancies promptly and punctually cannot be
shielded or defended in the name of judicial independence.
 
 
Strength of Judges
 
33.       The Eleventh Law Commission in its 120 th Report on “Manpower Planning in Judiciary – A Blue Print” ( July,
1987), inter-alia, observed that the strength of judicial officers in India was far less as compared to their  strength in 
certain other countries. In this Report a comparative figure vis-à-vis other countries  has been given:
                                   
Countries                      Judges/ Per million of population
India                             10.5
                                    Australia                       41.6
                                    Canada                                     75.2
                                    England                        50.9
                                    US                              107.0
                                                           
34. The Commission recommended that the present strength of 10.5 judges per million population be increased to 50
judges per million population in a phased manner.
 
35.       According to the note the Sub-Committee  has received from the Department of Justice,  the judges’ strength in
the District/Subordinate courts is worked out on the basis of yardsticks fixed by the concerned High Courts. The posts of
Judges/Judicial Officers along with supporting staff are created by the concerned State Governments.  These posts are
also filled up by the concerned State Government/UT Administration/High Courts as per their rules and procedure. 
Accordingly, the 120
th Report of the Law Commission, which had recommended increase in the number of judicial
Officers, was circulated amongst all the State Governments/UT Administrations/High Courts  in June 1988 for necessary
action at their end.
 
36.       The judges’ strength of High Courts was reviewed in 1995 on the basis of revised guidelines recommended by
the Chief Justice of India in 1994.   The judges’ strength of certain High Courts was increased, in consultation with the
Chief Justices of the High Courts and the Chief Ministers of States concerned.  The judges’ strength of all the High
Courts was last reviewed in the fourth quarter of the year 1999.  Six High Courts, namely High Courts of Allahabad,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Patna and Rajasthan have been found qualified for an increase in judge
strength.  The Sub-Committee notes that the matter is being pursued with the Chief Justices of the concerned High
Courts.  The Sub-Committee hopes that the process of consultation is not unduly procrastinated.
 
37.       The recommendations as contained in the 120
th Report of the Law Commission which stipulated that the judges’

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
strength should be increased from 10.5 judges per million population to 50 judges   per million population was not
accepted by the Government as it was thought that the need of the hour was to fill the existing vacancies in the judiciary. 
The Government argued that it would be a moot question whether to raise the strength of judges simply on the basis of
the population.  The Government was also of the view that it would perhaps   be appropriate if  the strength is increased
on the basis  of the pendency of cases, the average rate of disposal, etc.
38.       The Committee is at a loss to comprehend the logic of the argument advanced on behalf of the Government for
not accepting the recommendations of the 120
th Report of the Law Commission regarding the increasing of judges’
strength on the basis of population- judge ratio.  As a matter of fact, there are a lot of services and facilities which are
decided and measured on the basis of population, which is obviously a relevant factor.  The reasons cited by the
Government for the mounting arrears of cases include, among others, industrial development in the country and
increased trade and commerce and emergence of socio-economic measures.  Obviously, these factors and the crucial
factor of population give rise to litigation, the volume of which is not an altogether unknown quantity.  Equally, the
extent of pendency and the rate of disposal is known.  What the Law Commission had recommended was based on a
rough and ready computation.  The Committee is of the opinion that the judge population ratio recommended by the Law
Commission should be accepted as a starting point with sufficient scope for variation on the basis of pendency and
disposal. 
 
38.1     Speaking on Law Day 2001,  the Chief Justice of India  observed that the Judge-population ratio in our country
was very low, and  endorsed the recommendation of the Law Commission in its 120
th Report about increasing the ratio
of judges.
                           
38.2     The Committee is of the considered view that the Government may reconsider the recommendation of the 120 th
Report of the Law Commission and take steps to increase the strength of judges per million population, at the earliest. 
The Committee endorses the Law Commission’s recommendations and suggests that variations can be made for different
jurisdictions on the basis of pendency, rate of disposal and other relevant factors in consultation with the judiciary.  The
Committee understands that the States are generally not able or willing to provide the finances that are required to create
courtrooms and other infrastructure consequent upon the number of the judges being increased.  The Committee
recommends that the Union Government must take the initiative  to provide funds and create mechanisms  to monitor
their utilisation.
 
Case Load and Judicial Manpower Requirement
 
39.       The requirement of judges’ strength to clear the pendency on the basis of the case load in the subordinate
judiciary, average rate of disposal, pendency, etc.  pertaining to the year 1998 has been calculated by the Department of
Justice as below:-
 
(a)        No. of pending cases as on 1.1.1998:               2,01,39,080
            (b)        No. of cases instituted during   1998:                 1,36,68,073
            (c )       Total of (a) & (b)                             :                3, 38,07,153
            (d)        The working strength of the Judicial  Officers:             10,673
            (e)        Average case load per judge (c/d)   :                            3,168
 
40.       The average rate of disposal per judicial officer in the subordinate judiciary has been calculated by the
Department of Justice in respect of the year 1998 as follows:-
 
            (a)        No. of cases disposed of during 1998   :           1,36,15,783
            (b)        Working strength of judicial officers       :                   10,673

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
            (c )       Average rate of disposal of cases (a/b):                       1,276
 
 
41.       As regards the judges’ strength required in the subordinate judiciary for disposal of the accumulated pending
cases, calculation has been made by the Department of Justice as under:-
Pendency as on 1.1.99 i.e. 2,01,91,370            :                       =        15,824
Average rate of disposal i.e. 1276 cases:
 
42.       Thus as per the Justice Department’s  calculation, an addition of 15,824  Judges  is necessary in case the pending
cases are to be cleared in one year. That Department has further calculated the number of additional judges required to
clear the backlog of cases in 3,5 and 7 years. The Department’s computation is as follows:  in case the pending
accumulated cases are to be cleared in a period of three years, the number of judicial officers required will be 5275; in
case the accumulated pendency is to be cleared in a period of five years, the number of judicial officers required will be
3165; in case the cases are to be cleared in a period of seven years, the number of judicial officers required will be 2260. 
However, the number of posts of judicial officers vacant during 1998 was 1478.  Hence, the additional posts actually
required may be around 800 if the cases are to be cleared in seven years. If the cases are required to be cleared in five
years, the additional posts required will be 1687 and if the cases are required to be cleared in three years the required
number will be around 3800. Those computations are based on the assumption that all vacancies will be filled up. 
Although in some of the States like Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Kerala, Rajasthan, etc. all posts of judicial
officers have remained filled up during 1998, normally 5%  of the posts do remain vacant due to many factors  like
resignation, deaths, litigation and suitable candidates not being available.  This comes to figures of 607 22
 in relation to
the year 1998.  Hence, the additional strength  which may be required to clear the backlog of cases in a period of seven
years is 800+607=1407 or say 1400; in a period of 5 years – 800+ 1687= 2487 or 2500 and the additional strength which
may be required to clear the backlog in a period of the 3 years will be 800+ 3800= 4600, as per the Department’s
calculation.
 
43.       An analysis of the statistics furnished by the Department of Justice in relation to the Case Load Management in
the Subordinate Judiciary, reveals that the existing strength of judicial officers may be sufficient only to dispose of the
cases instituted in that year. The backlog remains and keeps on mounting.  For example, the number of cases instituted in
the subordinate judiciary during 1998 was 1,36,68,073 and the number of cases disposed during the same year was
1,36,15,783. Thus, about 55,000 cases were added to the then existing arrears of 2,01,39,080 thereby taking the figures
of arrears to 2,01,91,370 as on 1.1.99.
 
44.   The Committee has carefully considered the computations made in the Department of Justice for the reduction of
pendency of cases over a period of 3,5, or 7 years, besides disposal of regular year to year institution of cases. The
Committee notes that the Government has proceeded on the hypothesis that arrears should be cleared in a period of 7
years. The Committee questions the hypothesis.
 
45.   The Committee is of the view that the aim should be to clear the arrears within three to four years, that the primary
sanctioned strength should be maintained on the basis of an optimum judge population ratio worked out on the basis of
the pendency and the rate of disposal, and that judges’ strength should be augmented protem to deal with the
accumulated arrears.  The system should ensure a zero accrual of arrears beyond three years.  The judges’ strength
should be increased or augmented in the phased manner and without compromising the quality of judges for numbers
can never be a substitute for quality.
 
Liquidation of pendency in High  Courts
46.       As per calculation done by the Department of Justice in November, 1999, the additional strength to be added in
High Courts to liquidate total pendency of cases year wise will be as follows:
           

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
(i)         In one  year’s time                    974
            (ii)        In two year’s time                     488
            (iii)       In three year’s time                   325
 
47.       The addition in the strength of Judges at all levels will require supplemental creation of supporting staff for each
Judge and construction  of courts rooms and quarters of Judges of High Courts.
 
48.       The Committee notes that in order to liquidate the pendency in High Courts within a span of one to three years,
additional  judges will be required and also the supplemental creation of supporting staff for each judge and other
infrastructural support.  The Committee would like to impress upon Government to make full use of the centrally
sponsored scheme for infrastructural development of the judiciary started by it since 1993. The main problem the
Committee foresees is that  State Governments may not be very enthusiastic about the scheme as they have to share the
cost on 50:50 basis.  It may be pointed out that  the Committee on Home Affairs in its 72
nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, has urged upon the Government to consider
the idea of giving substantially larger contributions to the State Governments in carrying out the scheme.  The
Committee would urge the Government to make a specific plan for improving, augmenting and streamlining the
facilities and resources for existing courts and tribunals and for new courts and tribunals to be created to cut the
monstrous problem of arrears to size.
 
49.       The Department of Justice in its action taken replies to the recommendations of the Committee on Home Affairs
said that the matter regarding enhancement of Central support to the State Governments which are financially weak has
been taken up with the Planning Commission. A reminder has also been sent to them in this connection.  States like
Manipur, Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and UTs of Pondicherry and Lakshadweep are lagging behind at
present.  Those States/UTs have been requested to ensure that funds are utilised fully.  The Committee is informed that
suitable monitoring mechanism is in place.  The Committee  would urge the Government to pursue the plan for
elimination of the bulk of the arrears by swift and satisfactory disposal of cases through a dynamic multi-pronged
approach with a sense of urgency.
 
Alternative Mode of Dispute Settlement
50.       Considering the mammoth size of arrears, alternative modes of dispute settlement is the best way to reduce the
number of cases filed everyday.  The Malimath Committee and Chief Ministers and Chief Justices Conference, 1993
made recommendations on this aspect and a  Bill to amend Civil Procedure Code i.e. The Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 was brought which contained inter-alia provisions for making it obligatory for the court to refer
the dispute after the issues are framed for settlement either by way of arbitration, conciliation, mediation, judicial
settlement or through Lok Adalat.  It is only after parties fail to get their disputes settled through alternative dispute 
resolution methods that the suit shall proceed further in the court in which it was filed.
 
51. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its 49
th Report (1998), accepted the proposal  of
arbitration, conciliation, mediation and judicial settlement  and   it became part of the Code of Civil Procedure (
Amendment) Act, 1999.
 
52.       The Committee is hopeful and cautiously optimistic that efforts of this kind  would definitely help reduce the
burden on the courts and  decrease the accumulation of arrears. The Committee feels that the Government should
encourage Non-Governmental organizations to spread awareness among the people especially people of low income
groups, about the futility of frivolous cases to be filed in the court and persuade them to adopt methods like arbitration,
mediation, and out of the court settlement.  The Committee is of the view that an enlightened Bar and the Bar Councils
have a crucial role to play in the process.
 
Suggestions received from individuals/lawyers/retired judges

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
53.       The following suggestions/observations and some of which seems to have been actuated by sheer exasperation
and desperation, were received on procedural inadequacies, flaws and deficiencies in the judicial system from various
individuals, lawyers, retired judges etc:
 
(a)                In a vast majority of cases, adjournments are taken on false pretexts, and the law does not have any
appropriate method to tackle them.  A strict view on the adjournments is required.
(b)               Every transfer of a judge involves repetitive and wasteful procedures which involve delays, deceleration
in the process of disposal and unwanted adjournments.
(c)                Once a trial court completes recording of evidence and arguments of advocates, it should be made
mandatory for the judge to deliver the judgement within a maximum time limit of 30 days thereafter.
(d)               A provision can be made to have sittings of Magistrates within the prison premises.  It would  not only
save time but would also avoid bringing the accused to courts by hand cuffing etc.
(e)                Serving summons and warrant notices is another area, which takes a lot of time.  For this, modern
gadgets such as phones, wireless systems, fax machines, internet facilities connected with police
headquarters should be accepted as valid and should be made accessible to both Civil and Criminal
Courts, so that summons and notices can be sent faster.
(f)                 No oral evidence be insisted where matter rests solely on documentary evidence.  Witnesses should not
be harassed by adjournments.
(g)                Evidence should be tape-recorded or reported by short-hand stenographers and a verbatim record can be
kept which can be used while delivering decisions.
(h)                At least for two years all the vacations i.e summer vacation, winter vacation, Puja vacation etc. should be
terminated as a special case to dispose of the cases and also judges should sit for the whole day so that the
maximum number of cases can be disposed of.
(i)
                  Avoid double numbering system of proceedings i.e. first time inward entry should be the final number of
the proceeding; it will save time.
(j)                 Reduce pre-trial scrutiny only to verify payment of proper court fees and  other objections to be taken up
by other side and fix a time limit.
(k)               Preparation of and Service of Summons should be allowed mainly through Advocates.
(l)                  Emphasis has to be on final disposal of matters than on disposing interim applications and, therefore,
interlocutory orders should be an exception rather than the rule.  Interim orders should not result in
prolongation of the case.
(m)              In criminal courts, verification of complainant can be similar as in civil courts.
(n)                In recording the plea of the accused, answers to each allegation should be recorded.
(o)               Where an Advocate is appointed presence of parties should be insisted upon only at crucial stages of
trial.
(p)               In High Courts, all Benches should be Single Judge Benches.
(q)               Legible photocopies of papers should be acceptable in all courts.
(r)                 Copies of Judgements should be given in open court to parties..
(s)                Lengthy judgements should be avoided.
(t)                 Supreme Court and High Court decisions ought to be published by those Courts just as the Acts and
Rules are published by the Government, since those decisions are constitutionally binding on lower
courts.
(u)                Arbitration procedure should be made applicable to all courts and abolish complicated civil and criminal
procedures which are the root cause of the delays.
 
54.       The Committee finds that many of the suggestions though well-intentioned are not practicable.  On the other
hand, some of them arise from practical experience and insight and those suggestions are the stuff of judicial reforms at
the operational level.  The Government should examine the whole range of suggestions and many more which may be
received from time to time carefully with a view to implement those which are found acceptable and feasible.  It would
give the people a sense of participation in the reform process.
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
Other Initiatives Towards Judicial Reforms
55.       A number of other steps have been taken as a part of judicial reforms. Setting up of National Judicial Academy,
computerization and networking of courts and setting up of Fast Track Courts are important among such steps. Before
discussing them in detail, a brief description of the role of Law Commission of India and also a light on the status of
legal education in India will follow:
 
Law Commission of India
56.       Broadly the Law Commission is expected to keep the system of judicial  administration  under review to ensure
that it is sensitive responsive and ameliorative.  Since the third decade of the nineteenth century, Law Commissions were
constituted by the Government from time to time and were empowered  to recommend legislative reforms with a view to
clarify, consolidate  and codify particular  branches of law where the Government feel the necessity for it.  The first such
Commission was established  in 1834 under the Charter Act of 1833 under the Chairmanship of Lord Macaulay which 
recommended  codification of the Penal Code, the Criminal Procedure Code and a few other matters.  Thereafter, the
second, third and fourth Law Commissions were constituted in 1853, 1861 and 1879 respectively which during a span of
fifty years contributed a great deal to enrich the Indian Statute  Book with a large variety of legislations on the pattern of
the then prevailing English Laws adapted to Indian conditions.  The Indian Code of Civil Procedure, the Indian Contract
Act, the Indian Evidence Act, the Transfer of Property Act, owe their  origin to the first four Law Commissions.
 
57.       After independence, the Constitution of India with its Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State
Policy gave a new direction to law reforms geared to the needs of a democratic legal order in a pluralist society.   The
Constitution stipulated the continuation of pre-Constitution Laws (Article 372) till they were amended or repealed. There
were  demands in Parliament and outside for establishing a Central Law  Commission to recommend revision and
updating of the inherited laws to serve  the changing needs of the country.   The Government of India established the
First Law Commission of Independent India in 1955 with the then Attorney- General  of India, Mr. M.C. Setalvad, as its
Chairman.
 
58.       Since then, fifteen more Law Commissions have been appointed, each with a three –year term.
 
The Functions of the Law Commission
59.       The Law Commission is entrusted to suggest reforms on various existing laws in the light of the basic spirit of
the Constitution.  The functions of the Law Commission may broadly be outlined:
 
(i)         Depending upon the nature  and scope  of the topic for reform, to devise different  methodologies for collection
of data and research;
(ii)        to evolve consensus  among the members of the Commission on the issue;
(iii)       to circulate the reform papers among the public and interest  groups with a view to eliciting reactions and
suggestions on the basis of  questionnaires  and document;
(iv)       to organize seminars  and workshops in different parts of the country to elicit critical opinion on proposed
strategies for reform; and
(v)        to forward the final report to the Government  for its consideration.
 
Efficacy & Utility
60.       The Reports of the Law Commission are considered by the Ministry of Law in consultation with the concerned
central administrative  ministries  and State governments/UT administrations and judiciary. The reports  are also
presented to Parliament from time to time.  They are cited in Courts, in the academic  and public discourse  and are acted
upon by concerned Government Departments depending on the Government’s policies.
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
61.       Out of 175 Reports submitted so far on different subjects, recommendations contained in 91 reports have been
fully implemented by the Government.  33 Reports have not been implemented and 51 Reports are in different stages of
consideration.
 
62.       It may be pointed out that roughly 20% of the   reports of the Commission have not been found to be acceptable
and around 30% are still awaiting implementation, some of them for considerably long periods of time.  The Standing
Committee on Home Affairs had occasion, time and again, to recommend through its various reports that the Law
Commission’s reports should be carefully considered.
 
63.       The Committee on Home Affairs in its 45
th, 56th and 61st Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry had
recommended to ensure the accountability of the administrative Ministries of the Government for implementation of the
Law Commission’s recommendations.  As regards reports on the subjects falling under List III of the Seventh Schedule,
the Committee in its 61 st Report had recommended that the matter may be taken up on a priority basis with the State
Government/UTs Administrations in order to see that those Reports are considered and implemented in a time-bound
manner.
 
64.       The Committee in its 72
nd Report on Demands for Grants for 2001-2002 stated, inter alia:
 
“The Committee has gone through the list of pending 51 Reports of the Law Commission.  The Reports
presented in 1973 (56 th), 1976 (66 th), 1980 (82 nd) and many more are under examination.  This presents a very
sorry state of affairs.  The Committee recommends that examination of the Reports should be completed at the
earliest and States/UT administrations should be persuaded to send their comments without further delay on the
Reports falling under List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution”.
 
65.       The Committee strongly feels that when almost 50% of the reports of the Commission are not being implemented
,the efficacy, if not the utility of the Commission may well be questioned.  It is for the Government and the Parliament to
take note of the Law Commission’s reports with a view to consider them and to implement them rather than to allow
them to gather dust on bureaucratic and ministerial shelves.  A strong convention should be evolved in this respect.
 
Legal Education in India
 
66.       The backbone of a sound legal system is sound legal education and any reforms in a judicial system will be
incomplete without reforms in legal education which determines the quality of  the legal profession and the judicial
function.
 
67.       The plenary meeting of Law Secretaries and Law Ministers held in Hyderabad during 23-25 November, 1995
came out with a member of landmark resolutions on “Reforms in Legal Education and entry into Legal Profession”. [22]
Before passing the resolutions the plenary, meeting considered the following reports on Legal education:
 
(i)                  14th Report of the Law Commission;
(ii)                The Report of 17 October, 1994, prepared by the Committee of Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief
Justices of Delhi & Gujarat High Courts;
(iii)               15th Report of the Committee on Sub-ordinate Legislation (Tenth Lok Sabha)-16 December 1994;
(iv)              Report submitted by the UGC’s Reconstituted Panel on Law – 27 December, 1994; and
(v)                The Bhubaneshwar Statement of Law Ministers’ Working Group on Legal Education
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
68.   There was deep concern and a broad consensus at the Hyderabad Conference over the deteriorating standards in
Legal Education. The recommendations which emerged were welcomed by the Law Ministers and they were of the
opinion that a successful strategy for improving legal education ought to take into account the following elements,
among others:
 
(i)
                  More effective role by Bar Council of India;
(ii)                Adequate number of Law Colleges with augmented infrastructures including teachers of high
professional ability and integrity;
(iii)               Five year system of Law Course after 10+2;
(iv)              Only whole-time law colleges;
(v)                Strict adherence to the Standards prescribed by or under the Advocate Act, 1961 regarding infrastructure
in Law Colleges;
(vi)              Introduction of a National Law School, type of institution University in each State as a model;
(vii)             The Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India should be given more teeth for the
implementation of its recommendations;
(viii)           Introduction of common entrance examination of law colleges in order to attract best talent;
(ix)              In addition to the lecture method, case method, tutorials, problem method, moot courts, mock trials etc.
should be made compulsory;
(x)                Law examinations to be made more problem based to enable students to develop skills of analysis of
facts and reasoning; and
(xi)              Management of Law Colleges should be in the hands of professionals from the legal field.
 
69.      The Sub-committee is happy to note that Centres [23]of Excellence for Legal Education have been set up at
Bangalore (Karnataka),  Bhopal (M.P.), Kolkata (West Bengal), Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) and Jodhpur ( Rajasthan)
where 5 years Law courses have been introduced after 10+2 and students are being selected through entrance
examinations, which is in line with above resolutions.  The conception of courses and the design of specialised schools,
such as the School of Constitutional Governance and similar other schools at the National Law University at Jodhpur are
innovative and imaginative and may well provide models for new beginnings.
 
70.       Though setting up Centres of Excellence for Legal Education is the first important step, a long distance is yet to
be traveled, if we want to improve our legal education and consequently legal system in the country.  The Committee is
hopeful that necessary steps, such as  improving the infrastructure in Law Colleges, introduction of curriculum meant to
produce high standards of law professionals, recruitment of dedicated teachers will be taken up by the Government  of
course in close partnership with the Bar Council of India to augment legal education in the country.
 
National Judicial Academy
71.       The National Judicial Academy (NJA) has been set up under the Chairmanship of Chief Justice of India with the
objective of training of judicial officers of the States and Union Territories, organizing study courses, conferences and
seminars relating to court management and administration of justice, and interaction with other institutions within the
country and abroad regarding administration of justice.  The complex of the Academy is under construction at Bhopal.  It
is expected to be fully functional by 31
st March, 2002.  The Committee on Home Affairs in its 72 nd Report has inter
alia observed.
 
“The Committee feels that the NJA is a good institution provided we get good judicial minds from the Academy and
urges upon the Government to make the Academy fully functional by 31st March, 2002, the deadline fixed by them.”
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
72.       The Department of Justice in its action taken replies on the above recommendation of the Committee has said
that the observations of the Committee have been forwarded to the National Judicial Academy for appropriate action and
the progress made with regard to complete operationalization of the Academy would be monitored by the Department of
Justice.
 
73.       The Committee is of the opinion that the establishment of NJA is an important step towards judicial reforms and
the expenditure on the improvement of judicial system would be an investment for a future. The Committee is of the
view that the NJA should establish a Research Centre on Judicial Reforms including subjects such as Arrears and should
inculcate the mind set of problem solving and the spirit of reform.
 
Computerization of Courts
 
74.       The Supreme Court of India, 18 High Courts and 430 District Courts  have been computerized as per information
made available by the National Informatics Centre (NIC) to the Department of Justice.  Under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for the development of infrastructural facilities   for the Judiciary, an amount of Rs. 208.28 lakh had been
released by the Government during the year 2000-2001 to various States/UTs for the use of computers in courts. It is
noted that the Budget allocation for 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 under the Head- `Infrastructural Facilities for Judiciary’
are Rs.74.95 crore and 74.90 crore respectively, and the realised/utilized amount for the corresponding years is 72.26
crore and 37.79 crore respectively. 
 
75. The Ministry has informed that as per the norms of the Planning  Commission, 2-3 per cent of the Plan Budget could
be released for Information Technology.  Hence, this amount includes an amount of Rs.208.28 lakh released for
Information Technology.  The remaining amount of Rs.269.11 lakhs out of the allocation for 2000-2001 was transferred
towards Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for North-East and Sikkim and as per the revised norms of the Planning
Commission, 50% of the Plan Budget could be released for Information Technology.  Hence this includes an amount of
Rs.333.10 lakh released for Information Technology during the financial year 2001-2002.
 
76.       The Supreme Court and all High Courts have been interconnected through NICNET.  Daily case lists are being
generated through computer.  Important reported cases of the Supreme Court are available on NICNET.  Facilitation
centers/enquiry counters have been established in the Supreme Court, and the High Courts of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Calcutta and Andhra Pradesh.  Other High Courts have been  requested to set up facilitation centers/enquiry counters.
 
77.       The Committee strongly recommends that the task of computerization should be taken up on a high priority
basis; proper networking should be achieved between the Supreme Court, High Courts and all  Subordinate Courts
within a specified time schedule which will definitely help in disposing of the cases faster.
 
FAST TRACK COURTS
78.    The  Sub-Committee was informed by the Department of Justice , that the 11 th Finance Commission in its report
submitted recently has recommended a provision of Rs.502.90 crore for creation of 1,734 additional courts @ 5 courts
per district in the country for the period  2001-2005 under a scheme specifically for the purpose of disposing long
pending criminal cases.  These courts are known as Fast Track Courts. The first series of the courts were set up on April
1, 2001. The Scheme has been accepted by the Ministry of Finance, and necessary funds of Rs.202.27 crore for the year
2001-2002 have been earmarked by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.   Out of this an amount of Rs.168
crore has already been released to the State Governments as on 31st October 2001.
 
79.       The Department of Justice in a note  has said funds have been provided @ Rs.29 lakh per court.  The major
portion of the amount has been earmarked for provision of salaries for 5 years for judicial officers and other staff at the
rate of Rs.4.8 lakh per year.  The remaining Rs.5 lakh is for construction of one court room (Rs.3.4 lakh) and for
computerisation and library facilities (Rs.1.6 lakh).
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
80.       The note further informed that this Scheme for the clearance of the backlog of pending sessions cases, includes
appointment of ad hoc judges from amongst the retired sessions judges and additional sessions judges or judges through
promotion will be posted in these courts and consequential vacancies will be filled in so that further pendency is not
generated at the lower stage.  These judges will be required to dispose of 14 sessions trial cases in a month subject to the
backlog of cases and size of the district or 20-25 important criminal or civil cases per month. [24]
 
81.       This will entail saving of expenses over the under trials languishing in jails.  The details of under trials State-wise
is available at (SeeAppendix- XII).  In the first year, these courts will take up on priority:-
 
(i)         The sessions and other cases involving undertrials in jails.  At present there are about 1.8 lakh such
undertrials on whose maintenance Governments are spending about Rs.361 crore per annum  at the rate of
Rs.55 per day per person in jail.
(ii)        Sessions cases pending for two years or more in which accused persons have been on bail for a longtime.
 
82.       The  Department informed the Sub-Committee that State Governments and the High Courts have been requested
to make effective arrangements for representation on behalf of the prosecution and for quick process service.
 
83.       The Ministry expectes that with these additional courts and the reforms in the laws and procedures, it should be
possible to substantially bring down if not eliminate, pendency in the district and subordinate courts to the extent of
about two million cases in the period of four years starting from April 2001.  As on 31
st October, 2001, 862 Fast Track
Courts have been notified (A State-wise list can be seen at (SeeAppendix -XIII) by various States and 542 Fast Track
Courts are functioning in the country (A State-wise list is given at ( SeeAppendix -XIV). As per available information
(as on  31 October, 2001), 53,934 cases have been transferred to these courts and out of these, 15,078 cases have been
disposed of.
 
84.  The Committee welcomes the plan for the establishment of 1734 Additional Courts under the Special Problems
Grants of XI Finance Commission. However, if it is calculated that 542 courts  (which have started functioning) , were to
clear 25 cases per month, then in 7 months i.e. from 1 April, 2001 to 31 October, 2001, they should have cleared 94,850
cases. In fact they had cleared only 15,078 cases.   Taking into account the fact that all 542 courts did not start
functioning from 1 April 2001, still the figures are not at all encouraging.  The Committee recommends that the
Government should closely monitor the implementation of the proposal.  Every step taken to reduce arrears and ensure
swift disposal of cases is a step to restore and reinforce the faith of the people in the judiciary and the fundamental values
of rule of law.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
·        The Committee has been informed that the Malimath Committee was asked to submit  its report within six
months. However, it has now been given extension up to 31 March 2002. The Committee welcomes the setting
up of this Committee to go into the revamping of the criminal justice system and  is hopeful that its
recommendations would be far reaching as far as revamping of the criminal justice system is concerned. The
Committee would also expect of the Government to speedily process the recommendations and thereafter
implement those which are found acceptable.
 
(Para 7)
·
        The Committee is impressed by the various steps taken by the Supreme Court towards reducing the arrears
successfully.  Though similar methods are said to have been applied by various High Courts also,  similar results
have not been achieved. The Committee is particularly perturbed to note that cases are pending for over 50
years, 40 years and 30 years in certain High Courts.  As per the data furnished by the Government, M.P. High

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
Court has a case pending since 1950, Patna High Court has a case pending since 1951, Rajasthan since 1956,
Kolkata since 1955. The Committee is equally disturbed to note that over 5 lakh cases are pending in the High
Courts for over 10 years. And the number of cases pending for 7-10 years are also as high as over 3 lakh (please
see Appendix-VI).
 
(Para 20)
 
·        The Committee strongly feels that urgent steps are needed to be taken for the disposal of huge pendency of 
cases in the High Courts, especially  of Allahabad, Madras, Calcutta, Kerala and Bombay.  The Committee
would like that the Government be urged upon to take up this matter with the Chief Justice of India, Chief
Justices of the concerned High Courts and the State Governments with a view to work out or devise special plans
to reduce the pendency and revive public confidence  in the judiciary with regard to delays in the disposal of
cases and accumulation of arrears.
(Para 22)
·        The Committee notes that the problem of pendency in the High Courts is the most acute.   It fully agrees with
the observation of the Law Minister that the High Courts have become the slowest layer in the judicial process.
It is significant that despite poor infrastructure and other constraints in lower courts they have made a dent,
howsoever small, on the problem of arrears.  Those courts deserve better facilities and better working conditions
The Committee, also recommends that all necessary steps may be taken to secure expeditious handling of cases
in the High Courts and the Subordinate Courts by filling the vacancies of Judges in High Courts; application of
Active Case Flow Management Technique (ACMT); stricter control over adjournments; reallocation of cases,
when a bench is unable to sit; Bench stabilization; and Man-power management to reduce time taken in file
movement.  The Committee also recommends to the Government to accord top priority to improve manpower
and infrastructural facilities at the Subordinate/district court levels so as to facilitate wiping out of the arrears and
swift disposal of cases.   Budgetary allocations have to be augmented substantially.  There is need for a greater
sense of purpose.
 
(Para 26)
·        The Committee feels that the recommendations of the Malimath Committee, especially those cited above when
implemented in all the States/UTs, will definitely expedite the disposal of cases and suggests that the
Government may persuade the States/Union Territories with all sincerity, which are still in the process of
implementing them, to complete the process without further delay.
 
(Para 28)
 
·
        The Committee is of the firm view that setting up of alternative tribunals viz; Industrial Relations Commissions;
Rent Tribunals; and setting up of tribunals with jurisdiction on various educational malpractices are likely to
help reduce the burden on courts.  The Committee recommends that Government may take necessary steps to set
up these Tribunals at the earliest.
(Para 30)
·        TheCommittee is aware that for this state of affairs the Union Law Ministry is not blameworthy, as the entire
process of initiation of proposal for appointment of new judges is no longer the responsibility of the Executive as
a result of a decision of the Supreme Court.  Though it was not contemplated in the Constitution, responsibility
for judicial appointments now rests in the domain of the judiciary.  The Union Law Minister is accountable to
Parliament for the delay in filling up of the vacancies of judges but  he has functionally no contribution to make. 
The Supreme Court read into the Constitution a power to appoint judges that was not conferred upon it by the
text or the context.  The underlying purpose of securing judicial independence was salutary but the method of
acquiring for the Court the exclusive power to appoint judges by the process of judicial interpretation is open to
question.  Against this backdrop the Committee recalls a recent discussion in the Rajya Sabha in which the
Government was asked regarding alternate arrangements to fill up the vacancies and whether there was any
scope for having a freshreview of the Supreme Court’s judgement.
(Para 32.1)

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
·        The Committee is of the view that the delays in judicial appointments is a matter of serious public concern.  The
Committee is duty bound to point out that the failure to fill judicial vacancies promptly and punctually cannot be
shielded or defended in the name of judicial independence.
(Para 32.2)
 
·        The Committee is of the opinion that the judge population ratio recommended by the Law Commission should
be accepted as a starting point with sufficient scope for variation on the basis of pendency and disposal. 
(Para 38)
·        The Committee is of the considered view that the Government may reconsider the recommendation of the 120th
Report of the Law Commission and take steps to increase the strength of judges per million population, at the
earliest.  The Committee endorses the Law Commission’s recommendations and suggests that variations can be
made for different jurisdictions on the basis of pendency, rate of disposal and other relevant factors in
consultation with the judiciary.  The Committee understands that the States are generally not able or willing to
provide the finances that are required to create courtrooms and other infrastructure consequent upon the number
of the judges being increased.  The Committee recommends that the Union Government must take the initiative 
to provide funds and create mechanisms  to monitor their utilisation.
(Para 38.2)
 
·        The Committee has carefully considered the computations made in the Department of Justice for the reduction
of pendency of cases over a period of 3,5, or 7 years, besides disposal of regular year to year institution of cases.
The Committee notes that the Government has proceeded on the hypothesis that arrears should be cleared in a
period of 7 years. The Committee questions the hypothesis.
(Para 44)
·
        The Committee is of the view that the aim should be to clear the arrears within three to four years, that the
primary sanctioned strength should be maintained on the basis of an optimum judge population ratio worked out
on the basis of the pendency and the rate of disposal, and that judges’ strength should be augmented protem to
deal with the accumulated arrears.  The system should ensure a zero accrual of arrears beyond three years.  The
judges’ strength should be increased or augmented in the phased manner and without compromising the quality
of judges for numbers can never be a substitute for quality.
(Para 45)
·        The Committee notes that in order to liquidate the pendency in High Courts within a span of one to three years,
additional  judges will be required and also the supplemental creation of supporting staff for each judge and
other infrastructural support.  The Committee would like to impress upon Government to make full use of the
centrally sponsored scheme for infrastructural development of the judiciary started by it since 1993. The main
problem the Committee foresees is that  State Governments may not be very enthusiastic about the scheme as
they have to share the cost on 50:50 basis.  It may be pointed out that  the Committee on Home Affairs in its
72
nd Report on Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, has
urged upon the Government to consider the idea of giving substantially larger contributions to the State
Governments in carrying out the scheme.  The Committee would urge the Government to make a specific plan
for improving, augmenting and streamlining the facilities and resources for existing courts and tribunals and for
new courts and tribunals to be created to cut the monstrous problem of arrears to size.
 
(Para 48)
·        The Committee is informed that suitable monitoring mechanism is in place.  The Committee  would urge the
Government to pursue the plan for elimination of the bulk of the arrears by swift and satisfactory disposal of
cases through a dynamic multi-pronged approach with a sense of urgency.
 
(Para 49)
·        The Committee feels that the Government should encourage Non-Governmental organizations to spread

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
awareness among the people especially people of low income groups, about the futility of frivolous cases to be
filed in the court and persuade them to adopt methods like arbitration, mediation, and out of the court
settlement.  The Committee is of the view that an enlightened Bar and the Bar Councils have a crucial role to
play in the process.
 
(Para 52)
·        The Committee finds that many of the suggestions though well-intentioned are not practicable.  On the other
hand, some of them arise from practical experience and insight and those suggestions are the stuff of judicial
reforms at the operational level.  The Government should examine the whole range of suggestions and many
more which may be received from time to time carefully with a view to implement those which are found
acceptable and feasible.  It would give the people a sense of participation in the reform process.
(Para 54)
·        The Committee strongly feels that when almost 50% of the reports of the Commission are not being
implemented ,the efficacy, if not the utility of the Commission may well be questioned.  It is for the Government
and the Parliament to take note of the Law Commission’s reports with a view to consider them and to implement
them rather than to allow them to gather dust on bureaucratic and ministerial shelves.  A strong convention
should be evolved in this respect.
 
(Para 65)
·        Though setting up Centres of Excellence for Legal Education is the first important step, a long distance is yet to
be traveled, if we want to improve our legal education and consequently legal system in the country.  The
Committee is hopeful that necessary steps, such as  improving the infrastructure in Law Colleges, introduction of
curriculum meant to produce
 
 
 
high standards of law professionals, recruitment of dedicated teachers will be taken up by the Government  of
course in close partnership with the Bar Council of India to augment legal education in the country.
(Para 70)
 
·        The Committee is of the opinion that the establishment of NJA is an important step towards judicial reforms and
the expenditure on the improvement of judicial system would be an investment for a future. The Committee is of
the view that the NJA should establish a Research Centre on Judicial Reforms including subjects such as Arrears
and should inculcate the mind set of problem solving and the spirit of reform.
(Para 73)
·
        The Committee strongly recommends that the task of computerization should be taken up on a high priority
basis; proper networking should be achieved between the Supreme Court, High Courts and all  Subordinate
Courts within a specified time schedule which will definitely help in disposing of the cases faster.
(Para 77)
·        The Committee welcomes the plan for the establishment of 1734 Additional Courts under the Special Problems
Grants of XI Finance Commission. However, if it is calculated that 542 courts  (which have started functioning) ,
were to clear 25 cases per month, then in 7 months i.e. from 1 April, 2001 to 31 October, 2001, they should have
cleared 94,850 cases. In fact they had cleared only 15,078 cases.   Taking into account the fact that all 542 courts
did not start functioning from 1 April 2001, still the figures are not at all encouraging.  The Committee
recommends that the Government should closely monitor the implementation of the proposal.  Every step taken
to reduce arrears and ensure swift disposal of cases is a step to restore and reinforce the faith of the people in the
judiciary and the fundamental values of rule of law.
 
(Para 84)

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
MINUTES OF THE
SUB-COMMITTEE
I
FIRST MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms met at 4.30 P.M. on Monday, 24 July 2000, in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi ¾Convener
2.         Shri Raj Mohinder Singh                      
3.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
5.         Shri Anadi Sahu
6.         Shri P.H. Pandian
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
2.0       The Convener in his opening observations referred in detail to the Status Note prepared by the Secretariat on the
work done by the previous Sub-Committee and highlighted the  thrust areas pointed out therein.
 
2.1       The Convener then suggested and the members  agreed  that the Secretariat should obtain copies of the relevant 
Reports of the Law Commission, Malimath Committee Report,  Resolutions passed in the various Conferences of Chief
Justices and Law Ministers, Supreme Court Judgement in the case of Advocates-on-Record Association  and the Report
on Case Management System (Supreme Court) and circulate them  to  the Members of the Sub-Committee.  The
Convener  added  that  it would be useful for the Sub-Committee  to meet Mr. Justice R.S. Pathak, Mr. Justice
Venkatachaliah, Mr. Justice Ahmadi, Mr. Justice J.S. Varma and Mr. Justice Punchhi (all retired Chief Jusitces of India) 
and some other eminent judges, lawyers and jurists.  He also felt that all relevant statistics  with regard to arrears in the
Districts, High Courts and the Supreme Court, sanctioned judicial strength  at all levels, studies  relating to judicial 
manpower  requirements, reform  proposals regarding administration of justice, proposals  for improving the quality of
legal education and other legal reforms which could contribute to a system conducive to  public interest and a more
consumer friendly system.
           
2.2       The Convener suggested  priority attention to arrears, pendency of cases  and delays  in the disposal of cases and
requested the Members to express their views and help identify areas on which  the present  Sub-Committee should
concentrate  in its  subsequent  meetings.
 
3.0       Shri Hansraj Bharadwaj who was also a member of the earlier Sub-Committee, outlined briefly the work done by
that sub-Committee.  In that context, he referred to the efforts  made  for the preparation of a national agenda for judicial
reforms and deliberations held in various Conferences of Law Ministers of States and Chief Justices.  He agreed that the
reduction of pendency of cases in various courts, strengthening of manpower and infrastructural facilities therein, legal
education, alternative dispute resolution, arbritation, mediation  and conciliation should receive priority attention. 
Another Member put stress on the need for certain amendments in the Criminal Procedure Code.  Yet another Member
suggested for increasing the retirement age of High Court Judges, so that they would be at par  with  Supreme Court
Judges in that regard.  Members agreed that  top priority be accorded to the  question  of arrears, long   pendency of
cases and  Law’s  Delays.
 
4.0       Rounding up the discussion, the Convener stated that by broad consensus the following areas had been  
identified for detailed study:-

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
(a)        Law’s Delays, delay in the disposal  of cases, Long  Pendency of cases  and arrears (case load, judicial
manpower assessment, case management and statutory time limit for disposal of cases, etc.);
(b)         Legal education;
(c)          Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanism; and
(d)         Criminal Justice System.
 
and directed the Secretariat to obtain comprehensive background note on each of the identified areas .                          
                                   
 
4.1       The Convener also desired that the Sub-Committee may meet distinguished experts  and also record  evidence of 
both official and non-official experts on the identified areas in due course.
 
5.         The Sub-Committee adjourned at 5.45 P.M.
 
II
SECOND MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms met at 11.30 A.M on Friday, 22 September 2000, in Committee Room
‘B’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi ¾Convener
2.         Shri Sangh  Priya Gautam                    
3.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
4.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
5.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
6.         Shri Anadi Sahu
7.         Shri P.H. Pandian
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset  the Convener welcomed  the Members of the sub-Committee  and hoped that the documents/papers
as received from the Government circulated  to them would be useful while  considering the various  areas identified
under the  subject  Judicial Reforms.  The sub-Committee was of the opinion that at first the arrears of cases, pending  in
courts, delays   in disposal  of cases  time mention studing of cases, assessment of manpower in judiciary  of could be 
undertaken   for study  and report.  Therafter   the sub-Committee   could consider the next  subject  e.g., appointment  of
judges  in higher judiciary etc. 
 
3.         The sub-Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the modalities to be adopted  in the course of
consideration of the subject.  It was  decided to issue a Press Release containing some specific  questionnaire so that the
public opinion could be solicited  in the matter of identified even i.e. pendency in courts, since  being a consumer of
justice, people involvement in the process will be  important  in the matter.  It was also decided to obtain the views of the
Members as to what so go in the questionnaire and thereafter, based  thereon, a questionnaire should be prepared  to be
issued in the Press Release.  The questionnaire  should also be circulated widely among the judiciary, the bar, the
legislative etc.
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
4.         The Committee also mentioned  that there was  no transparency  at the High Court  or at Supreme Court  level
and wanted a broad machanism  to be evolved  for the appointment  and selection of judges.
 
5.         The Committee further desired that Law Commissioner’s Reports on the subject  should be  utilized  during the
cause of study  of the various aspects of judicial Reports.
 
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P.M.
 
 
I
FIRST MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms met at 10.30 A.M on Monday, 5 February 2001,  in Committee Room
‘A’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi ¾Convener
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sangh Priya  Gautam
4.         Smt. Jayashree  Banerjee
5.         Shri P.H. Pandian
6.         Dr. Jayanta  Rongpi
7.         Shri Manabendra Shah
8.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
9.         Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Convener referred to the Minutes of the meeting of the previous Sub-Committee on Judicial
Reforms held on 22 September 2000.   The Convener directed the Secretariat to prepare a short questionnaire and also a
list of experts to be called before the sub-Committee for presentation of their views on aspects pertaining to Judicial
reforms.
 
3.         Speaking on the issue of pendency of cases the Convener informed the Sub-Committee that the pendency in
Supreme  Courts had gone down  drastically from 1 lakh to 18,000 in a very short time.   This may well be imitated  in
the entire  judiciary of the country and with no extra cost. 
 
4.         The sub-Committee then decided to issue a Press Release on ‘Law’s delays, long pendency  of cases and arrears
and the need for reforms on a priority basis inviting  the views and suggestion of institutions, organizations, associations,
concerned citizens and eminent experts for formulating its recommendations on  the subject of speedy justice in the
Courts as well as tribunals.  The Sub-Committee also decided to include in the Press Release that those who were
desirous of appearing before the Committee could intimate the Secretariat.
 
5.         It was suggested in the meeting that  working hours of the Courts  should be extended by an hour and long
vacations be reduced to 15-20 days.  A view was also expressed  that the structure of Courts was obsolete which needed 
improvisation.  Procedural aspects needed to be simplified.
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
6.         About legal aid to the poor, it was pointed out that to ensure this, an effective legal aid mechanism should be in
place on the line of the United Kingdom.
 
7.         The meeting then adjourned at 11.40 A.M.
 
 
II
SECOND  MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms met at 5.30 P.M.  on Monday, 5 November  2001,  in Regal Room, The
Oberoi, Mumbai.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi ¾Convener
2.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
3.         Shri P.H. Pandian
4.         Shri Anadi Sahu
5.         Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.0       The Convener welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Sub-Committee to consider the  preliminary draft
report on  Law’s Delays and Arrears in Courts.
 
2.1       The Sub-Committee desired that the report should  focus on the huge pendency of cases in the courts, analysis of
the causes of delay in disposal  of cases and also unfilled vacancies of Judges in the Courts  further compounding the
delay  in the disposal of cases.  In that connection, it was pointed out  that  in the majority of cases,  State was the major
party.  The Sub-Committee also desired that the report should suggest specific measures for reduction of arrears.
 
2.2       The Sub-Committee felt that the  lack of infrastructural  facilities  for the judiciary should also be discussed and
specific recommendations made in the report.
 
2.3       It was felt that the system of Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanism should be adequately dealt with in the
Report.
 
2.4       Regarding the delay in filling up the vacancies of Judges, the  Convener pointed out that after the power to
initiate the process of filling up the vacancies was wrested from the executive,  the situation had worsened.  He wanted
an analysis to be made of the time taken in appointing a judge before the Supreme Court judgement  in the Advocates-on
Record case in 1993 and thereafter.
 
2.5       The Sub-Committee was of the view  that introduction of Fast-Track Courts was a good beginning provided they
functioned  in the right direction.  The need to examine their efficacy was expressed.
 
3.         The Sub-Committee was of the strong view  that resolving law’s delays should be taken up as a National priority.
 
4.         The Convener then directed the Secretariat to recast the draft report in the light of the suggestions made and
points raised.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
5.         The meeting then adjourned at 6.00 P.M.
 
 
III
THIRD  MEETING
 
The Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms met at 3.00 P.M  on Tuesday,  4  December  2001,  in  Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi ¾Convener
2.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
3.         Shri Anadi Sahu
4.         Shri Manabendra Shah
5.         Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset the Convener welcomed the Members to the meeting  of the  Sub-Committee for consideration and 
adoption of the draft  report on  ‘Law’s Delays and Arrears in Courts’.  He stated that a good and exhaustive  report on
Laws delays and arrears in courts had been attempted which would go a long way in expediting the judicial process.
 
3.         After some discussion  the Sub-Committee adopted the report with some changes, as suggested by the Convener.
 
4.         The Convener also requested the Members to send  their comments/suggestions on the Report if any by Friday
i.e. 7 December 2001,   so that the same could be incorporated in the final  version.  The Convener also sought  leave  to
suggest further modifications.
 
5.         The Sub-Committee authorised its Convener to present the Report to the Chairman  of the full  Committee for 
submission, consideration, adoption and presentation thereof  to both Houses of Parliament.
 
6.         The meeting adjourned at 3.30 P.M.
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MAIN COMMITTEE
L
FIFTIETH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 19 December, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
 
            LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
7.         Shri M.O.H.  Farook
8.         Shri Vinay Katiyar
9.         Shri Subodh Ray
10.       Shri Anadi Sahu
11.       Shri Manabendra Shah
12.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
13.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
14.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
           
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri A. K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.0       *                                              *                                              *
2.1       Thereafter, the Committee took up consideration of the Report of the Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms on
“Law’s Delays:Arrears in Courts” and adopted the same.
2.2       The Committee decided to present/lay the Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2001, as its Eighty-fourth Report, along
with Evidence tendered on the Bill, to both  Houses on Friday 21 December 2001.  The Committee also decided to
present/lay the Report on “Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts” as its Eighty-fifth Report, to both Houses on 21 December
2001.
________________________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matters.
3.0       The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj, and Shri Anadi Sahu and in
his absence Shri  P.H. Pandian, to respectively present/lay the Reports/Evidence to Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha.
 
3.1       The Committee also decided that in view of the indications of the likely  adjournment of both the Houses sine die
before the scheduled date i.e. 21 December 2001, and also in view of the fact that the term of the current Committee
would expire on 31 December 2001, the Reports and the Evidence may be presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
by the Chairman of the Committee, should the Houses adjourn sine die prematurely.
 
3.2       The Committee, accordingly, authorised its Chairman to present the Reports and Evidence to Hon’ble Chairman,
if required.
 
4.0       The Chairman, on behalf of the entire Committee,  placed on record  his sincere appreciation  for the good work
done by the Secretariat in servicing the Committee.  Several members associated themselves with  the observations of
the Chairman.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M. to reassemble tentatively on 14 and 15 January 2002, after its
reconstitution.
 
 
APPENDICES
APPENDIX  I
 
 
LAW'S DELAYS, DELAY IN THE DISPOSAL OF CASES, LONG PENDENCY OF CASES & ARREARS (CASE
LOAD, JUDICIAL MANPOWER ASSESSMENT, CASE MANAGEMENT AND STATUTORY TIME LIMIT FOR
DISPOSAL OF CASES ETC.)
 
1.         PENDENCY  OF CASES IN COURTS
 
(i)         REASONS
 
The problems of delay and arrears in trial and appellate Courts, have over the years, assumed a very serious
proportion causing concern to litigants, the public and all branches of the government.  There has been a steady increase
in the institution of cases and accumulation of arrears, due to several complex factors.   Some of them are, increased
institution of Court cases on account of the awareness of rights on the part of the citizens; enactment of numerous laws
creating new rights and obligations, industrial development in the country and increased trade and commerce and
emergence of socio-economic measures both legislative and administrative, touching the life of the citizens at all levels,
population increase, lawyers' strike etc.
 
(ii)        PENDENCY OF CASES IN SUPREME COURT:
 
The pendency of cases  in the Supreme Court has shown a downward trend.  The pendency  of cases which was
1,04,936 as on 31.12.1991 has come down to 21,600 as on 5.7.2000 (statement-I).  This steep decrease is due to the
following steps taken by the Supreme Court:-
 
(a)        Better utilisation of available computer network and streamlining of administration and manpower of the
Registry staff.
 
(b)        More practical categorisation & grouping of cases involving similar question of   law.
 
(c)                Stabilization of Benches.
 
(d)        As far as possible cases scheduled are taken up for hearing on a day listed for that day.
 
(e)        No accumulation of defective matters.
 
(f)         Reservation of more and sufficient slot for old pending Miscellaneous and SLP matters, so that they are
listed in chronological order in sufficient numbers.
 
(iii)       PENDENCY IN THE HIGH COURTS
 
The pendency of cases in the High Courts which was 26.51 lakhs as on 31.12.1993 increased to 29.81 lakhs as on
31.12.1995 and further increased  to about 31.81 lakhs as on 31.12.1997.  The pendency of cases as on 31.12.1999 is
33.65 lakhs (statement -I).  Various measures have been adopted for expeditious disposal of cases including

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
classification and grouping of cases, computerisation of records in High Courts, identification and listing of the cases
covered with the decisions finally made by the Supreme Court and High Court on the same point.   In addition, many
High Courts have taken steps to amend their rules of procedure in order to simplify legal proceedings and to achieve
expeditious disposal of cases.
 
(iv)       PENDENCY IN SUBORDINATE COURTS
 
As per available information, the pendency of cases in the District/Subordinate Courts as on 31.12.1995 was 2.18
crores.  The pendency decreased to 1.99 crores as on 31.12.1996 and this figure slightly increased to about 2 crores as on
31.12.1997 and to 2.02 crores as on 31.12.1998.  As per latest available information, the pendency is 2.01 crores
(statement-II).  The overall disposal of cases during the year 1996 was 1.44 crores while the institution of cases for the
same period was 1.25 crore.  The decrease in pendency of cases appears, inter-alia, due to directions given by the
Supreme Court in its judgement dated 1.5.1996 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1128 of 1996 for closing of cases involving
minor offences pending for 2 years or more in which proceedings have not commenced and also due to appointment of
Special Judicial Magistrates/Special Metropolitan Magistrates under Section 13 and 18 of the Cr. P.C. for the disposal of
traffic and petty casses.
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT  I
NO. OF CASES PENDING IN THE SUPREME COURT
(AS ON 5
TH JULY, 2000)
 
Admission matter:           8077
Regular matter:             13523
                                    ---------
Total:                            21600
                                    ---------
 
NO. OF CASES PENDING IN VARIOUS HIGH COURTS.
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sr. No.Name of High Court     No. of Cases Pending   As on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.         Allahabad                     815026                                    12/99
2.         Andhra Pradesh                        150222                                    12/99
3.         Bombay                       284203                                    12/99
4.         Calcutta                        310914                                    12/99
5.         Delhi                            178186                                    12/99
6.         Gauhati                           38702                                    3/99
7.         Gujarat                         143274                                    12/99

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
8.         Himachal Pradesh           11928                                    12/99
9.         J&K                             70336                         12/99
10.       Karnataka                    84486                         12/99
11.       Kerala                          308237                                    12/99
12.       Madhya Pradesh          106293                                    12/99
13.       Madras                                    355382                                    12/99
14.       Orissa                          117339                                    12/99
15.       Patna                              82697                                    12/99
16.       Punjab & Haryana        184970                                    12/99
17.       Rajasthan                     122899                                    12/99
18.       Sikkim                               206                         12/99
 
                                                _______
                        TOTAL:           3365300         
                                                _______                                 
 
STATEMENT  II
Latest figures available as on 31
st August, 2000
NO. OF CASES PENDING IN THE DISTRICT/SUBORDINATE COURTS
 
SI.        Name of States/            As                    Civil                 Criminal            Total
No.      UTs                              on                                ____________________       
 
 
1.         Andhra Pradesh                        12/99               561351                        433523                        994874
2.         Aruncahal Pradesh        06/99                    331                 1469                            1800
3.         Assam                          12/99               44723             116804                        161527
4.         Bihar                            12/99               253692                        999204                       1252896
5.         Goa                              12/99                 27542                          12041                          39583
6.         Gujarat                         12/99               642133                       2498023                      3140156
7.         Haryana                       12/98               201656                        293145                        494801
8.         Himachal Pradesh         12/99               71297               67826                        139123
9.         Jammu & Kashmir        12/98               46529               75386                        121915
10.       Karnataka                    12/99               662269                        421046                       1083315
11.       Kerala                          12/99               218847                        376683                        595530
12.       Madhya Pradesh          12/99               357390                       1033516                      1390906
13.       Maharashtra                 12/99               860508                       1828967                      2689475
14.       Manipur                       12/99                   4524                            3614                            8138
15.       Meghalaya                    12/97                     261                            1968                            2229           
16.       Mizoram                       12/99                   1890                            1001                            2891
17.       Nagaland                      12/99               --------------Not available-----------------
18.       Orissa                          06/99               129757                        528780                        658537
19.       Punjab                          12/98               201118                        174094                        375212
20.       Rajasthan                     06/99               280893                        573999                        854892

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
21.       Sikkim                          12/98                     467                            1352                            1819
22.       Tamil Nadu                  12/99               537363                        305889                        843252
23.       Tripura                         12/99                   5921                          12767                          18688
24.       Uttar Pradesh               06/99               1008471                     2298622                      3307093
25.       West Bengal                 12/98               457254                        854264                       1311518
26.       And. & Nicobar                       06/99                     552                                56                              608           
27.       Chandigarh                   12/98                  12961                         32206                          45167
28.       Dadra & N. Haveli       12/99                     273                            1035                            1308
29.       Daman& Diu               12/99                     558                              598                            1156
30.       Delhi                            12/99               157531                        305542                        463073
31.       Lakshadweep               12/99                      83                  110                   193
32.       Pondicherry                  12/99                   5845                           5789               11634
                                                            _______________________________________
                                                                
                                                TOTAL:           6753990                  13259319                     20013309
                                                            ________________________________________
                                                                
APPENDIX  II
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
 
STATUS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF JUDICIAL REFO ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY
VARIOUS COMMITTEES, LAW COMMISSION, ETC.
 
            The term Judicial Reforms involves a critical study of the existing system of laws and administration of justice,
highlighting the areas of deficiencies and improving upon them by plugging the loopholes.  The Courts in India are
functioning according to the procedure laid-down in the Criminal Procedure Code, Civil Procedure Code, Indian
Evidence Act etc.  To accelerate the disposal of cases and to remove the bottlenecks coming in the way of providing
speedy and inexpensive justice, there is need to amend certain provisions in the existing statutes i.e. the High Court Acts
and Rules, Civil Procedure Code,  the Criminal Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act, augmenting the strength of courts,
setting up of alternative modes of disposal and provision of modern information technology to Courts.  The various steps
taken in this regard are enumerated in the succeeding paras.
 
(1)        IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE MALIMATH COMMITTEE AND
OTHERS:
 
A Committee of 3 Chief Justices of High Courts headed by Shri Justice V.S. Malimath, the then Chief Justice of
Kerala High Court was constituted in January, 1989 to study the problem of arrears in courts and to suggest steps for
their expeditious disposal.   In all 177 recommendations were made by the Malimath Committee.  The recommendations
of the Malimath Committee were commended to the concerned Central Ministries, all the State Government/UT
Administrations and High Courts for necessary follow-up action in December, 1990 by Department of Justice.
 
The status of the action taken on the recommendations made by the Malimath Committee, Chief Ministers and
Chief Justices Conference and law Commissions with regard to expeditious disposal of cases by High Courts/State
Government/UT Administrations is as follows:
 
(a)        Abolition of Original Civil Jurisdiction of the High Court:
 
The High Courts namely Rajasthan, Karnataka, Gauhati, Orissa, Kerala, Calcutta, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir,
have no original civil jurisdiction.  The Gujarat High Court has recently implemented the recommendations.  However,
the original pecuniary jurisdiction of District/Subordinate Courts in the cities of Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and in the State
of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh have been increased by the concerned State Governments. 
 
(b)        Abolition of Letter Patent Appeal:

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
Letter Patent Appeal have been abolished by the Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, Govt. of NCT of Delhi, Himachal
Pradesh, Kerala have accepted the recommendation.  The Bombay High Court have informed that High Court Rules
have been amended so that large cases can be heard by Single Judge.  The High Court of Andhra Pradesh has informed
that the no action is called for since there is not Letter patent Appeals.
 
(c)        Filing of certified copy of decree to be dispensed with.
 
The State of Andhra Pradesh has implemented the recommendation.  The recommendation have been included in
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1998 for which the Legislative Department is the Nodal Department.
 
(d)        High Court to specify categories of cases which could be heard by Single Judge, or by a Division Bench.
 
Karnataka, Gauhati, Punjab and Haryana High court, NCT Delhi High Court, Orissa, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir,  Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and Guwahati have implemented the recommendation.  High Court of
Bombay and Patna are in the process of implementation of above recommendation.
 
(e)        Magisterial courts to try in a summary way the offences specified in Ss.260 & 261 of the Cr.P.C.
 
The High Courts of Andhra Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh have implemented the report whereas high Court of
Maharashtra and High Court of Gujarat are in the process of implementation.
 
(f)         Work  of serving summons and notices should be entrusted to the process servers of the courts in addition to the
police as at present.
 
These provisions already exist in Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974.  However, Government of Nagaland has
implemented the order.  Govts.  of  Himichal Pradesh, NCT Delhi, Kerala, Gujarat, Maharashtra are in the process of
implementing the same.
 
(g)        Convention  to be evolved that would discourage granting adjournment:
 
The High Courts of Punjab and Haryana, Orissa, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Patna, Gauhati, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Allahabad, Bombay have implemented the
recommendation.
 
(h)        Court should avoid writing of long and elaborate judgement:
 
The High Courts of Bombay and Delhi have issued necessary instructions.
 
(i)         Reserved judgements should ordinarily be delivered within reasonable time.
 
Govt. of Nagaland, High Court of Himachal Pradesh, High Court of Orissa, High Court of Gujarat, High Court of
Andhra Pradesh and Govt. of Madhya Pradesh have implemented the recommendation.
 
(j)         Court to prepare lists of old cases and arrange their early disposal.
 
Punjab and Haryan High Court, Govt. of Nagaland, Govt. of Assam, High Court of Karnataka, High Court of
Himachal Pradesh, High Court of Delhi, High Court of Kerala, High Court of Orissa, High Court of Gujarat, High Court
of Andhra Pradesh and High Court of Bombay have taken necessary action.
 
(2)        GENERAL STEPS TAKEN BY THE HIGH COURTS;
 
A  request was made by the then Hon'ble MLJ&CA to the Chief Justices of all the High Courts to take steps
earlier taken by the Supreme Court for expe3ditious disposal of cases in the high Court.  Almost all the High Courts have

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
informed that they have taken the following steps for early disposal of cases:
 
(i)                  More practical categorisation and grouping of cases;
 
(ii)                As far as possible cases scheduled to be taken up for hearing on a particular day are listed for that day;
 
(iii)               No accumulation of defective matters;
 
(iv)              Reservation of more and sufficient time slot for old pending miscellaneous cases so that they are listed in
chronological order in sufficient numbers;
 
(v)                Streamlining of administration and manpower of the Registry staff through computer network.
 
(3)        AMENDMENT IN THE CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE, 1908:
 
The Legislative Department introduced a Bill on Judicial Reforms for the amendment of Civil Procedure Code
which is a mile stone in the field of tackling vexatious or frivolous litigation.  The Bill was based on the
recommendations made by the Malimath Committee and Chief Ministers & Chief justices Conference, 1993 so as to
expedite trial of cases and eliminate delays in the disposal of Civil cases.  The Bill contained, inter-alia, provisions for
making it obligatory for the Court to refer the dispute after the issues are framed for settlement either by was of
arbitration, conciliation, meditation, judicial settlement or through Lok Adalat.  It is only after parties fail to get their
disputes settled through resolution methods that the suit shall proceed further in the court in which it was filed.
 
The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999, aiming at speedy disposal of cases has received
President's assent on 30.12.1999.  it is awaiting requisite notifications by the Legislative Department.
 
(4)        AMENDMENT IN THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE:
 
The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 introduced in the Rajya Sabha on May 9, 1994,
containing 49 clauses to amend various provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 was considered by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs.  The Committee in its report suggested modification of 17 clauses
of the Bill.  The Cabinet in its meeting held on march 7, 2000 considered a Note for the Cabinet proposing to accept
most of the suggestions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee and approved the proposals contained therein. 
Subsequently, Legislative Department has prepared a List of Official amendments to be carried out to the Bill on the
basis of approval of the Cabinet.  Necessary notices for consideration of the Bill and for moving official amendments to
the Bill have been issued to Secretary General, Rajya Sabha on 18.7.2000.
 
            The Law Commission of India submitted its 154
th Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Some of the recommendations which pertain to State Governments have been referred to them for implementation.  As
regards the recommendations for amending any of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Ministry
of Home Affairs is formulating its views on such recommendations in consultation with State Governments/UTs.
 
(5)        SETTING UP OF ALTERNATIVE TRIBUNALS TO REDUCE PENDENCY
IN HIGH COURTS:
 
(a)        SETTING UP OF INDUSTRIAL RELATION COMMISSION:
 
The Malimath Committee had recommended the setting up of an Industrial Relation Commission at the Centre
and State level excluding the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts against the decision of these Commission.
 
Ministry of Labour  has informed, in August, 1999, that there is no proposal at present for setting up of any
Industrial Relations Commission.
 
(b)        SETTING UP OF RENT TRIBUNALS:

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
Ministry of Urban Development has informed that the States/UTs are requested from time to time to set up Rent
Control Tribunals in their respective States by way of amending/creating Rent Laws on the lines of Model Rent Control
Legislation enacted by the said Ministry.
 
Ministry of Urban Development vide their letter dated 16.8.99 has informed that the State/UT wise information
about the number of such Rent Tribunals would be furnished to this Department as soon as said the information is
received by them.
 
(c)
                EXTENSION OF JURISDICTION OF CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS TO THE
TEACHING AND NON-TEACHING STAFF OF UNIVERSITIES:
 
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension.  The Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension has agreed in principle to extend the jurisdiction of CAT to cases of service
matters of teaching and non-teaching staff of the Central Universities subject to working out the modalities in this
regard.  Department of Education has been requested to take up the matter with DoPT.
 
(d)        SETTING UP OF TRIBUNAL/MACHINERY FOR EARLY DISPOSAL OF CASES CONCERNING
STUDENTS ADMISSIONS/EXAMINATION MALPRACTICES, EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMME,
AFFILIATION AND DE-AFFLIATION OR COLLEGES, ELECTION TO UNIVERSITIES BODIES
ETC.
 
The matter has again been taken up recently with Deptt. of Education for the setting Tribunal/Machinery for early
disposal of above cases.  Information is still awaited from Deptt. of Education who have been reminded to expdite the
information.
 
(6)        TRAINING FOR LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING:
 
Legislative Department had informed that training to officers in Legislative drafting is already being provided by
the Legislative Drafting Institute to the officers of the Central/State Govts.
 
(7)        INADEQUACY OF JUDGE STRENGTH:
 
The Judge strength of high Courts was reviewed in 1995 on the basis of revised guidelines recommended by the
Chief Justice of India in 1994.  As considered necessary on the basis of review, the Judge strength of certain High Courts
was increased, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Courts and the Chief Ministers of the States concerned. 
The subsequent review was undertaken in the last quarter of the year 1999 and increase in judge strength of some of the
High Courts is under consideration in consultation with the respective Chief Justices and State Governments.
 
     (8)   DELAY IN FILLING UP OF VACANCIES:
 
The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President after consultation with such of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the president may deem necessary for the purpose.  In the case of
appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice of India, the Chief Justice of India is always required to be consulted
(Vide article 124 of the Constitution).
 
The Judges of the High Courts are appointment by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
the Governor of the State and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief justice of the High Court (Vide
article 217 (1) of the Constitution).
 
Any change in the system of appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and of High Courts and in the mode of
transfer of Judges from one High Court to another would necessitate an amendment of the aforesaid provisions of the
Constitution.
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
Prior to the Judgement of the Supreme Court in Advocates-on-Record Association vs Union of India and others
on October 6, 1993, a proposal for appointment of a Judge could also be initiated by the Government.  However,
according to the Judgement of October 6, 1993 read with the Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998, of the Supreme
Court of India the initiation of the proposal for appointment of a Judge in the Supreme Court must be by the Chief
Justice of India, and in the case of a high Court by the Chief Justice of that High Court.  For transfer of a Judge/Chief
Justice of a High Court to another High Court, the proposal has to be initiated by the Chief Justice of India.  This is the
manner in which proposals for appointments to the Supreme Court and the High Courts as well as for the transfers of
Judges/Chief Justices of the High Courts must invariably be made.
 
In order to overcome the effect of the aforesaid judgement it was decided to amend articles 124, 217, 222  and
insert new article 224B in the Constitution of India.  The Constitution (Eighty-Second Amendment) Bill, 1997, was
forwarded to the Lok Sabha Secretariat on 14
th March, 1997.  The Bill, however, could not be introduced on account of
the dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
 
The National Agenda for Governance of the National Democratic Alliance, contains the following para, which,
inter alia, refers to the National Judicial Commission:
 
"28. We will set up a National Judicial Commission which will recommend judicial appointments in High Courts
and Supreme Court and draw up a code of ethics for the judiciary.  We will enact legislation to provide an
eligibility criteria that the high offices of State-legislative, executive and judicial are held only by naturally born
Indian citizens.  We will also introduce a multi-purpose identity card for all citizens."
 
(9)        TRANSFER OF HIGH COURT JUDGES:
 
            The Government of India has accepted the recommendations made by the Law Commission in its 80th Report as
a policy that there should be a convention according to which 1/3 rd of Judges in each High Court should be from other
States.  The Government is implementing the policy either by making initial appointments from outside or by effecting
transfers as advised by Chief Justice of India.
 
(10)      CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL 1990 NATIONAL JUDICIAL COMMISSION:
 
            One of the items of the National Agenda for Governance of National Democratic Alliance is to set up a national
Judicial Commission to make recommendations for Judicial appointments in the Supreme Court and the High Courts.  A
note for the Cabinet is being finalised for this purpose.
 
(11)      RURAL  LITIGATION-SETTING UP OF GRAM NYAYALAYAS:
 
 
The Law Commission in its 154
th Report on Code of Criminal  Procedure has recommended that States should
enact legislation on Nyaya Panchayats to suit their local needs and conditions.  The Andhra Pradesh Mandala Nyaya
Panchayats Bill, 1995 may be adopted as a model on the composition, powers and jurisdiction of the Nayaya Panchayats.
 
(12)      GOVERNMENT LITIGATION:
 
All  the Central Ministries/Departments have recently been requested to take necessary steps like filing of
counter-affidavits in time, avoidance of unnecessary adjournments, etc. for early disposal of cases where they are a
party.  Further, taking into account the pendency of cases, the Ministries/Departments have also been requested to
undertake the review of Acts/Laws being administered by them.  They have also been requested to opine whether cases
involving Rs.10,000/-or less may be compromised outside the Court.
 
 
 
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
(13)      PROVISION OF  MODERN OFFICE EQUIPMENT'S  TO THE COURTS:
 
            The High Courts have already been provided with various modern office equipments like Telex, FAX,  electronic
typewriters etc.  The various High Courts and State Governments have informed that they are providing electronic
typewriters/Photo-copiers machines etc. to Subordinate Courts in a phased manner.  For modernining and streamlining
the judiciary in the country through computerization, under the Project COURTS, the National Informatics Centre have
installed computers in the Supreme Court and all the 18 High Courts.  Further the NIC has taken up computerization of
the 430 District Courts in the country.  So far about 253 District Courts have been provided with computer hardware.
           
On  the basis of the recommendations made by the Special Subject Groups constituted by the Prime Minister's
Council on Trade & Industry, NIC has been requested to provide Information Technology to all the Subordinate Courts. 
The information sought by the NIC is being collected.  The 11
th Finance Commission has also been requested to allocate
funds for computerisation of all the Courts in the country.
 
(14)      SETTING UP OF FACILITATION CENTRE/ENQUIRY COUNTER IN THE HIGH COURTS FOR THE
CONVENIENCE OF GENERAL PUBLIC.
 
All  High Courts have been requested to set up computerised Enquiry counter in their High Court for the
convenience of general public.  They have also been requested to intimate the expenditure involved in the setting up of
such centre so that the amount provided under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme could be released to them.  High courts
of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh have informed that they have already set up such a centre.  The Gujarat Model is being
circulated to all the High Courts and funds will be sub-allotted on receipt of their requirement.
 
A proposal has been received from the Kerala High Court to allocate Rs. 10 lakhs for the purpose.  Another
proposal has been received from Rajasthan High Court intimating that the expenditure involved would be Rs.
1,01,000/-.  An amount of Rs.1.95 lakh is required by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  Gauhati High Court has
requested for an amount of Rs.6.50 lakhs.  Government of Kerala is being asked to allocate 2 to 3% funds for the
purpose of computerisation as per guidelines out of the amount allocated to them for the CSS for the development of
infrastructure facilities for the judiciary.  This has been repeated to other State Governments and High Courts for
information and necessary action.
 
In the Principal Registrar's Conference held in December, 1999, it was resolved that the High Courts (other than
Bombay, Guwahati, Gujarat, J&K and Madhya Pradesh  which have already established such centres) may also take
necessary steps for establishment of such facilitation centres.
 
(15)      SETTING UP OF NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY FOR PROVIDING TRAINING TO
JUDGES/JUDICIAL OFFICERS IN THE COUNTRY:
 
The Government has set up a national Judicial Academy as a Registered Society for providing training to the
Judicial Officers of all the States/UTs.  The Academy will also take research work in addition to providing training.  The
complex of the Academy is under construction at Bhopal and is expected  to be fully functional by the end of 2001.
 
(16)      PLAN FUNDS FOR THE JUDICIARY:
 
A Centrally Sponsored Scheme relating to development of infrastructual facilities for the Judiciary is being
implemented by the Department of Justice since 1993-94.  The scheme includes construction of court buildings and
residential quarters for Judges/Judicial Officers covering High Courts and Subordinate Courts.  One of the main criteria
of this scheme is that the State Governments must come forward with matching State's share equivalent to the amount
released by the Central Government.  However, the State Governments are free to utilise additional funds depending on
their own resources.  The expenditure in respect of UTs is fully met by the Central Govt.
 
From 1993-94 to 199-2000 an amount of Rs. 335.43 crores has been released to various States/UTs as Central
share under this scheme.  Against this, Rs.781 crores has been spent by various States/UTs upto 1999-2000 (Complete
information in respect of amout spent during 1999-2000 is still awaited).  The scheme is very popular in the States/UTs. 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
During the current financial year 2000-2001, an amount of Rs. 74.95 crores has been provided by the Planning
Commission.
 
 
(17)      LOK ADALATS:
 
The Lok Adalats have proved an effective mechanism for alternative resolution of disputes through persuasive
and conciliatory efforts.  With the enforcement of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 and extension of the
provisions of Chapter III of the Act to all the States and Union territories, Lok Adalats have been provided a statutory
base and are now vested with the powers of a civil court.  At the first Annual Meet of the State Legal Services
Authorities held under the aegis of the National Legal Services Authority on 12
th September, 1998, State Legal Services
Authorities informed that they were in the process of establishing the permanent and continuous Lok Adalats.  In
providing a legal aid to the poor and the needy people, the Act of 1987 is a step forward in the direction of provision of
inexpensive justice.  On the basis of the information received from the State legal Services Authorities, the number of
Lok Adalats held and number of cases disposed of during the last 3 years is as follows:
 
Year                 No. of Lok Adalats held                       No. of cases disposed of
 
1996-97           10,490                                                 9,42,479
1997-98             9,352                                                 9,45,090
1998-99             8,700                                               11,25,000
 
 
(18)      APPONNTMENT OF SPECIAL JUDICIAL MAGISTRATES UNDER SECTION 13 AND 18 OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE:
 
Most of the State Governments have appointed Special Judicial/Metropolitan Magistrates for the disposal of petty
criminal cases including traffic cases.  The State Governments/High Courts are reminded periodically to appoint Special
judicial/Metropolitan Magistrates.  Letters were sent to Punjab & Haryana High Court, A&N Administration and Govt.
of Orissa in this regard.  The A&N Administration have informed that they have taken up the matter with the Calcutta
High Court.  Govt. of Orissa, Punjab & Haryana High Court and A&N Administration have been reminded on 31.3.2000
to intimate the latest position.
 
 
(19)      IMPROVEMENT IN FUNCTIONING OF COURTS - REQUEST BY THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA TO
CHIEF JUSTICES OF ALL THE HIGH COURTS:
 
The Hon'ble Chief Justice of India vide his DO dated 22
nd December, 1998, addressed to Chief Justices of all the
High Courts, has impressed upon the need to deal with the problem of delay in disposal of cases and to make the year
1999 as an "Year of Action".  The Chief Justice of India has also requested for filling up the vacant posts of Judges in the
District Courts.  He has also stated that the cases pending for more than 7 years be disposed of during the year 1999. 
After this exercise, the cases which are more than five years old be taken up after the end of December, 1999.
 However, the State Governments/High Courts are requested by the Department of Justice t fill up the existing
vacancies of Judicial Officers in the Subordinate Courts which are presently around 10% of the total sanctioned strength.
 
(20)      LEGAL EDUCATION AND LEGAL PROFESSION:
 
This subject matter is dealt with by Department of Legal Affairs who have been requested to furnish information
regarding revamping of legal education and legal profession by them.  The reply is still awaited.
 
(21)      CREATION OF AN ALL INDIA JUDICIAL SERVICE:
 
On the basis of the recommendations made by the Law Commissions, the Supreme Court of India and views
received from various High Courts and State Government/UTs, a draft Cabinet Note was prepared.  The

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
views/comments of the concerned departments have been obtained.  The First National Judicial Pay Commission has
also suggested certain guidelines.  The Cabinet Note has been accordingly modified and is under submission for
approval.
 
(22)      REPORT OF FIRST NATIONAL JUDICIAL PAY COMMISSION:
 
In pursuance of the direction of the Supreme Court, in All India Judges Association vs. Union of India and others
dated 13.11.91, the first National Judicial Pay Commission (Shetty Commission) was set up on 21.3.1996.  The terms of
reference of the Commission included examination of the present structure of emoluments and conditions of service,
minimum  qualifications, age of recruitment and retirement, method of recruitment, work method and work environment
etc. of Judicial Officers in the States and UTs, taking into account the total packet of benefits available to them and to
make suitable recommendations to the State Governments.
 
The Commission submitted it final report with respect to Judicial Officers to the Hon'ble Prime Minister on
November 11, 1996.  As per its terms of reference, the Commission, has also forwarded its Report to all the State
Government/High Courts.  Implementation of the recommendations of the Commission is under active consideration of
the Union Government as regards UTs.  A draft Note for the Cabinet seeking direction of the Cabinet on the
Commission's recommendations has been prepared and with the approval of the Minister of law, Justice & Company
Affairs it has not been referred to the Department of Expenditure and Department of Personnel and Training for their
views/comments.
 
In the meantime, the Supreme Court of India, which took cognizance of the matter last heard the case on
29.3.2000.  The case is likely to come up for hearing at any time.
 
APPENDIX  III
PRESS RELEASE
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
STUDY ON JUDICIAL REFORMS
 
In order to ensure that the justice system is able to function at its optimum efficiency and that the common people
have access to speedy, inexpensive and substantial justice, the Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs has decided to take up the subject of law's delays, long
pendency of cases and arrears and the need for reforms on a priority basis.
 
1.
      The Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms of the Standing Committee on Home Affairs which has been constituted
under the Convenership of Dr. L.M. Singhvi, Member, Rajya Sabha consists of the following Members, namely,
Sarvashri Hansraj Bhardwaj, Sangh Priya Gautam, S. Ramachandran Pillai, Raj Mohinder Singh, C.P.
Thirunavukkarasu, Kuldip Nayyar, Members, Rajya Sabha and P.H. Pandian, Dahyabhai Vallabhai Patel, Anadi Sahu,
Manabendra Shah, Lal Bihari Tiwari, Rajkumar Wangcha, Smt. Jayashree Banerjee and Dr. Jayanta Rongpi, Members,
Lok Sabha.
2.
      The Sub-Committee invites the views and suggestions of institutions, organizations, associations, concerned citizens
and eminent experts for formulating its recommendations on the subject of speedy justice in the courts as well as
tribunals.  The subject has assumed serious proportions causing concern to litigants, the public at large and all branches,
departments and undertakings of the Government.
3.      Individuals/institutions/organizations may send their suggestions/views in the form of memoranda (in English and
Hindi) to Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, Room No. 006, Ground
Floor, New Delhi (Tel. No. 3034187 (O) and 6259328 (R) so as to reach him within three weeks from the date of

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
publication of this Release.  The memoranda so received would form part of the record of the Sub-Committee and would
be treated confidential.  Therefore, no suggestions or submissions sent to the Sub-Committee should be given publicity
in any manner. Institutions/organizations/associations/concerned citizens/eminent experts desirous of appearing before
the Sub-Committee may also intimate the Secretariat at the above address.
 
Website
:                                                                       E.Mail:tapanda @sansad.nic.in
htt://parliamentofindi.nic.in                                                               rsc-ha @sansad.nic.in
 
 
New Delhi
23 February, 2001.
APPENDIX  IV
THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON JUDICIAL REFORMS
 
Papers circulated
1.
                  Status note prepared by the Secretariat
2.                  Background note received from Department of Justice
3.                  Minutes of the first meeting of the Sub-Committee on Judicial Reforms held on 24th July, 2000
4.                  List of experts on Judicial Reforms furnished by the Department of Justice;
5.                  A note on Judicial Reforms received from Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj, M.P.;
6.                  A background note on each of the following subjects received from the Department of Justice:-
 
(a)                Administration of Criminal Justice;
(b)               Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism; and
(c)                Reforms in Legal Eductation.
 
7.                  Malimath Committee Report;
8.                  Statement showing follow-up action taken by the Department of Justice on the Malimath Committee
Report;
 
9.                  Resolution approved in the Conference of Chief Justice, Chief Ministers and Law Ministers of the States
and also of the Chief Justice of India and the Union Law Minister and the Union Minister of State for law
held on 31st August and 1st September, 1985 at New Delhi;
 
10.              Updated Implementation Report on the various items contained in the Resolutions passed by the
Conference of Chief Ministers, Chief Justice and Law Ministers of States and Chief Justice of India and
the Union Law Minister held on 31 st August and 1st September 1985 as received from the Department of
Justice;
 
11.              Chief Ministers' and Chief Justices' Meeting, 1993-Resolution;
12.              Law Ministers' Meeting, 1995-Hyderabad Resolution;
13.              Goa Statement of law Ministers' Working Group-I;
14.              Pondicherry Statement of Law Ministers' Working Group-II;

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
15.              Pachmarhi Statement of Law Ministers' Working Group III;
16.              Law Ministers' Conference, 1997 - Gist of discussion at the Conference as received from the Department
of Legal Affairs;
 
17.              Supreme Court Judgement Dated 6 October 1993 in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association
versus Union of India Case;
 
18.              Opinion of the Supreme Court on Civil Advisory Jurisdiction - Special Reference No. 1 of 1998 under
Article 143(1) of the constitution;
 
19.              New York University Journal of International Law and Politics-Indian Civil Justice System Reform;
Limitation and Preservation of the Adversarial Process by Hiram E. Chodosh, Stephen A. Mayo, A.M.
Ahmadi, Abhishek M. Singhvi (Vol. 30 Fall 1997-Winter 1998 Nos. 1-2)
 
20.              The D.M. Singhvi Memorial lecture titled 'The Indian Judiciary in the 21st Century' delivered at the India
International Centre on 12 April, 1999 by Mr. Justice A.S. Anand, Chief Justice of India, as published in
India International Centre Quarterly Journal, Monsoon 1999;
 
21.              A set of Press Clippings on Judicial Reforms;
 
22.              152nd Report of Law Commission on Custodial Crimes;
 
23.              167th Report of Law Commission on the Patents (Amendment) Bill, 1998.
 
24.              Comprehensive background note on Law's Delays, in the disposal of cases, Long pendency of cases and
Arrears (case load, judicial manpower assessment, case management and statutory time limit for disposal
of cases etc.);
 
25.               Report on modernisation of Civil Justice System in India: Implementation Plan; prepared by the Study
Team constituted by the national Judicial Academy (NJA) and submitted to the Hon'ble Chief Justice of
India in 1997;
 
26.              Latest figures of pendency of cases in Supreme Court and High Courts (High Court wise) and
Subordinate Courts (Statewise);
 
27.              Relevant Reports of the law Commission on various aspects of Judicial Reforms;
 
28.              Extracts of the Reports of the Law Commission pertaining to the subject;
 
29.              Statement showing implementation of law Commission's Reports on Judicial Reforms;
 
30.              154th Report of law Commission on Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; and
 
31.              173rd Report of Law Commission on Prevention of Terrorism Bill.
APPENDIX  IVA
UNCORRECTED SPEECH OF CJI ON LAW DAY IN SUPREME COURT ON 26TH NOVEMBER, 2001
 
Ladies and Gentlemen.
            I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to you on Law Day.  It enables me to tell you what I see lies ahead for
the Supreme Court and the judiciary in general.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
            The general position of the backlog of cases in the Supreme Court is satisfactory,  but I found, when I assumed
office on 1 st November, 2001, that there were about 85 matters pending for hearing by a Bench of five judges and
several others pending for hearing by Benches larger than of five judges.  Some of these matters were filed in the
Supreme Court almost 20 years back.  I thought it fit, therefore, to constitute a Constitution Bench from the very first
non-miscellaneous day of my term in office and I propose that for the rest of it there will be a Bench of five or more
judges sitting throughout.  Having in continuous operation a Bench of five or more judges will necessarily mean that the
disposal rate of appeals and writ petitions before smaller Benches will decrease and that the overall arrears will increase. 
This, in my view, is of little overall consequence because the principal function of this Court is to hear and decide
constitutional issues and resolve conflicts on the interpretation of law between the High Court.
 
            The arrears in most other courts in this country are very considerable indeed and I think that it is requisite to lay
the blame for the arrears squarely where it belongs.  The Law Commission, in its 127
th Report, made as far back as
1988, commented on the judge-population ratio in the country.  It "recommended that the State should immediately
increase the present ratio from 10.5 Judges per million of Indian population to at least 50 judges per million of Indian
population within the period of next five years.  It was further recommended that by the year 2000 India should
command at least 107 Judges per million of India Population".  The ratio presently is 12 or 13 judges per million
population.  Chief Justice Anand and I were in St. Petersburg in Russia two  years ago and were invited to visit the local
court.  At tea Chief Justice Anand was asked about the number of judges in India.  His reply evoked disbelief and
consternation : what justice could so few judges give so large a population! Even in Russia the judge-population was
substantially larger.  Twelve years back the ratio was about 41 in Austrialia, 75 in Canada, 51 in England and 107 in the
United States of America.
 
            A Law Minister of the Union not so very long back acknowledged that the judge strength across the board
needed to be increased, according to him, fivefold, but he wondered where that increase could be accommodated, in
terms of court rooms, etc.
 
            The reason why we do not have more judges across the board is because the States are simply not willing to
provide the finances that are required.  There is a matter pending before this Court, which I do not propose to hear any
more so that I can freely say in public what I want and need to.  The relief sought in that matter is an increase in the
strength of judges all over the country.  Each and every States in the country has stated in reply that it has no more
money for the judiciary.  What then is the position in regard to money?
 
            The expenditure on the judiciary in terms of the GNP is only 0.2 per cent; and, of this, half is recovered by the
States through court fees and fines.
 
            Given the attitude of the States, is it any wonder that the jails of our country are filled to the brim, largely with
under-trails.  I do not mean to comment adversely on the fast track courts recently started.  In some States they are doing
a commendable job, but even there they are not a complete answer.
 
            Under-trials and convicts, indeed, litigants as a class, do not constitute a vote bank that has to be catered to.  Let
me say it clearly, the principal responsibility for the judicial arrears in the country does not lie with the judiciary.
 
            This is not to say that the judges and the bar do not share some responsibility for the backlog of cases.  I hear
from people all over the country that some judges in the High Courts and in the subordinate judiciary do not sit in their
courts on time and, perhaps worse, do not sit at all after the lunch break.  This is reprehensible behaviour, and it is the
responsibility of the Chief Justice of the High Court and, in the case of the subordinate judiciary, the High Court Judge
in-charge of the District and the District Judge concerned to take action.
 
            The Bar, unfortunately, is known to seek adjournments for reasons that have nothing to do with the case and,
even more unfortunately, many judges are incapable of standing up to the Bar.  I can only appeal to advocates all over
the country to put their obligation to the court above their obligation to themselves and desist from accepting conflicting
work.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
            It remains for me to touch on the aspect of corruption in the judiciary.  I have said it in public before I assumed
this office and I say it again: the vast majority of judges in this country are thoroughly honest, straight forward men and
women.  It is the minority which gives a bad name to the judiciary.  Where the subordinate judiciary is concerned, the
High Court exercises adequate disciplinary jurisdiction and it is very necessary that errant subordinate judges should be
disciplined, after adequate inquiry.  This would send out a message not only to other judges but to the public at large that
corruption within the judiciary is not tolerated.  So far as the higher judiciary is concerned, impeachment is the only legal
remedy and it is available only in the cases of what are called "high crimes and misdemeanors".  In any case, a recent
experience of the impeachment process showed how flawed it could be.  The only alternative is internal, namely, the in-
house procedure, and I would like to see it enforced whenever the conditions to do so exist.
 
            I will not be addressing you on the next law Day: this is my first and last law Day speech.  I wish the law, the
judiciary, the bar and, particularly, this great institution, the Supreme Court of India, well; and I will, while in office, do
all that is in my power to further their cause.
 
Thank you!
           
APPENDIX  IVB
H. Times
04.10.2001
Infinite justice:
LN Mishra's widow dies waiting for it
Neeta Sharma
New Delhi, October 3
 
WIFE  OF  assassinated Congress leader Lalit Narain Mishra died last week after waiting 26 long years for
justice.
 
 Unbelievable as it may sound, the trial court has been in the process of merely recording the statements of the
accused since the last one decade.  Of the seven accused,
till date it has managed to record the statements of only two accused.  This is the pace at which the case is proceeding
despite a court directive for a day-to-day hearing to expedite the matter.
 
On January 2, 1975, senior Congress leader and then Union Minister for Rilways L.N. Mishra was killed in an explosion
which occurred while he was addressing a public meeting at Samastipur.
 
Old age and a perpetual wait for Justice took its toll on Mishra's wife last week.  Legal luminaries state that the
case is the oldest criminal case whose trial is still dragging on.  The case, in fact, epitomises the lethargic pace at which
the Indian legal system operates.  Since the trial proceedings started, the case has been transferred to as many as nine
judges.
 
Case files have become thicker by the day and the number of trunks used for ferrying the documents from one
court room to another has swelled.  Senior defence counsel K.K. Luthra, P.P. Grover, Bawa Gurucharna Singh, C.L.
Prem and one CBI prosecutor have died since the case came up for hearing, a court official discolsed.
 
Many important witnesses had to be dropped either because they remained untraced or because they did not come
forward for deposition.  In fact, 50 of the total 151 prosecution witnesses have been dropped for one reason or another.
 
The protracted proceedings have created an uncanny situation.  The defence counsel has also lost track of vital
documents like chargesheets and the case diaries.  Stacked in the rusted trunks, the case files resemble ancient
manuscripts.  Presently state defence counsels say that there are over 36,000 documents relating to the case.
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
The case was handed over to the CBI on January 4, 1974.  Investigations by the agency revealed in June 1975
that a plot had been hatched by some influential political persons to eliminate Mishra, they key suspects being the Anand
Margis.
 
Further investigations led to the arrest of Santoshanand Avadhoot, Sudevanand Avadhoot, Ram janam Dwivedi,
Ram Nagina Prasad, Arteshhanand Avadhoot, Ram Rup and Gopalji.  They were charged with conspiring to eliminate
Mishra.  The Margis allegedly held Mishra responsible for bringing their enemy-the Communist Party of India-close to
the Congress.
 
           
APPENDIX  IVC
Clearing arrears
Apex Court on a fast Track
By Abhishek Singhvi
 
The Apex court's current achievements must not lead to complacency.  The abysmal arrears
position at the base of the pyramid -the lower judiciary-and in many of the larger high courts has
to be tackled immediately.
 
            The Supreme Court's efforts and achievements in the realm of arrears reduction reflect a ray of hope amidst the
generally depressing scenario of staggering court pendency.  A brief look at some statistics shows that the total numbers
of pending cases in all the 18 high courts in India as far back as 1992 were roughly 2.5 lakh; some High courts by
themselves have arrears of more than lakh (Allahabad), 3 lakh (Madras), 2.5(Bombay) and 1.5 lakh (Delhi).  The total
arrears in the lower judiciary amount to a staggering 2 crore cases.  As against this, the total actual cases pending in the
Supreme Court-admission as well as final hearing regular cases-as on October 30, 1995 were mere 37,656, which
compares favourably even with the total pendency of 1,07,776 cases in 1990 in  the apex court.  The Supreme Court has
thus progressively moved towards arrears reduction over the years.
 
            A closer analysis of the period from November 1994 to October 30, 1995, reveals an even more impressive
performance.  The Court, on November 1, 1994 inherited a backlog of 34,075 admission cases and 20.918 regular
hearing cases, thus totalling 54, 993 of actual total pending matter.  Further registrations added 58, 749 cases during this
period, thus resulting in a total of 1,13,742 cases.  To deal with the large pendency, the court, during this period,
proposed of a staggering76,086 actual cases, thus leaving only 16,612 admission and 21,044 final hearing cases (a total
of 37,656 cases) pending as on October 30, 1995.
 
            This period thus saw a disposal of 76,086 cases as against a disposal of 39,018 cases over the preceding one year
period, that is November 1, 1993 to October 31, 1994.  There was thus a 194 per cent increase in disposal.  For this
reason, despite an enhanced filing figure of 58,749 during this period compared to 143 over the 1993-94 period i.e. a 158
per cent reduction, the period which started on November 1, 1994 with 54,993 cases ended with a net reduced and of
31.5 per cent i.e. almost a one-third reduction .  The preceding period which started on November 1, 1993 involved only
a marginal reduction of 14 per cent.
 
            The 1994-95 period had an average judge strength of 22 (as against the sanctioned figure of 25 judges).  There
judges had 210 working days and devoted roughly equal time (i.e. 105 days) for each of the two categories of
miscellaneous and final hearing matters.  The average disposal per judge per day was thus (10 admission cases or 5.29
regular hearing cases.  The reasons for this heart-warming performance are diverse but all have much more to do with
simple management and administrative techniques than  with law;
 lawyers or legal doctrines.  The first is the growing up and listing suo motu by the Court Registry and without either
party asking for it or necessarily wanting it, of old pending matters.
            Since net disposals exceeded net new registrations during this period, slots were available for listing such old
matters and this was done by the computer on each day in chronological order.  Thus approximately 33 per cent to 40 per
cent of all matter listed on any day before any bench would be old pending matter and the balance would be current
filings or court-direction dates.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
            The apex court thus successfully implemented one of the cardinal principles of a modern doctrine somewhat
pompously referred to in the West as the active caseflow management technique (ACMT)  viz., it created two tracks, one
for keeping abreast of current filings and a second one to deal with old pending matters.
 
            Second, adjournments have been made an exception and not the rule.  Adjournments in the Supreme Court can
never be taken for granted and cases scheduled for a particular date are invariably listed on that day.  Indeed, listing is
entirely a computer-managed affair, except for extremely urgent listing required within less than 15 days for which a
special oral mention has to be made to the Chief Justice.
 
            Thirdly, cases listed for a day which were earlier adjourned in case of absence of any judge are now immediately
redistributed on that very day over the remaining nine or ten benches and thus dealt with or disposed of on the same day,
despite an inevitably enhanced workload for each bench.  Fourthly, bench stabilisation over three-month or six-month
periods ensures that the same or similar subjects out of the 56 computer-classified subjects go to the same benches as far
as possible, thus expediting disposal.  Fifthly computerisation  at every level and department of the Registry has
increased efficiency considerably.
 
            Human resources have been streamlined and work redistributed over 43 departments to minimise  intra and inter-
departmental file movement; staff strength for each section has been reorganised depending on the filings and pendency
in respect of each subject heading; the maximum information covering numerous fields and criteria are led into the
computer in respect of each case, thus ensuring maximum information retrieval at the touch of a button; and a Judis
programme has already digested all Supreme Court report judgments into the computer.
 
            But clearly the single most important factor, albeit the most undefinable and unquantifiable, is "attitudinal
change"  a change in the work culture, a change from the status quoist ethic, a change amongst judges, lawyers, officials
and employees comprising the Supreme Court family, regarding the urgency and the imperative necessity for arrears
reduction.  Delay reduction is impossible without planning, cooperation continuous monitoring and repeated adjustment
and refinement of the plan.  It requires judicial commitment and leadership and the apex court has undoubtedly been
fortunate in this respect.
 
            The apex court clearly has many miles to go and the catalogue of commendable achievements discussed above
should not lead to complacency.   The abysmal arrears position at the base of the pyramid-the lower judiciary-and in
many of the larger high courts has to be tackled immediately on a warfooting.    Separate arrears reduction plans, for
high courts and the lower judiciary, need to be implemented.
 
            The Supreme Court itself must always maintain its full strength of 25 judges and increase the working days per
year at least by 15 per cent to 20 per cent if it is to achieve zero arrears by 2000 AD.  Otherwise, at the current
(presumably peak)  disposal rate per judge per day, roughly 10 years would be required on the average availability of 22
judges to eliminate all pending arrears  (assuming, of course, that fresh filings do not increase dramatically).
 
The uncertainties engendered by the supplementary list of business issued by the Supreme Court one day in
advance, which sometimes radically alters the various advanced weekly and daily lists of business must be minimised. 
Strict time-limit for oral arguments in long or heavy final regular hearing matters must be stipulated and enforced.  But it
the momentum is maintained, we might all live to see the almost unbelievable sight at least in India, of a court (and the
apex court at that) actually functioning as a zero arrears court.
 
APPENDIX  V
_________________________________________________________________________
SI.        Name of the                 Number of Cases         Cases pending              As on
No.      Court                                pending                   for more than
_________________________________________________________________________
            Supreme Court               21, 995                              425                 31.10.2001
 

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
            High Courts
 
1.         Allahabad                     8,67,584                      2,88,472                      6/2001
2.         Andhra Pradesh                        1,63,794                          3,675                                   6/2001
3.         Bombay                       2,94,915                        28,131                                   12/2000
4.         Calcutta                        2,82,808                      1,27.190                      3/2001
5.         Delhi                            1,78,001                        35,865                                   12/2000
6.         Gauhati                            41,317                            118                                    3/2001
7.         Gujarat                         1,41,046                      15,253                                    9/2001
8.         Himachal Pradesh            15,604                             26                         3/2001
9.         Jammu & Kashmir           32,762                           732                         6/2001
10.       Karnataka                       89,924                           733                         6/2001
11.       Kerala                          4,05,469                        3,979                         6/2001
12.       Madhya Pradesh          1,17,141                        6,919                         6/2001
13.       Madras                                    3,50,107                        6,573                         12/2000
14.       Orissa                          1,29,822                        4,747                         6/2001
15.       Patna                               78,595                        5,844                         6/2001
16.       Punjab & Haryana        2,33,370                      48,951                                    6/2001
17.       Rajasthan                     1,32,306                         7,298                                    12/2000
18.       Sikkim                                 122                                            2                         9/2001
19.       Chattisgarh                   (New created High Court)
20.       Jharkhand                     (New created High Court)
21.       Uttaranchal                   (New created High Court)
                                                ______________________________
                        TOTAL:           35,54,687                    5,84,508
                                                ______________________________
                                               
 
APPENDIX  VI
 
a)         Supreme Court :           As on 28.2.2001, the oldest cases
                                                (15 numbers) pertain to the year 1976
 
b)         High Courts:
________________________________________________________________________                       
Sl.        Name of the                 Year of the                   No. of cases           No. of cases
No.      High Court                   oldest case                   pending for             pending  for
                                                Pending in 1998            7-10 years           over 10 years
                                                                                   (as on 31.12.1999
_________________________________________________________________________

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
(1)        (2)                                (3)                                (4)                                (5)
_________________________________________________________________________
1.         Allahabad                     1964                            136869                                    201460
2.         Andhra Pradesh                        1979                             13592                             2823
3.         Bombay                       1968                             41650                           28404
4.         Calcutta                        1955                            39171                         146476
5.         Delhi                            1966                            18866                            33774           
6.         Gauhati                         1984                                479                                141
7.         Gujarat                         1973                           12332                            18592
8.         Himachal Pradesh         1979                                608                                 37
9.         Jammu & Kashmir        1965                              6704                             2392
10.       Karnataka                    1976                              2249                             1081
11.       Kerala                          1974                              6599                              533
12.       Madras                                    1964                              9389                            5050
13.       Madhya Pradesh          1950                            17295                            9655
14.       Orissa                          1972                             4139                            3313
15.       Patna                            1951                              6586                            6657
16.       Punjab & Haryana        1964                            27587                          33791
17.       Rajasthan                     1956                               7893                           6674
18.       Sikkim                          1996                                    0                                 2
                                                                                 ____________________________
                                                                                    338808                                    500855
                                                                                 ____________________________
APPANDIX  VII
Latest figures available as on 31
st August, 2000
NO. OF CASES PENDING IN THE DISTRICT/SUBORDINATE COURTS
 
________________________________________________________________________
SI. No.Name of States UTs     As on               Civil                 Criminal            Total
____________________________________________________________________
                                               
1.         Andhra Pradesh                        12/99               561351                        433523                        994874
2.         Aruncahal Pradesh        06/99                    331                 1469                            1800
3.         Assam                          12/99               44723             116804                        161527
4.         Bihar                            12/99               253692                        999204                       1252896
5.         Goa                              12/99                 27542                          12041                          39583
6.         Gujarat                         12/99               642133                       2498023                      3140156
7.         Haryana                       12/99               201656                        293145                        494801
8.         Himachal Pradesh         12/99               71297               67826                        139123
9.         Jammu & Kashmir        12/99               46529               75386                        121915
10.       Karnataka                    12/99               662269                        421046                       1083315
11.       Kerala                          12/99               218847                        376683                        595530

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
12.       Madhya Pradesh          12/99               357390                       1033516                      1390906
13.       Maharashtra                 12/99               860508                       1828967                      2689475
14.       Manipur                       12/99                   4524                            3614                            8138
15.       Meghalaya                    12/99                     261                            1968                            2229           
16.       Mizoram                       12/99                   1890                            1001                            2891
17.       Nagaland                      12/99               --------------Not available-----------------
18.       Orissa                          06/99               129757                        528780                        658537
19.       Punjab                          12/99               201118                        174094                        375212
20.       Rajasthan                     06/99               280893                        573999                        845892
21.       Sikkim                          12/99                     467                            1352                            1819
22.       Tamil Nadu                  12/99               537363                        305889                        843252
23.       Tripura                         12/99                   5921                          12767                          18688
24.       Uttar Pradesh               06/99               1008471                     2298622                      3307093
25.       West Bengal                 12/99               457254                        845264                       1311518
26.       And. & Nicobar                       06/99                     552                                56                              608           
27.       Chandigarh                   12/99                  12961                         32206                          45167
28.       Dadra & N. Haveli       12/99                     273                            1035                            1308
29.       Daman& Diu               12/99                     558                              598                            1156
30.       Delhi                            12/99               157531                        305542                        463073
31.       Lakshadweep               12/99                      83                  110                   193
32.       Pondicherry                  12/99                   5845                           5789               11634
                                                                 ____________________________________
                                                TOTAL:         6753990                    13259319                     20013309
                                                                 ____________________________________
APPENDIX   VIII
_________________________________________________________________________
SI. No.Name of States UTs     Numbers of Cases pending over                       As on                                                   10
years old in the District/
                                                Subordinate Courts
_________________________________________________________________________
1.         2                                  7                                                          9
_________________________________________________________________________
1.         Andhra Pradesh                        7177                                                    6/2000            
2.         Aruncahal Pradesh             0                                                     6/1999                 
3.         Assam                             32                                                     12/1999                      
4.         Bihar                           59449                                                   6/2000                        
5.         Goa                              2857                                                    12/2000                      
6.         Gujarat                        97822                                                   6/2000                        
7.         Haryana                       1880                                                    12/1998                      
8.         Himachal Pradesh           351                                                    6/2000                        
9.         Jammu & Kashmir        3827                                                    12/1998                      
10.       Karnataka                   28132                                                   6/2000                        
11.       Kerala                          2825                                                    6/2000                        
12.       Madhya Pradesh           66219                                                 6/2000                        
13.       Maharashtra              217257                                                   6/2000                        
14.       Manipur                         431                                                    12/1999                          
15.       Meghalaya                    1658                                                    12/1999                      
16.       Mizoram                            2                                                     6/2000                            
17.       Nagaland                      --------Not available-------                                                     
18.       Orissa                         10187                                                   6/2000                        
19.       Punjab                          4142                                                    12/1998                      
20.       Rajasthan                    49468                                                   6/2000                        
21.       Sikkim                               0                                                     12/1999                      

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
22.       Tamil Nadu                  5182                                                    12/1999                      
23.       Tripura                           335                                                    6/2000
24.       Uttar Pradesh            158532                                                   12/1999          
25.       West Bengal                95555                                                   12/1998                      
26.       And. & Nicobar                            3                                                     6/1999                        
27.       Chandigarh                      79                                                     12/1998                         
28.       Dadra & N. Haveli           7                                                      6/2000                              
29.       Daman& Diu                  16                                                     6/2000                              
30.       Delhi                          15571                                                    12/2000                      
31.       Lakshadweep                   4                                                      6/2000                               
32.       Pondicherry                  345                                                     6/2000                                                    
_____________                         
                                           829345    
                                      ______________                      
 
APPENDIX   IX
STATEMENT SHOWING THE SANCTIONED STRENGTH, ACTUAL STRENGTH AND VACNCIES AND
NEW POST AGREED TO BE CREATED.
 
As on  1.9.2001
 
SI.
NO
HIGH
COURT
SANCTIONED
STRENGTH
ACTUAL
STRENGTH
VACANCIES NEW POSTS
  Pmt Addl. Total Pmt Addl. Total Pmt Addl. Total Pmt Addl. Total  
1. Allahabad 66 2 68 49 - 49 17 2 19 - 27 27  
2. Andhra Pradesh 31 8 39 25 2 27 6 6 12 - - -  
3. Bombay 42 18 60 40 11 51 2 7 9 - - -  
4. Calcutta 45 3 48 38 - 38 7 3 10 - 2 2  
5. Chattisgarh 4 2 6 3 - 3 1 2 3 - - -  
6. Delhi 25 7 32 23 8 31 2 (-)1 1 - 1 1  
7. Gauhati 17 1 18 13 - 13 4 1 5 - 1 1  
8. Gujarat 28 7 35 26 6 32 2 1 3 - 7 7  
9. Himachal
Pradesh
6 2 8 5 2 7 1 - 1 - - -  
10. Jammu &
Kashmir
9 5 14 6 3 9 3 2 5 - - -
 
11. Jharkhand 10 2 12 5 - 5 5 2 7 - - -  
12. Karnataka 31 8 39 29 4 33 2 4 6 1 - 1  
13 Kerala 27 2 29 20 5 25 7 (-)3 4 - - -  
14. Madhya Pradesh 22 6 28 17 2 19 5 4 9 - 1 1  
15. Madras 32 10 42 27 6 33 5 4 9 - - -  
16. Orissa 13 2 15 11 3 14 2 (-)1 1 - 1 1  
17. Patna 27 - 27 22 - 22 5 - 5 2 2 4  
18. Punjab &
Haryana
30 7 37 28 2 30 2 5 7 - 3 3
 
19. Rajasthan 27 5 32 26 - 26 1 5 6 - - -  
20. Sikkim 3 - 3 2 - 2 1 - 1 - - -  
21. Uttaranchal 4 3 7 3 - 3 1 3 4 - - -  
 TOTAL: 499 100 599 418 54 472 81 46 127 3 45 48  

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
                
 
APPENDIX   X
STATE-WISE DETAILS OF VACANT POSTS OF JUDICIAL OFFICERS AS ON 31.12.1998/1.6.2000
________________________________________________________________________
 
SI.        No. of the State/UT                  No. of sanctioned posts            No. of Judicial officers
No       Vacancy Position         
            of Judicial Officers                    as on 1.6.2000
_________________________________________________________________________
                                   
1.         Andhra Pradesh                                    680                              675                              5
2.         *Assam                                                216                              204                             12
3.         *Aruncahal Pradesh                  293                              293                              0
4.         *Bihar                                     1653                             1372                         281
5.         Gujarat                                     626                              516                            110
6.         Goa                                            44                                36                               8
7.         Haryana                                   266                              233                              33
8.         Himachal Pradesh                     98                                 90                                           8
9.         Jammu & Kashmir                    161                              161                               0
10.       Karnataka                                640                              584                             56
11.       Kerala                                      367                              344                             23
12.       *Madhya Pradesh                    943                              756                          187
13.       Maharashtra                            1268                            1156                         112
14.       *Manipur                                   26                                26                             0              
15.       Meghalaya                                   7                                  6                              1
16.       Mizoram                                   34                               19                            15              
17.       Nagaland                                  21                               21                              0          
18.       *Orissa                                                384                              296                           88          
19.       Punjab                                      301                              274                           27          
20.       *Rajasthan                               624                              624                            0           
21.       Sikkim                                      13                               11                             2           
22.       *Tamil Nadu                            692                              688                            4           
23.
              Tripura                                     74                               43                           31           
24.              *Uttar Pradesh                        1797                           1480                        317           
25.       *West Bengal                           544                              503                          41
26.       *And. & Nicobar                        5                                  5                            0
27.       Chandigarh                               19                               16                            3  
28.       Delhi                                        385                              249                       136     
29.       Dadra & N. Haveli                      2                                  2                            0 30.      Daman& Diu                          
   2                                  2                            0
31.       Lakshadweep                              3                                  3                            0      
32.       *Pondicherry                            17                               17                            0
________________________________________________________________________                                   
                                                               
TOTAL:                                                   12205                              10705                     1500
________________________________________________________________________
 
·
        as on 31.12.1998 (including posts of Special Judicial Magistrates)
APPENDIX  XI

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
LAW MINISTERS' MEETING 1995
HYDERABAD RESOLUTION
           
The plenary meeting of Law Secretaries and Law Ministers was held in Hyderabad during 23-25 November,
1995 to consider the following items:
 
I.                    Implementation of -
(i)                  Resolution adopted by the Chief Ministers and Chief Justice (1993);
(ii)                Calcutta Resolution of Law Ministers (1994);
II.                 Alternative Dispute Resolution;
III.               Reforms in Legal Education and Entry into Legal Profession.
 
2.
                  The Law Secretaries met under the chairmanship of Dr. P.C. Rao, Union Law Secretary, on 23 November,
1995.  The Law Secretaries recommended a draft Resolution on the items referred to above for consideration of the Law
Ministers.
 
3.
                  The Law Ministers met under the Chairmanship of Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Union Minister of State for Law, Justice
and Company Affairs, on 25 November 1995 to consider the aforesaid draft Resolution.
 
4.         The Chief Justice of India, Shri Justice A.M. Ahmadi, the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh,  Shri N.
Chandrababu Naidu, Shri Justice K. jayachandra reddy, Chairman, law Commission of India and Shri P.S. Mishra, Chief
justice of Andhra Pradesh High Court delivered special addresses at the meeting.
 
5.         The Law Ministers expressed their appreciation on the work done in the Working Group of Law Secretaries and
of Law Ministers which met in Bhubaneswar from 22 to 24 September 1995 as also in the Plenary Meeting of Law
Secretaries which met in Hyderabad on 23 November 1995.
 
I           Implementation of-(i) Resolution adopted by the Chief Ministers and Chief Justice (1993); and (ii)
Calcutta Resolution of Law Ministers (1994).
 
6.         The Law Ministers took note of Doc.No. LMM/IMP/1/95 containing the statement showing follow up action
taken on the recommendations made by the Chief Ministers and the Chief Justices in their 1993 Resolution as also by the
Law Ministers in their 1994 Calcutta  Resolution.
 
7.         The Law Ministers expressed their satisfaction that the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 had been brought
into force.  They noted, however, that only the State Governments of Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan had taken
steps to enforce the Act in their jurisdictions and called upon the State Government to taken steps immediately for the
purposed of bringing the said Act into force in their respective jurisdictions.
 
8.         The Law Ministers were happy to note that, in keeping with the recommendations of the Chief Ministers and
Chief Justices in their New Delhi Resolution, the Government of India, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India
and the Chief Justice of High Courts, had reviewed the Judge-strength in the High Courts and increased the number of
Judges in the High Courts of Madras, Kerala, Karnataka and Gujarat.  They further noted with appreciation that the
Government of India, issued guidelines recommending that action for appointment of  a High Court Judge should be
initiated at least four months in advance of the occurrence of a vacancy.  The Law Ministers expressed the hope that

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
these guidelines would be strictly observed by all the constitutional functionaries.  They recalled the recommendation of
Chief Ministers and Chief Justices that the number of vacancies in each High Court to be filled up from the judicial
officers of subordinate judiciary might go upto 40% and noted that the 40% limit was a accepted by the High Courts.
 
9.         The Law Ministers noted that, in consonance with the recommendations made by them in their Calcutta
Resolution, the Government of India had invited the Law Commission of India to undertake a comprehensive  revision
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Evidence Act, 1872.
 
10.       The Law Ministers noted with appreciation that the Government of Rajasthan decided to establish courts at the
Tehsil level to assist rural litigation and asked the other State Governments to initiate similar steps with a view to
providing inexpensive and speedy resolution of rural litigation.
 
11.       The Law Ministers, while noting that some Sate Governments had taken steps to furnish courts with modern
equipment, underlined the need to expedite the process of computerising the records and judgments of courts.  They
noted with special satisfaction  that the High Court of Gujarat had been fully computerised and that the Government of
Gujarat had commenced the task of computerising the district courts and city civil courts in a phased manner.  They
expressed the hope that the other State Governments would also take similar steps on priority basis so as to enable the
courts to deal with the problem of arrears of cases as expeditiously as possible.
 
12.       The Law Ministers recalled the earlier recommendation of the Chief Ministers and Chief Justices that the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in regard to the appointment of Judicial Magistrates of the Second
Class, Special Judicial Magistrates and Special Metropolitan Magistrates should be put to use by identifying cases which
they would be empowered to deal with under the Code.  While the State Governments of Assam, Andhra Pradesh and
Himachal Pradesh had taken steps in this regard, the other State Governments had not reported much progress in this
regard.  The Law Ministers noted that the Supreme Court of India had issued directions with a view to ensure that the
machinery contemplated by sections 6(4), 13, 18, 260 and 261 of the Code of Criminal Procedure be put into effect for
clearing the backlog of petty criminal cases [vide kadra Pahadiya Vs. State of Bihar, 1995 (6) SCALE 121].  The Law
Ministers underlined the need to take immediate action as recommended by the Chief Ministers and Chief Justices in this
regard as also directed by the Supreme Court of India.
 
13.       The Law Ministers recalled that the Chief Ministers and Chief Justices had earlier recommended the need for
evolving appropriate guidelines for preventing indiscriminate strikes by lawyers.  They noted that the Supreme Court of
India, by its order dated 7 December 1994, directed the following interim measures in the matter of lawyers' strikes:
 
"(i)        In the rare instance where any association of lawyers (including statutory Bar Councils) considers it
imperative to call upon and/or advise members of the legal profession to abetain from appearing in courts on any
occasion, it must be left open to any individual member/members of that association to be free to appear without
let, fear or hindrance or any other coercive step.
 
(ii)        No such member who appears in courts or otherwise practices his legal profession, shall be visited with
any adverse or penal consequences, whatever, by any association of lawyers, any shall not suffer any expulsion
or threat of expulsion therefrom.
 
(iii)       The above will not preclude other forms of protest by practicing lawyers in courts such as, for instance,
wearing of arm bands and other forms of protest which in no way interrupt or disrupt the court proceedings or
adversely affect  the interest of the litigant.  Any such form of protest shall not however be derogatory to the
court or to the profession.
 
(iv)       Office bearers of a Bar Association (including bar Councils) responsible for taking decisions mentioned

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
in clause (1) above shall ensure that such decisions are implemented in the spirit of what is stated in clauses (1),
(2) and (3) above."
 
            The Law Ministers further noted that the aforesaid order had been circulated by the Bar Council of India to the
State Bar Councils and Bar Associations for necessary action and expressed the hope that all concerned would abide by
the Court's  order in its letter and spirit and extend full cooperation to the courts in this regard.
 
14.       The Law Ministers, while noting that some progress was made in the matter of implementation of the earlier
recommendations made by them as also by the Chief Ministers and Chief Justices, observed that a number of
recommendations still remained to be implemented.  They declared that any delay or inaction in this regard would not
only make the recommendations weak but also render their collective endeavours a wasted effort.  The Law Ministers
noted that the country was passing through a critical moment in the matter of administration of justice on account of the
backlog of cases in courts and expressed their determination to pursue with vigour the recommendations made by them.
 
15.       The Law Ministers further expressed their dissatisfaction that about 16 State Governments could not fully utilize
the  amount released by the Central Government based on a formula provided by the Planning Commission of India. 
They called upon all concerned to give attention that was due to the working of courts which played an important part in
the maintenance of rule of law and in the achievement of the objective of building a welfare State and equitable social
order.
 
II.
                 Alternative Dispute Resolution
 
16.       The Law Ministers recalled that the Chief Ministers and the Chief Justices, in their Resolution adopted on 4
December 1993, declared that courts were not in a position to bear the entire burden of justice system, that a number of
disputes lent themselves to resolution by alternative modes such as arbitration, mediation and negotiation and that the
disputants should take advantage of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) which previded procedural flexibility, saved
valuable time and money and avoided the stress of a conventional trial.
 
17.       The Law Ministers further recalled that, in their Resolution adopted at Calcutta on 17 November 1994, they
recommended that a comprehensive law on arbitration and conciliation be enacted based largely on UNCITRAL, Model
Law on International Commercial Arbitration and UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules covering both international and
domestic arbitration and conciliation.  The Law Ministers noted with satisfaction that was introduced in Parliament in
consonance with the recommendation made in the Calcutta Resolution.  The Law Ministers hoped that the Bill would be
enacted as early as possible.  They considered that the proposed law on arbitration and conciliation would greatly
strengthen settlement of disputes by ADR.
 
18.       The Law Ministers were of the view that ADR should be the preferred method for settlement of a wide range of
disputes, especially commercial and other civil disputes.  They underlined the urgent need to establish infrastructure
facilities for strengthening ADR movement in India.  In this connection they noted with satisfaction, the establishment of
the International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (ICADR)  in New Delhi which was inaugurated by the Prime
Minister of India on 6 October 1995.  They recommended that ADR mechanism should be established throughout the
country.  The Law Ministers recommended that, among others, the Central Government, the State Governments, public
sector undertakings and chambers of commerce and industry should render such financial and other assistance as they
could in promoting ADR organisations in India.  They further recommended that training courses should be organised
for ADR  neutrals so as to equip them with a reasonable standard of expertise and skill.
 
19.       The Law Ministers emphasised the desirability of courts developing ADR schemes as an integral part of the court
system.  They called upon the Central Government, State Governments and the various public sector undertakings to
incorporate ADR clauses in their contracts.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
20.       The Law Minis6ters also noted that the legal education in India  trained law students only in court systems
involving adversarial proceedings.  They felt that legal education should be so oriented as to train law students in
innovative approaches to dispute-resolution.  They called upon the Bar Council of India, the University Grants
Commission and the Universities to revise the syllabi for legal education with a view to incorporating therein specific
courses on ADR processes which are designed to develop dispute-settlement skills of law students and to prepare them
as problem solvers.
 
III        Reforms in Legal Education and Entry into Legal Profession
 
21.       The Law Ministers considered the recommendations made by the Law Commission of India in its 14
th Report,
the Committee of Judges, consisting of Hon'ble Shri Justice A.M. Ahmadi (as he then was), Hon'ble Shri Justice M.
Jagannatha Rao,  the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court and Hon'ble Shri Justice B.N. Kirpal, the Chief Justice of Gujarat
High Court (as he then was), in its report of 17 October 1994,  the Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Tenth Lok
Saber) in its 15 th Report presented on 16 December 1994 and the University Grants Commission's Reconstituted Panel
on Law in its report submitted on 27  th  December 1994.  The law Ministers took note of the Working Paper on the
agenda item presented by the conference secretariat of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
[No.LMM/(LE)/1/95] and the Bhubaneswar Statement of Law Ministers' Working Group on Legal Education
[No.LMM/(LE)/2/95].
 
22.       The Law Ministers expressed their concern at the deteriorating standards in legal education.  They observed that
the Supreme Court of India had also recently drawn attention to the fall in the standard of legal education.  They were of
the opinion that there was an urgent need for reforms in legal education.  The Law Ministers also noted that the quality
of the legal services and administration of justice depended largely on the standard of legal education.
 
23.       The Law Ministers generally welcomed the recommendations made by the bodies referred to above.  They
considered that the fall in the standard of legal education was not on account of any deficiencies in the legal framework, 
but primarily on account of week enforcement of the legal provisions by the competent bodies.  They were of the
opinion that a successful strategy for improving legal education ought to take into account the following elements,
among others:
 
(i)         The Bar Council of India, the body entrusted with the task of maintaining the standard of legal education,
should play a more effective role in discharging its functions under the provisions of the Advocates Act.
 
(ii)        There should be an adequate number of law colleges with proper infrastructure including experienced
law teachers and staff so that sufficient number of well trained and properly equipped law graduates in all
branches of law would be available to meet the growing demands of the society.
 
(iii)       Professional legal education should be a five-year system of law course 10-plus-2 level.  However,
students who were undergoing three year law course should be eligible to enrol as advocates till an
appropriate amendment  was made to the Advocates Act, 1961 prescribing a five-year system of law
course.
 
(iv)       Legal education, which prepares students for the practice of  law, should be allowed  only through whole-
time law colleges or University Department.
 
(vi)
              In addition to a 5-year system of law course after 10-plus-2 level, it should be open to a university to
offer a 3-year law course after 10-plus-2 level for the benefit of people who wanted to gain knowledge of

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
law and advance their careers in areas other than legal profession.
 
(vii)             It should be strictly ensured that only such law colleges were allowed to come into existence, whose
infrastructure facilities wee in conformity with  the standards prescribed by or under the Advocates Act,
1961 and the rules made thereunder.  The practice of granting temporary approval to law colleges should
be discontinued forthwith.  Existing law colleges offering 3-year law course should not be allowed to
switch over to 5-year law course, unless they satisfied the prescribed standards for offering such course
and also obtained prior approval of the Bar Council of India.  Greater vigilance was called for in the
matter of extending approval to law colleges or continuing such approval to colleges which did not
maintain prescribed standards.
 
(viii)
           It would be appropriate if the bar Council of India obtained the comments of the concerned State
Government also in the matter of affiliation/disaffiliation of law colleges, especially having regard to the
fact that State Governments maintained several law colleges.
 
(ix)              A law college which failed to satisfy at any time the prescribed standards should be given a specific
time-limit within which it could take remedial measures and, if it failed to take such measures within such
time-limit, action should be taken to withdraw the approval extended to such college.  The Bar council or
India should consider using the services of the national Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC),
set up by the University Grants Commission, to evaluate law colleges at prescribed intervals in term of
the norms laid down by the Bar Council of India.  Such an independent, scientific assessment would help
the Bar Council of India to proceed against the erring institutions according to law.
 
(x)
                There should also be a National Law School type of college in each State so that it could serve as a
model institution for other law colleges in that State.
 
(xi)              The Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India should establish criteria for determining as
to how many colleges could be allowed to operate in a given area, having regard to such factors as the
size of the area, size of the population in the area, need for lawyers in that area, the number of law
colleges and courts in the neighbouring areas, etc., so as to avoid undue concentration of law colleges in a
given area.
 
(xii)
             With a view to securing strict enforcement of the relevant provisions of the Advocates Act and the rules
made thereunder, the Legal Education Committee of the Bar Council of India should consist of, among
others, representatives of the judiciary, Union Ministry of law, Justice and Company Affairs, University
Grants Commission, established law colleges/law faculties and institutions specialising in legal  research. 
The recommendation of such a body should, as a general rule,  be accepted by the Bar Council of India. 
The recommendations of the Legal Education Committee should in no event be rejected unless such
rejection was supported by a majority of the total membership of the Council and by a majority of two-
thirds of the members of the Council present and voting.
 
(xiii)
           Admission into law colleges should be through a common entrance examination, held either at the
national level or at the Sate level, and entry into the colleges should be made conditional upon a candidate
securing a minimum of 50% marks in such examination.  Eligibility for appearing in the entrance
examination should also be made conditional upon a candidate securing a minimum of 50% marks in the
qualifying examination.
 
(xiv)
           It should be made mandatory that, in addition to the lecture method, the law colleges would invariably
provide for the case method, tutorials, problem method, moot courts, mock trails, etc., in imparting legal
education and that marks were awarded on the basis of participation of students in these activities.  A

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
Minimum of 75% attendance should be insisted upon in such activities.
 
(xv)            Law examinations should increasingly be problem-based to enable students to develop skills of analysis
of facts and reasoning essential for the profession.
 
(xvi)           Post-graduate courses in law should not be allowed to be taught either in morning/evening colleges or
through correspondence courses.  Such courses should not be allowed in institutions which did not have
libraries that possessed latest books and periodicals in law and competent teachers and staff.
 
(xvii)         Management of every law college should include judges, experienced legal practitioners, law teacher
and academics.
 
(xviii)        Practical training should be given its due place in professional legal education.  The present scheme as
prescribed by the Bar Council of India Rules should be continued by colleges teaching law.  However,
this alone would not be adequate to give the new entrant to the Bar the necessary professional skills and
standard of ethics.  For this, a scheme of one year's apprenticeship under a Senior Advocate or an
advocate with atlest 15 years of practice followed by an examination on procedural subjects organised on
a six-monthly basis by State Bar Council must be introduced with immediate effect.
 
(xix)           The Bar Council of India, research institutions in the field of law and other bodies dealing with areas of
interest to lawyers should be invited to organise refresher courses for practising lawyers which benefited
them in the pursuit of their legal profession.
 
(xx)
            Law colleges imparting legal education for admission to practice should be encouraged to extend
supportive services to the legal aid apparatue.  This would enable the students not only to extend technical
services to the community they live in, but also to learn a variety of professional skills related to court
procedures and alternative dispute resolution systems.  Legal Aid Committees should also be encouraged
to develop linkages with professional law colleges in respect of matters falling within their jurisdiction.
 
(xxi)
           In view of the increased responsibilities of the Bar Councils for maintaining standards in the profession,
and having regard to the inadequate income of the Bar Councils, a higher enrolment fee not exceeding
Rs.2000/-should be prescribed, leaving it to the Bar Council of India and the State Bar Councils to
prescribe from time to time a reasonable fee within that limit fix a reasonable  amount not exceeding
Rs.500/- towards renewal of certificate of enrolment.
 
24.       The Law Ministers noted with satisfaction that the Bar Council of India and the University Grants Commission
were in general agreement with the aforesaid recommendations in the matter of reforms in legal education and entry into
legal profession.  The Law Ministers further noted with appreciation that the Bar Council of India had resolved to
introduce one-year pre-enrolment training for law graduates seeking to enter the legal profession.
 
25.       The Law Ministers were of the opinion that the Advocates Act, 1961, and the rules made thereunder be amended
immediately for giving effect to the above recommendations.
 
26.       The Law Ministers expressed their deep appreciation to the Government of Andhra Pradesh for inviting them to
hold the present plenary meeting in Hyderabad and making all efforts for its successful completion.
 
Hyderabad
25 November 1995.

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
APPENDIX   XII
NUMBER OF UNDERTRIALS IN DIFFERENT JAILS AT THE END OF 1999
 
SI. NO STATE/UTs NO. OF UNDERTRIALS
(1) (2) (3)
1. Andhra Pradesh       8557
2. Aruncahal Pradesh         -
3. Assam      4390
4. Bihar    39449
5. Goa       288
6. Gujarat     4879
7. Haryana     6015
8. Himachal Pradesh       392
9. Jammu & Kashmir     1189
10. Karnataka     6780
11. Kerala     3390
12. Madhya Pradesh   18501
13. Maharashtra   13960
14. Manipur       323
15. Meghalaya       574
16. Mizoram       486
17. Nagaland       775
18. Orissa     8009
19. Punjab     7430
20. Rajasthan     6772
21. Sikkim         85
22. Tamil Nadu     9289
23. Tripura       672
24. Uttar Pradesh   44269
25. West Bengal     8529
 TOTAL (STATES) 195003
26. And. & Nicobar       211
27. Chandigarh       291
28. Dadra & N. Haveli        39
29. Daman             & Diu        28
30. Delhi      8776
31. Lakshadweep           0
32. Pondicherry       132
 TOTAL (UTs)     9477
 TOTAL (ALL INDIA) 204480
 
APPENDIX  XIII
STATEMENT SHOWING NO. OF FAST TRACK COURTS SET-UP BY VARIOUS STATES IN THE
COUNTRY
_____________________________________________________________________
SI.No.  Name of High Court                             No. of Courts  notified
_____________________________________________________________________
1.         Andhra Pradesh                                                42
2.         Aruncahal Pradesh                                3

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
3.         Assam                                                  15                                           
4.         Bihar                                                  183
5.         Chhattisgarh                                         39                                                       
6.         Goa                                                      -                      
7.         Gujarat                                                 -                      
8.         Haryana                                               12                                                       
9.         Himachal Pradesh                                 -
10.       Jammu & Kashmir                               43
11.       Jharkhand                                             -
12.       Karnataka                                           13                                            
13.       Kerala                                                   1                    
14.       Madhya Pradesh                                 85        
15.       Maharashtra                                        94                    
16.       Manipur                                               2         
17.       Meghalaya                                            3                                                         
18.       Mizoram                                               3                     
19.       Nagaland                                              2                     
20.       Orissa                                                 19                    
21.       Punjab                                                  -                                                          
22.       Rajasthan                                            40        
23.       Sikkim                                                  -                      
24.       Tamil Nadu                                        30         
25.       Tripura                                                 3
26.       Uttaranchal                                         45                     
27.       Uttar Pradesh                                   182                     
25.       West Bengal                                      13          
                                                            _________
                                                                   862
APPENDIX  XIV
STATEMENT SHOWING NO. OF FAST TRACK COURTS FUNCTIONING IN VARIOUS STATES IN THE
COUNTRY
_____________________________________________________________________
SI.No.  Name of High Court                             No. of Courts  functioning
_____________________________________________________________________
1.         Andhra Pradesh                                                25
2.         Aruncahal Pradesh                                -
3.         Assam                                                  15                                           

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
4.         Bihar                                                  37
5.         Chhattisgarh                                         11                                                       
6.         Goa                                                      -                      
7.         Gujarat                                                 -                      
8.         Haryana                                               -                                                          
9.         Himachal Pradesh                                 -
10.       Jammu & Kashmir                               40
11.       Jharkhand                                             -
12.       Karnataka                                           8                                             
13.       Kerala                                                   1                    
14.       Madhya Pradesh                                 64        
15.       Maharashtra                                        94                    
16.       Manipur                                               2         
17.       Meghalaya                                            -                                                          
18.       Mizoram                                               -                      
19.       Nagaland                                              -                      
20.       Orissa                                                 17                    
21.       Punjab                                                  -                                                          
22.       Rajasthan                                            40        
23.       Sikkim                                                  -                      
24.       Tamil Nadu                                          -          
25.       Tripura                                                 2
26.       Uttaranchal                                         30                     
27.       Uttar Pradesh                                   150                     
25.       West Bengal                                        6          
                                                                ______
   542
                                                                                                                                   
III.       CASE MANAGEMENT AND STATUTORY TIME LIMIT FOR DISPOSAL OF CASES
 
STEPS TAKEN FOR REDUCING PENDENCY
 
            Briefly stated, various measures that have been taken by the Government include amendment of the Civil
Procedure Code and Criminal Procedure Code, increase in the number of posts of Judges/Judicial Officers, appointment
of Special Judicial/Metropolitan Magistrates and adoption of other alternative modes of dispute resolution including
organising  Lok Adalats.  In addition, the Supreme Court and High Courts have taken a number of steps for expeditious
disposal of cases, viz; grouping and classification of cases involving similar question of law, setting up specialised
benches, computerization of listing of cases, etc.
 
COMPUTERISATION IN COURTS

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
            The Supreme Court of India, 18High Courts and 430 District Courts have been computerised as per information
made available by the national Information Centre (NIC).  Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for the development
of infrastructural  facilities for the judiciary, an amount of Rs. 208.28 lakhs has been released by the Government during
the year 2000-2001 to various States/UTs for the use of computers in courts.
 
            The Supreme Court and all High Courts have been interconnected through NICNET.  Daily cause lists are being
generated through computer.  Important reported cases of the Supreme Court are available on NICNET.  Facilitation
centres/enquiry counters have been established in the Supreme Court, and the High Courts of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Calcutta and Andhra Pradesh.  Other High Courts have been requested to set up facilitation centres/enquiry counters.
 
            In addition to above steps for implementing other judicial reforms have also been undertaken by the Government.
 
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS IN CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE
 
The Law Commission of India in its 154
th Report has made a number of recommendations for speedy disposal of
criminal cases.  The Law Commission in its Report has not recommended fixing of time limit for criminal and other
cases which are pending in the lower courts, except to prevent delay in trials in rape cases including child rape cases. 
The following proviso was recommended to be inserted to prescribe a time limit of two months from the date of the
commencement of examination of witnesses for completion of trial:
 
"Provided that when the inquiry or trial related to an offence under section 376 to 376 (E) of the Indian
Penal Code, judgement shall, as far as possible, be delivered within a period of two months from the date
of commencement of the examination of witnesses."
 
AMENDMENT IN THE CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE
 
            The Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 1999, as assented to by the President, will prove useful in the field
of speedy disposal of cases by the Indian Judicial System.  The proposed Amendment Act, 1999 inter alia provides fixed
time frames at various stages of civil proceedings such as filing of written statements, service of summons, framing of
issues, restriction on grant of number of adjournments etc.
 
DIRECTIONS OF THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA FOR SPEEDY DISPOSAL OF CASES
 
            The Hon'ble Chief Justice of India has also written to various High Courts to dispose of all cases which are
pending for more than seven years in various courts.
 
SETTING UP OF 1734 ADDITIONAL COURTS UNDER THE SPECIAL PROBLEMS GRANT PROVIDED BY
THE XITH FINANCE COMMISSION
 
On       the initiative taken by the Department of Justice, the Eleventh Finance Commission has provided a special
problems grant of Rs.502.90 crore for disposing of about 2 million pending cases in the country by creation of 1734
additional courts @ 5 courts per district in the country for the period 2001-2005.
 
CASE LOAD AND JUDICIAL MANPOWER REQUIREMENT
 
The recommendation of the 120th report of the Law Commission which stipulated that the judge strength should

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
be increased from 10.5 judges per million population to 50 judges per million population was not accepted by the
Government as it was thought that the need of the hour was to fill the existing vacancies in the judiciary.  Other-wise
also it will be a moot question whether we have to raised the strength of judges simply on the basis of the population.  It
will perhaps be appropriate if the strength is increased on the basis of the pendency of cases, average rate of disposal,
etc.
 
The requirement of judge strength to clear the pendency on the basis of the case load in the subordinate judiciary,
average rate of disposal, pendency, etc. pertaining to the year 1998 has been calculated as given below:-
 
(a)        No. of pending cases as on 1.1.1998:               2,01,39,080
(b)        No. of cases instituted during 1998:                   1,36,68,073
(c)        Total of (a) and (b)                      :                    3,38,07,153
(d)        The working strength of the judicial officers:               10,673
(e)        Average case load per judge {c/d}:                             3,168
The average rate of disposal has been calculated in respect of the year 1998 as follows:
 
(a)        No. of cases disposed of during 1998   :           1,36,15,783
(b)        Working  strength of judicial officers      :                   10,673
(c)        Average rate of disposal of case [a/b]                         1,276
 
As regards the judge strength required for disposal of the accumulated pending cases, calculation has been made
as under:-
 
(a)        Pendency as on 1.1.98             :                       2,01,39,080
(b)        No. of cases instituted               :                       1,36,68,073
(c)        No. of cases disposed of          :                       1,36,15,783
(d)        Pendency as on 1.1.99 [a+b-c]:                       2,01,91,370
(e)        The additional  judge strength required to clear the backlog of pendency in one year      
           
            :Pendency as on 1.1.99
            :                              15,824
                        :Average rate of disposal i.e. 1276 cases:
 
            The above number is necessary in case the pending cases are to be cleared in one year.  In case the pending
accumulated cases are to be cleared in a period of 3 years, the number of judicial officers required will be 5275.  In case
the accumulated pendency is to be cleared in a period of five years, the number of judicial officers required will be
3165.  In case the cases are to be cleared in a period of seven years, the number of judicial officers required will be
2260.  However, the number of posts vacant during 1998 was 1478.  Hence, the additional posts required may be around
800 if the cases are to be cleared in seven years and all vacancies are filled up.  Although in some of the States like
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Kerala, Rajasthan, etc. all posts have remained filled up during 1998, normally 5%
vacancies do remain vacant in any cadre due to so many factors like resignation, deaths, litigation's, suitable candidates
not being available etc.  This comes to a figures of 607 in relation to the year 1998.  Hence, the additional strength which
may be required to clear the backlog of cases in a period of seven years is 800+607=1407 or say 1400.  However, the
State Government/UTs should make efforts to reduce the percentage of vacancies from the present 10% to 5%.
 
LIQUIDATION OF PENDENCY IN HIGH COURTS

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 
            As per calculation carried out in November, 1999, the additional strength to be added in High Courts to liquidate
total pendency of cases in a year wise will be as follows:
 
            i)          In one year's time                      974
            ii)         In two year's time                     488
            iii)         In three year's time                    325
            However, addition of strength of High Court Judges will require supplemental creation of supporting staff for
each judge and construction of court rooms and quarters of judges of High Courts.
§ Nominated w.e.f. 15th March , 2000 vice Shri Akhilesh Das.
j Nominated w.e.f. 28th February,  2000.
o Re-nominated w.e.f. 5th May, 2000.
%  Nominated w.e.f. 29th May,  2000.
*Ceased to be member w.e.f.  7th  November , 2000 on being appointed as a Minister.
 
(i)
[1] As per information provided by the Department of Justice, as on 31 October, 2001,  2,03,25,756 cases were pending in District/Sub-Ordinate courts;
35,57,637 cases were pending in High Courts and 21,995 cases were pending in Supreme Court. All added together amounted to 2,39,05,388 cases i.e. around 24
Million.
2 Infinite Justice: L.N. Mishra’s widow dies waiting for it; Hindustan Times; 4 October,2001, New Delhi. ( the Paper clipping is  at Appendix- IVB).
[2] The concept of Plea-bargaining has not been recognised so far in the criminal jurisprudence of India. However, plea-bargaining is considered to be one of the
viable alternatives to deal with the disposal of criminal cases in countries like USA where nearly 75% of the total convictions are secured as a result of plea-
bargaining.  Plea-bargaining in its most traditional and general sense refers to pre-trial negotiations between the accused, usually conducted by the counsel  and
the prosecution during which the accused agrees to plead guilty in exchange for certain concessions by the prosecutor.
Note: As the concept of plea-bargaining is not recognised in India, the Ministry is unable to comment on the role of Approver vis-à-vis Plea-bargaining.
[3]
 Nyaya Panchayats imply judicial decentralisation at the people’s level. These judicial institutions represent the secular, egalitarian and modernistic legal
ideology for assisting the desired social change.
[4] Source: Annexure to the Rajya Sabha  Starred Question No. 106 answered on 26 November,2001.
[5] This analysis has been taken from a paper clipping tilted Apex court on a fast-track: Clearing Arrears by Dr. Abhishek  Singhvi, (A copy is annexed at
Appendix IV-C)
 
[6] Source:  Annexure to the Rajya Sabha  Starred Question No. 106, answered on 26 ovember,2001.
 
[7] Source: Parliamentary Debates, Rajya Sabha, Part II ( 24 August, 2001), , p. 561.
 
[8]
 The High Courts namely, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Gauhati, Orissa, Kerala, Calcutta, Delhi, J&K, have no original jurisdiction. The Gujarat High Court has
recently implemented the recommendation.
[9] LPA has been abolished by the Govt. of U.P. Delhi, Himachal Pradesh , Maharashtra and Kerala have accepted the recommendations.
[10]

SUB-COMMITTEE
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/85threport%20.htm[30-06-2016 17:49:13]
 Andhra Pradesh has implemented the recommendation.
[11] Karnataka, Gauhati, Punjab & Haryana, Delhi, Orissa, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, J&K, M.P., and  Kerala High Courts have implemented the
recommendations.  High Courts of Mumbai and Patna are in the process of implementation.
12 (i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;
(ii)           theft, under section 379, section 380 or section 381 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the value of the property does not exceed two hundred
rupees;
(iii)          receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the value of the property does not exceed two
hundred rupees;
(iv)          assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, under section 414 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the value of such property does
not exceed two hundred rupees;
(v)           offences under section 454 and 456 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
(vi)          insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 504; and criminal intimidation, under section 506 of the Indian penal Code (45 of 1860);
(vii)         abetment of any of the foregoing offences;
(viii)        an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence; and
(ix)          any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).
Note: Summary trial implies speedy disposal. Summary case means a case which can be tried and disposed of at once. Summary trial is not intended for
a contentious and complicated case which necessitates a lengthy inquiry.
[13]
 Govt. of Nagaland has implemented the order. Govts of Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, Kerala, Gujarat, Maharashtra, are in the process of implementing the
same.
[14]  The High Courts of  Karnataka, Gauhati, Punjab & Haryana, Orissa, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, M.P., Himachal Pradesh, Madras, Patna, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Allahabad and Mumbai  have implemented the recommendations
[15]
 High Courts of Mumbai and Delhi have issued necessary instructions.
[16] High Courts of  Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, M.P. and Govt. of Nagaland have implemented the recommendation.
[17] High Courts of Punjab & Haryana, Karnataka, Delhi, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Mumbai and Govts of Nagaland and Assam have taken necessary action.
[18] Source: Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 848, answered on 26 November, 2001.
[19]including 47 new posts.
[20] as on 1.6.2000. ( For State-wise detail please see Appendices IX & X)
[21] Source: Rajya Sabha Debates ( Uncorrected), part I, dated December, 3, 2001, pp 41-42.
22  The total sanctioned strength  of judicial officers during 1998 was 12151 i.e. working strength  (10673) + vacancies  (1478) and 5% of this will amount to
607.
[22]
 Details of the Hyderabad Resolutions on the Reforms in Legal Education and entry into Legal Profession  are annexed at (See Appendix – XI).
[23] These Centres are knows as National Law School of India University, Bangalore; National Law Institute University, Bhopal; National Academy of Legal
Studies and Research University of Law, Hyderabad; the West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata; and National Law University ,
Jodhpur.
[24] In a reply to an Unstarred Question No. 90 answered on 19 November, 2001 in Rajya Sabha, The Department of Justice has said that as per the available
information on 31 October, 2001, 53,934 cases have been transferred to these courts and out of these, 15,078 cases have been disposed of.