PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTY ·NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS FIFTEENTH REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March 1996/Chaitra, 1918 (Saka) 

C.S. (H.A.)--47 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTY -NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS FIFTEENTH REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(Laid in the Rajya Sabha on the 27th August, 1996) 
(Laid in the Lok Sabha on the 27th August, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March 1996/Chaitra, 1918 (Saka) 

CON T ENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ..•...•.........•....••...•..•......•.......... . .....• (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCfiON •...•...•........•••.•...•...... •.•...•...•... •.•••..•......•••••.. . ••.••..•• • (iii) 
3. REPORT······················································································· 1-8 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ............•....•..•• 9-12 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
H. Vacant 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
*7. Shri N. Rajendran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raaj Babbar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
**15. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
:j:19. Vacant 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri · Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
t Vacancy caused w.e.f. the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Shri R.K. Dhawan in the Union Council 
of Ministers. 
• Nominated on 17th August, 1995 in the vacancy caused by the retirement of Shri Murasoli Maran from the 
Membership of Rajya Sabha. . 
•• Nominated on 20th September, 1995 in the vacancy caused by induction of Dr. Jagannath Mishra in the 
Union Council of Ministers. 
t Vacancy caused w.e.f. the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Prof. M. Kamson in the Union Council of 
Ministers. 
(i) 

35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs having been authorised by the 
Committee, present this Twenty-ninth Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee, contained in its 
Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 8th May, 1995. The 
Committee directed Government to furnish a note indicating Action Taken by it on various 
recommendations of the Committee contained in that Report. 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 16th January, 1996, decided to consider 
the Action Taken Note furnished by Government. Accordingly, the Committee, in its 
meeting held on the 6th March, 1996 considered the Action Taken Note and sought 
clarifications from the Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs thereon. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
29th March, 1996. 
NEw DELHI; 
March, 1996 
(iii) 
RAJNI RANJAN SAHU 
Chairman 
Committee on Home Affairs 

REPORT 
CIVIL DEFENCE 
Recommendation (Para 11)-Tbe strength of Civil Defence volunteers is far behind the 
targeted strength (3.77 lakhs against 6.76 lakhs). Volunteers are not inclined to join Civil 
Defence as it provides scope for mobilisation mainly during hostile enemy action. The 
Committee wonders whether it would be helpful to provide some kind of incentives to the 
volunteers to encourage them to join Civil Defence, since majority of these disciplined men 
make no dig on the State exchequer in the form of salary and allowances. The Committee 
also recommends that the training imparting capacity of the National Civil Defence College, 
Nagpur should be enhanced and made relevant to the modem warfare. 
2. Action Taken by Government-State Governments are primarily responsible for 
raising the volunteers to their targeted strength and providing them adequate training. 
Government is reminding them continuously in this regard remedial measures/incentives as 
mentioned below are under consideration of Government to attract volunteers from 
public:-
(i) Amendment to the Civil Defence Act, 1960 to enable deployment of volunteers 
during natural calamities such as earthquake, flood etc. It will keep them operation­
ally fit and help to ttain them for war at all times. This will also bring them in close 
contact with public and build up their image; 
(ii) Enhancement of daily allowance and parade allowance from Rs. 221- and Rs. 20/­
per day to Rs. 50/- and Rs. 47/ respectively; and 
(iii) Issue of Uniforms to the volunteers. 
StatesiUTs are not utilising their allotted vacancies in various courses run by 
National Civil Defence College, Nagpur. States have been impressed upon to utilise 
their allotted vacancies. An exercise to improve the infrastructure of the college to 
increase its course capacity is also under consideration. Constant revision of syllabi to 
include modern state of art subjects is an on-going process. 
3. The Committee welcomes the measures proposed by Government to attract volunteers 
to join Civil Defence. It hopes that final decision on these proposals will be taken at the 
earliest. It also hopes that Government will make all efforts to impart the necessary training 
to all volunteers recruifed to the Civil Defence in the National Civil Defence College, Nagpur. 
HOME GUARDS 
4. Recommendation (Para 14)-Against the authorised strength of 5,73,793, the raised 
strength of Home Guards is 4,18,493. The Committee, therefore, in view of the multiple 
rble being performed by the Home Guards, is of the opinion that either the requirements of 
the States in regard to their authorised target strength be revised or all efforts be made by 
the Ministry to raise the strength to its targeted level within a specified time-frame. 
5. Action Taken by Government- The responsibility for raising and training of Home 
Guard Volunteers is that of the StatesiUTs. StatesiUTs have been reminded to make up 
their deficiencies. Out of a total deficiency of 1.57 lakh Home Guards, West Bengal and 
Bihar alone account for 1.03 lakh. Leaving these two, there is no significant shortfall in any 
of the remaining States. To attract people to join this force, the upward revision of 
allowances payable to Home Guards is under consideration. The Ministry is also of the firm 
opinion, not to decrease the Centre's share for reimbursement of 75% for North-Eastern 
States and 50% for the remaining States which have been unilaterally reduced by the 
1 

2 
Finance Ministry to 40% in respect of States in the current fmancial year (1995-96). For 
1996-97 this percentage has been further reduced to 25%. The Home Ministry feels that this 
reduction will lead to loss of initiative with States. 
6. The Committee, in view of the significant role assigned to Home Guards reiterates, 
that all efforts may be continued to raise the force to its full authorised strength. The 
Committee also expresses its conformity with the Ministry that the share for reimbursement in 
respect of North-Eastern States and other States should be retained to 75% and SO% 
respectively. Further, the Committee is of the view that guidelines should be issued to aU 
States to reserve vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as per percentage of 
their population in the respective States. 
INTER-STATE COUNCIL 
7. Recommendation (Para-B)-The Committee reiterated its recommendation contained 
in its First and Ninth Reports for frequent meetings of the Sub-Committee of the Inter-State 
Council to examine and make concrete suggestions on the recommendations of the Sarkaria 
Commission on Centre-State Relation. The Sub-Committee has not met since 24th April, 
1993. 
8. Action Taken by Government-All efforts are being made to convene the meeting of 
the Sub-Committee to complete consideration of the recommendations of the Sarkaria 
Commission expeditiously. It is also proposed to call a meeting of the Inter-State Council 
early, to consider and finalise the recommendations which have been made by the Sub­
Committee. The Prime Minister and Chairman of the Inter-State Council has been requested 
accordingly. 
9. The Committee is pained to express, that for one reason or other, the meeting of the 
Sub-Committee has not been held, despite repeated recommendations of the Committee. It is 
now over three years since the Sub-Committee last met. The Committee, once again expresses 
its serious concern over inordinate delay in holding the meeting of the Sub-Committee and 
calls upon Government to convene the meetings of the Sub-Committee and the Inter-State 
Council at the earliest. 
UNDER UTILIZATION OF PLAN FUNDS UNDER REGISTRAR-GENERAL OF INDIA 
(PARA 22) 
10. Recommendation (para 22)-The Committee is not at all convinced with the reasons 
given by the Ministry regarding the under-utilisation of Plan Funds for 1992-93, 1993-94 and 
1994-95 by the Registrar-General of India and finds it casual and perfunctory. The 
Committee feels that responsibility should be fixed for non-utilisation of plan fund because 
of administrative slackness. The Committee is, therefore, constrained to express its 
unhappiness over this. 
11. Action Taken by Government- The proposal for creation of a large number of posts , 
required for implementing the schemes were put forward to Home (Finance). The 
competent authority decided to refer the proposals to Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) for their 
assessment. A few skeleton posts were, however; sanctioned to initiate the projects. Final 
Report of the SIU is still awaited. As the required posts were not sanctioned, the fund 
allotted for the purpose remained unutilised. Similarly, funds remained unutilised due to 
non- purchase of equipments for various reasons under a few schemes. 
12. The Committee is surprised to note that though funds have been allotted to 
implement various schemes under the Registrar-General of India, sanction of posts to 
undertake these activities was not given. Even after a lapse of couple of years, the final report 
of the SIU is still awaited, resulting in abandonment of plan schemes. The Committee is, 
therefore, constrained to express its unhappiness over these administrative delays and hopes 
that the requisite number of posts will soon be sanctioned and filled to carry out these 
important schemes. 

3 
CENSUS STAFF 
13. Recommendation (para 23)-The census staff which is engaged on temporary basis 
for decennial census work is relieved of their duties when the census work is over. The 
Committee would like the Government to examine the possibility of re-employing such 
persons in some Government Establishments on humanitarian grounds. 
·14. Action Taken by Government-Government has already granted certain concessions 
and benefits to the retrenched census employees recruited in 1991 census in recruitment to 
Government Service. These include relaxation of age for appearing in exams conducted by 
Staff Selection Commission and Railway Service Commission, consideration for absorption 
in vacancies in group 'C' posts arising in the census organisation etc. on fulfilling other 
eligibility conditions. 
15. The Committee appreciates that Government is concerned and sympathetic towards 
the retrenched census employees and hopes that these concessions/benefits will continue. 
MODER.NlSATION OF POLICE FORCE 
16. Recommendation (para 30)-The Committee endorses the view of Government for 
enhancement of the amount sanctioned under the modernisation of Police Force in view of 
the new challenges thrown up by the law and order situation in various States, cost 
escalation and the need for upgradation of equipments to keep pace with the technological 
changes. The Committee also supports the idea of spending the allocated amount on one or 
two items selected by the States themselves, instead of distributing them under the 
prescribed six items, as it would enable them to spend the amount as per their requirement. 
The Committee strongly feels that the criteria for allocation for various States, which were 
fixed long ago, may be reviewed so as to make it need-based while taking care of some 
other aspects like strategic location of a State, level of modernisation of police in the State 
etc. 
17. Action Taken by Government-A proposal for enhancing the annual allocation from 
Rs. 30 crores to Rs. 50 crores for modernisation of State Police Force for the period 1995-
2000 was referred to the Ministry of Fioance (Deptt. of Expenditure). However, it has been 
disapproved. The Matter of allowing the State Governments to spend their respective annual 
allocation under the scheme on one or two items to be selected by them (individual State 
Governments) is being considered separately. The criteria for State-wise allocation of funds 
is also being reviewed. 
18. The Committee is not at all convinced with the decision of the Ministry of Finance , in 
disapproving the proposal for an enhancement of allocation for modernisation of State Police 
Force. It, therefore, urges upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to endeavour afresh for an 
upward revision of the allocation. The Committee also calls upon the Government to take an 
early decision on the convenience of State Governments to spend their respective annual 
allocation on one or two items of their .individual choice; and on the criteria for allocation 
among all States. 
TRAINING OF CENTRAL PARA-MILITARY FORCES 
19. Recommendation (para 31)- Training to Central Para-Military Forces should not 
mean only physical training and training in equipment but also include behavioural training 
and awareness of human rights. The Committee, therefore, recommends a composite 
training aimed at integrated development of the personality of such personnel in view of the 
changing socio-economic scenario. 
20. Action Taken by Government-Behavioural aspects and human rights have been 
included in the curricula of all the training courses for different levels being conducted by 
CPMFs. In the light of observation of the Committee, BPR & D has been requested to 

4 
evolve composite training programme aimed at integrated development of CPMF personnel. 
The recommendations/observations of the Committee have further been communicated to 
all CPMFs for re-orienting their training courses where necessary. 
21. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by Government on its recommendation 
in imparting a composite training to CPMF personnel to develop their all round personality. 
But, it feels that a close monitoring of these training courses is immensely required to make 
them effective. It, therefore, impresses upon Government to conduct these courses in true 
spirit. 
HOUSING FOR CENTRAL PARA-MILITARY FORCES (CPMFs) 
22. The current annual level of funding on Police Housing, which is around 60-70 crores 
is highly inadequate. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that mere 
increase of a few crores of rupees is not a solution to this acute housing problem and some 
concrete steps need to be taken to improve the situation. The Ministry would have to take a 
holistic approach in this regard. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry to study 
the cases of a few States who have set up State Police Housing Boards and have also taken 
commercial loans to tackle the situation. ln this connection, the Committee understands that 
the Director-General CRPF has submitted a proposal regarding setting up of a Housing 
Corporation for Central Police Organisation which may be given due consideration. 
23. Action taken by Government- For exploring the possibility of setting up of Housing 
Corporations, an exercise was undertaken in the Ministry to evaluate whether it would be 
possible to supplement Government funding for Police Housing with commercial borrowings. 
The interest burden only, however, appeared to be much higher than the total projected 
budget allocation and the proposal was not processed further. Nevertheless, in deference to 
the wishes of the Committee, some selected State Governments have been requested to 
indicate the details of their Police Housing Corporations/Boards and source of funding, 
including commercial borrowings, if any. On receipt of the information, possible modalities 
would be studied in depth, and the viability of setting up of a Housing Organisation would 
be analysed afresh. 
24. The Committee is happy to note that Government has started afresh, an exercise to 
explore the possibility of setting up of Housing Corporation/Board and taking of commercial 
loans for Police Housing. It, however, impresses upon the Government to complete the 
exercise in a time-bound manner, so that the scheme evolved could be implemented as early as 
possible. 
INDO-BANGLADESH BORDER WORKS 
25. Recommendation (Para 38)-The Committee is of the view that while some of the 
constraints mentioned for delay in completion of the project could not have been foreseen, 
others could have been taken care of at the time of preparation of the project report with a 
little foresightedness, proper planning and better coordination amongst the executing 
agencies. This resulted in high cost escalation. The Committee at this stage can only hope 
that the revised project will be completed by 1998 through regular monitoring in view of the 
strategic importance and backwardness of the region. 
26. Action Taken by Government-A High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) has 
been set up under the Chairmanship of the Union Home Secretary to supervise the project. 
Meetings of the HLEC are held to review the progress of work and also to approve the 
decisions taken in Technical Committee meetings. Keeping in view the importance of the 
project, close monitoring of its progress is done through regular meetings taken by Special 
Secretary (CS), Ministry of Home Affairs with all concerned. The project was approved by 
the CCPA for completion by March, 1998, however, seeing its importance , the HLEC 
instructed that efforts be made to complete the project even earlier, i.e. by March, 1996. All 

5 
concerned have now been advised that all possible efforts be made to complete the project 
by March, 1998. As on 31st January, 1996 out of 2,784 Kms. of road and 896 Kms. of 
fencing, work in respect of 1,419 Kms. of road and 565 Kms. of fencing have been 
completed. 
27. The Committee notes that no reason has been mentioned in the Action Taken Note, as 
to w~y the target of March, 1996, for completion of the project, as fixed by the HLEC, which 
is monitoring and supervising the project could not be adhered to. It feels that due weightage 
should have been given to the advice of this Committee. 
COXST AL SECURITY 
28. Recommendation (para 40)-The Committee expresses its serious concern over the 
state of affairs in regard to coastal security and desires that adequate number of vessels, fully 
equipped with latest gadgets and equipments, required for the purpose of effective patrolling 
of coastal areas be procured and put into service at the earliest, so that, the smuggling of 
arms, ammunition explosives etc., through sea could be prevented. 
29. Action Taken by Government-Following the Bombay bomb blast incidents of 1993, 
the Ministry of Home Affairs Core Group carried out a threat assessment. With a view to 
checking smuggling, particularly of arms and explosives effectively, the Core Group decided 
upon a 3-tier defence mechanism i.e. intensive surveillance by Naval Vessels on the high 
seas, joint Coast Guard-Navy surveillance in the territorial waters and patrolling by joint 
detachments of Navy, Coast Guards, Customs and State Police through trawlers in the 
shallow waters along the shore. This exercise is going on. Subsequently, it was felt that it 
would be more cost effective if the entire responsibility of coastal surveillance were to be 
entrusted to the Coast Guards. Coast Guards were accordingly r~quested to prepare a paper 
in consultation with the Ministry of Defence, containing proposal for such a new scheme 
under which the entire gamut of functions required for effective coastal surveillance is 
coordinated by the Coast Guards. A scheme has since been prepared by the Coast Guards 
and is awaiting a joint presentation by the Coast Guard and Navy to the Defence Secretary. 
This Scheme is based upon a holistic view of the problem. The scheme envisages:-
(i) Setting up of a Centralised intelligence agency for collection and collation of 
information from different sources; 
(ii) Intensification of surveillance by l:lpgrading the equipments; 
(iii) Working out an appropriate mechanism for command and control to facilitate joint 
operations; and 
(iv) Building up of an appropriate communication structure. 
30. The Committee has noted the various steps taken by the Government to strengthen 
the security, particularly the coastal security, in the country. The Committee, however, is of 
the considered view that the measures thus far taken are far from adequate and the 
authorities which are responsible for taking decisions are not yet fully alive to the need and 
importance that the internal security of the country requires. In fact the Home Secretary in 
his presentation before the Committee on March 6, 1996, was candid enough to admit that 
the Security aspect hitherto had not been given the necessary importance which it really 
deserved. Regarding Coastal Security he admitted that there are no vessels for surveillance 
and boats are still being hired from fishermen for the purpose. The State Governments hire 
them and the cost is reimbursed to them. He informed the Committee that Pakistan was 
trying to undermine the security of this nation by using various means-land-means, sea­
means and air-means. He added that the Home Ministry had not been able to impress upon 
the Ministry of Finance for allocation of adequate funds required to strengthen the various 
security measures. The Home Secretary added that there was tremendous need to improve 

6 
the police forces in the North-Eastern sector of the country. In his view the present police 
forces in this part of the region, barring Assam, were basically meant for 6,000 or 10,000 
people only. In his view the local police forces should have been strengthened all these years 
which had been neglected to some extent. At present, Rs. 30 crores were being given per 
year for this purpose as against Rs. 50 crores requested by the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
However, the Ministry of Finance felt that it was not necessary to provide financial resources 
to that extent. The Home Secretary in his presentation further added that in his view it had 
still not dawned on them that security needs should be given top priority and anything else 
should follow after that. 
31. The Committee notes with great concern the views expressed by the Home Secretary 
and the fact that security aspects are not receiving the importance that they deserve. The 
Committee is of the view that the -'ational security is paramount and should be given due 
priority and adequate funds should be made available to the agencies which are responsible 
for national security in the country. 
PROBLEM AREAS OF BSF AND CRPF 
32. Recommendation (para 42)-A few critical areas which include ralSlng of more 
battalions, modern methods of surveillance, replacement of old and unsafe aircrafts, 
upgradation of training facilities, more funds for arms and ammunitions and moderni sation 
of communication facilities etc., deserving special attention for better performanc e were 
highlighted by the Directors-General of BSF and CRPF. The Committee hopes that the 
issues highlighted would receive serious consideration of the Ministry. 
33. Action Taken by Government- The issues raised are very vital and will receive 
serious consideration within the financial constraints. Depending upon the availability of 
funds, requirements of CPMFs and other relevant factors, needs of BSF, CRPF and other 
CPMFs would be attended with a view to enhancing their effectiveness. 
34. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that in view of vital 
importance of the issue, the M--.nistry will endeavour to see that financial constraints do not 
cause serious hindrance in achieving the desired objective. 
RAPID ACTION FORCE (RAF) 
35. Recommendation (para 43)-The Committee in its First and Ninth Reports relating 
to the Demands for Grants of the Ministry, had recommended raising of more battalions of 
RAF. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note has stated that the Committee's recommenda­
tion has been noted and has not given any categorical reply in this regard. The Committee 
takes serious note of the Ministry's evasive reply and once again reiterates its earlier 
recommendation that raising only ten battalions of RAF may not be sufficient and there is 
need for further raising of such battalions. 
36. Action Taken by Governmem-In deference to the recommendation of the 
Committee and depending upon the pressing need and the long-term threat to internal 
security proposals have been initiated for budgetary allocations in 1996-97 for raising of two 
additional RAF battalions. 
37. The Committee feels satisfied that the Ministry has ultimately accepted its 
recommendations and decided to raise two more battalions of RAF for dealing with situation... 
arising out of communal tension, including riots and riot like situations ~ore effectively. 
ABERRATIONS IN THE ROLE OF CPMFs 
38. Recommendation (para 45) - The Committee expresses its deep concern over the 
serious aberrations in the roles of Central Para-Military Forces. The Committee is of the 
considered view that deployment of these forces outside their originally prescribed duties 
should be done sparingly and only in exceptional circumstances. 

7 
39. Action Taken by Government- The Government agrees with the Committee. As 
far as possible, CPMFs are deployed on their defined primary tasks. However, over the last 
few years, there has been increasing demand from various Stat~s and Union Territories. The 
deployment in North-East and Jammu and Kashmir have increased to an unprecedented 
level, thereby reducing the availability of Force for deployment. Expansion of CPMFs has 
not been able to keep pace with the increasing demand for their deployment. This imbalance 
in the demand and availability ratio has at times made it inevitable to deploy other CPMFs 
outside their original duties in exigencies. However, efforts are made to relieve CPMFs from 
such deployment at the earliest so that they return back to their normal functions. 
40. The Committee is satisfied that Government agrees with its recommendation and is 
making efforts to relieve CPMFs from duties other than their originally prescribed duties. 
PERSONNEL POLICY OF ITBP 
41. Recommendation (para 46) -As per the approved staffing and personnel policy in 
ITBP, the recruitment, is made generally from amongst men belonging to hill areas in view 
of the fact that the majority of the Force is deployed on the difficult and hazardou s high 
altitude areas in the northern frontiers and the men recruited for the Force have to serve in 
these areas for major part of their service. The Committee fully endorses this policy and 
recommends that the same be strictly adhered to. 
42. Action Taken by Government- The recommendation has been noted. 
43. The Committee expresses its satisfaction. 
DEPLOYMENT OF ITBP 
44. Recommendation (para 47) - The Committee does not approve the deployment of 
ITBP on duties other than the border dutie s and strongly recommends that the ITBP should 
be deployed for the purpose for which it was raised. 
45. Action Taken by Government - Deployment of ITBP outside the charter of its 
duties has been minimal and in exigencies only for short durations. 
46. The Committee, though feels satisfied with the reply of the Ministry yet it reiterates 
its recommendation for not using the ~'orce outside its originaiJy defined duties, except in 
exigencies. 
NON-COMPLETION OF HYDRO-ELECTRIC PROJECTS IN ARUNACHAL PRADESH 
AND NAGALAND 
47. Recommendation (para 50) - The Committee acknowledges the significance of 
Ranganadi and Doyang Hydro-Electric Projects in Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, 
respectively, in the context of the strategic location and importance of these States and 
impresses upon the Ministry to take all necessary steps to ensure the completion of these 
projects within their revised target dates. 
48. Action Taken by Government - Jt has been stressed on North-Eastern Council and 
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation that their is need to improve the monitoring of 
these project~ at the corporate level and better projection of the physical and financial 
targets and achievements. 
49. The Committee, in the absence of any categorical reply regarding timely completion 
of the Ranganadi and Doyang Hydro-Electric Projects, reiterates its recommendation that 
Government should make every effort to complete these important projects within their 
revised target dates. lt do~s agn~e that-proper monitoring and better projection of the physical 
and financial targets will go a long way in timely completion of the Projects. 
FREEDOM FIGHTERS' PENSION 
50. Recommendation (para 53)- Committee expresses its deep concern over the state of 
affairs in grant of pension to the genuine freedom fighters and hopes that the Ministry would 

8 
take all necessary remedial steps to overcome these shortcomings. The Committee also 
endorses the recommendations made. by. the Committee on Petitions, Rajya Sabha in its 97th 
Report on the "thorough review. of the entire procedure relating to grant of pension to 
freedom fighters" to improve the situation. 
51. Action Taken by Government - It has never been the intention of the Central 
Government to deny pension to the genuine freedom fighters. The application for grant of 
freedom fighters pension are scrutinised as per the provisions of the Swatantrata Sainik 
Samman Pension Scheme and pension sanctioned to the applicants, who fulfil the eligibility 
criteria. 
52. The Committee while taking a note of this clarification, urges upon Government to 
make every effort to deal with the cases of freedom fighters' pensions with all care, attention , 
swiftness and sympathy as they constitute a very special class of our country who have made 
great sacrifices for the sake of country's freedom from the. British Empire. 
DEPLOYMENT OF CISF PERSONNEL BY DELID POLICE 
53. Recommendation (para 57)- In view of the manpower constraints being faced by 
Delhi Police, 22 companies of CISF are presently performing armed guard duties at the 
residences of the protected persons. A proposal for sanction of additional staff for this 
purpose is pending consideration of the Government. The Committee again stresses that 
Para-Military Forces should not be deployed on duties other than their prescribed ones , 
except in exigencies and that too not for a long period. It hopes that Government would 
take an early decision in regard to the proposal pending before it so that the CISF personne l 
could perform their normal prescribed duties. · 
54. Action Taken by Government - The recommendations have been noted. The 
proposal received from the Delhi Police involves creation of 6560 posts with a tot al 
expenditure of Rs. 38.89 crores per annum. The approval of the Finance Ministry is 
required. Efforts to obtain the approval of the Ministry of Finance continue to be made and 
will be intensified to secure an early decision. 
55. The Committee notes that the proposal is pending before the Ministry of Finance for 
more than a year. It, ·therefore, expresses its displeasure over the delay in examining the 
proposal and arriving at a decision. The Committee urges upon the Government to make all 
efforts to secure an early decision so that CISF personnel could be relieved to perform their 
normal prescribed duties. 
DELHI POLICE AS MODEL POLICE 
56. Recommendation (para 59)- Delhi Police is taking a number of steps including 
training courses to improve behavioural pattern of its personnel towards persons belonging 
to weaker sections of the society. The Committee hopes that the measures being taken by 
the Delhi Police would improve the behavioural aspect of its personnel and thereby taking it 
closer to the ~eaker sections of the society in ameliorating their problems and difficulties. 
57. Action Taken by Government - Training of Delhi Police personnel - initial as well 
as in-service are being carried out as per recommendations of the Jain Committee and Delhi 
Police Commission. Inputs on human rights, communal amity, police-public relations, police 
attitude towards the public in general and weaker sections in particular have also been 
included in the training curricula. Similarly, reorientation courses on these lines are also 
being run in the Districts and other units. Delhi Police Officers are regularly deputed for 
various seminars and courses conducted on police· subjects in various· institutions in the 
country. 
58. The Committee notes the various measures be\p~ undertaken by Delhi Police in 
improving the b~havioural aspect of its personnel towards weaker sections of the society. It, 
however, emphasise upon the need for constant monitoring and supervision of these training 
courses to achieve the desired objectives as persons from the weaker sections of society are the 
most vulnerable and require the most sympathetic approach. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
XXXI 
THIRTY ·FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th January, 1996 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
7. Shri .Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
9. Shri Raaj Babbar 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
13. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Singh 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
18. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
19. Shri Rabi Ray 
20. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
21. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
22. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
23. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
24. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri C. B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. • • • 
3. The Committee then expressed serious concern over the law and order situation in 
the country in the wake of recent arms drop at Purulia and decided to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Director, CBI on the 29th January, 1996 to have an 
overview of the situation. It also decided to seek clarifications, if any, from the Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions on the Action Taken Notes furnished by these Ministries on the recommendations 
contained in its Fifteenth and Sixteenth Reports respectively, on the same day. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 
the 29th January, 1996. 
•• • Relates to other matter. 
9 

XXXVIII 
THIRTY-EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 6th March, 1996 in Committee 
Room '63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri N. Rajendran 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
9. Shri Jitendra Prasada . 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
11. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
12. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
13. Shri Ram Singh 
14. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
15. Shri Rabi Ray 
16. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
17. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
* * 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
Shri V.K. Jain, Spl. Secretary (IS) 
Dr. S.D. Trivedi, Spl. Secretary (FPR} 
Shri R.D. Kapoor , Additional Secretary (J) 
Shri H.H. Tayabji, Additional Secretary (J) 
Shri S. Prakash, Joint Secretary (IS-I} 
Shri C.D. Arora, Joint Secretary (IS-II) 
Shri R.S. Sethi, Joint Secretary (S} 
Shri B.N. Jha, Joint Secretary (NE) 
Shri R.R. Shah, Joint Secretary (UT} 
Shri V.K. Malhotra, Joint Secretary (CS) · 
Shri V.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (J-1} 
••• Relates to other matter. 
10 

11 
REPRESENTATIVE OF INTER-STATE COUNCIL 
Shri B.B. Lal, Adviser 
2. The Chairman apprised members that as per the agenda of the meeting, the 
Committee would take up consideration of (I) the Action Taken Note furnished by the 
Ministry of Personnel , Public Grievances and P.ensions on the recommendatio~s of the 
Comntittee contained in its Sixteenth Report relating to Demands for Grants (1995-96) and 
(II) the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the recommenda­
tions of the Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report relating to Demands for Grants 
{1995-96) and seek clarifications there on from the Secretaries of the concerned Ministries 
who had been invited for the purpose. 
3. • • • 
4. The Chairman then wecomed the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and requested 
him to explain the steps taken/being taken by Government Of?. the Committee's recommen­
dations contained in its Fifteenth Report. The Secretary informed the Committee of the 
action taken on the Committee's recommendations. He also clarified the queries raised by 
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Committee desired that the Secretary may 
furnish information on the points, which had not been replied satisfactorily by the Ministry . 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 P.M. to meet again at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, 
the 7th March, 1996. 
• • • Relates to other matter. 

xxxx 
FORTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 29th March, 1996 in Committee Room 
'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
5. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABRA 
6. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
7. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
8. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
11. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
12. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Singh 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
18. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
19. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft Twenty-ninth, Thirtieth and 
Thirty-first Reports on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations! 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Fifteenth, Sixteenth and Seventeenth 
Reports relating to Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministries of Home Affairs, 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Law, Justice and Company Affairs, 
respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports with some changes 
in the Twenty-ninth Report. 
3. The Committee discussed the matter regarding presentingllaying the said Reports in 
the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha. As the term of the present Committee was to expire on the 
7th April, 1996 and also in view of the ensuing Lok Sabha elections, it authorised its 
Chairman, to present the Reports to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha as per the Direction 
issued by him in this regard. 
4. • * * 
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 6.00 P.M. on 4th April, 1996. 
••• Relates to other matter . 
12 