 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME 
AFFAIRS 
  
EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT 
  
ON  
PERSONNEL POLICIES OF CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE AND CENTRAL 
SECRETARIAT SERVICE 
  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON DECEMBER 19, 2001) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON DECEMBER 19, 2001) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2001/AGRAHAYANA 1923 (SAKA) 
  
C O N T E N T S 
  
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                           
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                     
                                                             
3.         REPORT                                                                                                                      
            CHAPTER -    I    
             Central Industrial Security Force 
            CHAPTER       II    
            Central Secretariat Service 
             
4             RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE                                            
5.        ANNEXURE                                                                                                                          
            List of Central Secretariat Service Officers who are empanelled to hold  
            the posts of Joint Secretary and still awaiting placement 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2001) 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee-   Chairman 
  
Page 1 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Shri Hiphei 
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
6.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
7.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8.         Shri K.M, Saifullah 
9.         Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
φ 10.    Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
11.       Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
12.       Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13.       Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
¢ 14.    Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta 
15.       Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
#          16.       Shri Pritish Nandy 
@17.   Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
  
LOK SABHA 
18.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
19.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
 ♠20.               Shrimati  Nisha Chaudhary 
 • 21.               Shri Samar Chaudhary 
22.       Shri M.O.H. Farook 
£ 23.    Shri Vijay Goel 
24.       Shri Rajen Gohain  
25.       Shri  Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
26.       Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.       Shri Arun Kumar 
28.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
29.       Shri P.H. Pandian 
30.       Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel 
31.       Shri Shriniwas Patil 
∗  32.   Shri Jitendra Prasada 
33.       Shri Subodh Ray 
34.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
_______________________________________________________________ 
φ   Ceased  to be Member   w.e.f. 1 March, 2001. 
¢ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 14 June 2001 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya Sabha. 
#   Nominated w.e.f. 3 August, 2001. 
@  Nominated w.e.f. 20 August, 2001. 
♠  Expired on 30 January,2001. 
 •  Expired on 10 September, 2001. 
£  Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  1 September 2001 on being appointed Minister. 
∗   Expired on 16 January, 2001. 
  
35.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
36.       Shri Anadi  Charan Sahu 
Page 2 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

37.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
38.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
39.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
¥ 40.    Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma 
41.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
42.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
43.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi  
φ 44.    Dr. S. Venugopal 
45.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
46.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha 
♦47.    Shri  Harin Pathak 
♥48.    Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
&49.       Shri Jaisingrao  Gaikwad Patil 
  
SECRETARIAT
 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
¥  Expired on 27 November 2001. 
φ   Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on  Human Resource 
Development. 
♦  Nominated w.e.f. 20 February, 2001. 
♥  Nominated w.e.f. 8 March, 2001. 
&Nominated  w.e.f. 21 November 2001. 
  
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Home Affairs 
having been authorised by the Co mmittee to submit the Report on its behalf, do he reby present this
Eighty-third Report of the Committe e on Personnel Policies of Centra l Industrial Security Force and 
Central Secretariat Service. 
2.0       The personnel policies of  CISF and CSS have been engaging attention   of this Committee fo r
quite some time.  The Committee has made several observations/recommendations on various aspects of
the personnel policies of CISF and CSS in its Fift y-fourth (1999) and Fift y-ninth (2000) Reports on 
Demands for Grants of the Minist ry of Home Affairs and Thirty-t hird (1996), Thir ty-eighth (1997), 
Forty-fourth (1998), Fift y-fifth (1999) and Sixtieth  (2000) Reports on Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, respectively. 
  
2.1       The Action Taken Replies of both the Mi nistries on the observation s/recommendations of the
Committee contained in its aforementioned Repor ts are evasive, sketchy, self-contradictory, 
inconsistent, grossly unsatisfactory and misleading. 
  
2.2        The Committee while examining the Dema nds for Grants (2001-2002) of  the Ministry of Home 
Affairs decided to present a se parate re port on the grievances of direct recruit Grou p ‘A’ officers o f 
Page 3 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

CISF.    
  
2.3       In its sittings held on 28 March 2001, while examining the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) o f 
Ministry of Personne l, Public Grievances and Pensions, th e Committee took note  of the relay hunge r
strike of the members of CSS Foru m for fulfillment of certain demands  with regard to their service. 
Accordingly, in case of personnel policy of CSS also the Committee decided to present a separate report.
  
2.4       Consequently, the Committee heard the Home Secretary and Secretary (Personnel) on personnel
policies of CISF and CSS in its meeting held exclusively for the purpose on 10 April 2001. 
  
2.5       The Committee was informed by both th e Ministries about sett ing up of two separate
Departmental Committees to go into the problems of  CISF and CSS, respectively, which were supposed
to present their Reports by 31 August & 31 May 2001, respectively.  In its meeting held on 13 June
2001, the Committee decided to wait for their Reports before formulating its
observations/recommendations.  As the two Departmental Committees  failed to meet their respective
deadlines, their term was extended upto the end of November 2001.  In the meantime, the Committee, in
its meeting held on 19 October 2001, took cognisance of the delay in submission of the reports of the
two Departmental Committees and decided to wait for their reports which were likely to be submitted by
30 November 2001. 
  
2.6       Interestingly, both these Departmental Committees have once again failed to submit their reports
by the extended deadline i.e. 30 November 2001, and their tenure have  been further extended upto 28
February 2002 for submission of their reports.    
  
2.7       Since most of the areas on which this  Committee has made observ ations/recommendations have
been referred to these two Depart mental Committees, the Committee, therefore, desires that these
Departmental Committees should  take due cognizance of the obs ervations/recommendations of this
Committee as contained in this report. 
3.         The Prime Minister and the Home Minist er have been appr ised of the Committee’s feelings on 
the issues of CSS and CISF, respectively. 
  
4.         The Report has two chapters.  The first chapter is devoted to CISF and second one to CSS. 
  
5.         For Chapter-I, the Committee has made use of the Action Taken Repl ies of Ministry of Home 
Affairs on its relevant observations /recommendations as contained in its Fifty-fourth and Fifty-ninth 
reports, replies to the questionnaire furnished by the Ministry, oral evidence of  the Home Secretary   
and replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee during the course of the oral evidence
of the Home Secretary and the le tters received from several members bringing certain aspects to the
Committee’s notice. 
  
5.1       For Chapter-II, the Committee has main ly relied on Central Secret ariat Service Rules, 1962,
various executive instructions on Central Staffing Scheme, Orders, Notifications and Office Memoranda
of Ministries of Personnel,  Public Grievances and Pensions and Finance, re plies to the questionnaire,
comprehensive note on CSS, Action Taken Note s on the recommendations of the Committee as
contained in its Sixtieth Report a nd replies to the Parliament Questi ons on the subject as received from
the Ministry of Personnel, Public  Grievances and Pensions and re presentations received from the
associations  of Central Secretariat Service, while formulating its views. 
  
5.2       The Committee considered the draft Re port in its sitting held on 11 December 2001 and adopted
the same. 
  
Page 4 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

6.         For facility of reference and conveni ence, observations and recomm endations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.     
  
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                           Chairman 
December 11, 2001.                                                                      Committee on Home Affairs
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE 
  
            The grievances of Group ‘A’ direct recruits of Central Industria l Security Force (CISF) have
been engaging the attention of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Co mmittee on Home 
Affairs for over a couple of years.  It has dwelt at length on the grievances of these officers in its two
successive Reports viz. 54
th and 59 th.  Despite that the problems and gr ievances of these officers have 
remained unchanged mainly due to bureaucratic i ndifference and apathy towards them.  It is this
indifference of the mandarins of Ministry of Home Affairs which has impelled the Committee to present
a separate Report on the long pending grievances.  It, theref ore, hopes that a ju st, humane and lasting
solution will be found by the Governme nt to put an end to the seemingly endless miseries of Group ‘A’
direct recruits of CISF. 
  
2.         It is worthwhile to have a brief peep in to the genesis of the grievances before suggesting suitable
solutions for their redressal. 
2.1       Central Industrial Security Force is an ar med force of the Union.  Its primary role is to protect
and safeguard industrial undertaki ngs owned by the Central Governme nt together with such othe r
installations as specified to be vital by the Government which include certain State Government
Undertakings.  In addition to this , it is now mandated to perform in ternal security and election duties,
and provide consultancy services to the industrial establishments in private sector.  Besides, it performs
any other duties that may be entrusted to it by the Central Government. 
2.2       The rank structure of the force at Group ‘A’ level is as follows: 
1.                  Assistant Commandant 
2.                  Deputy Commandant 
3.                  Commandant 
4.                  Deputy Inspector-General 
5.                  Inspector-General 
6.                  Director-General 
As is evident, the entry to Group ‘A’ rank structure begins at the level of Assistant Commandant.
Recruitment to the rank of Assist ant Commandant takes place from f our sources, viz. promotion from
the rank of Inspector, absorption of security officers from PSUs, re-employment of ex-army officers and 
direct recruitment through Civil Services Examinati on.  Here, it is pertinent to note that the post o f
Assistant Commandant was origin ally a Group ‘B’ post and was el evated to Group ‘A’ in 1987-88.  
With its elevation to Group ‘A’, th e post of Assistant Commandant be gan to be filled  up through direct
recruitment also.  Although, it  gained the status of Group ‘A’ post, it lacked the necessary attributes 
which characterise an organized Group ‘A’ service.  These attributes are as follows: 
  
(a)                The highest cadre post is not below the level of Rs.5900-6700; 
(b)               It has all the standard grades, namel y, Rs.2200-4000, Rs.3000-4500, Rs.3700-
Page 5 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

5000/Rs.4500-5700 and Rs.5900-6700; 
(c)                At least 50 per cent of the vacancies in the Junior Time Scale (Rs.2200-4000) are 
required to be filled by direct recruitment; and 
(d)               All vacancies above the Junior Time S cale and up to the Senior Administrative 
Grade (Rs.5900-6700) are filled by promotion from the next lower grade. 
Evidently, CISF has only two at tributes viz. (i) and (ii) as  mentioned above which are not
sufficient enough to enable it to earn  the status of an orga nized Group ‘A’ Civil Serv ice.  As a result o f 
this, Group ‘A’ direct recruits to the level of Assistant Commandant represent only a group of posts an d
not an organized civil service. 
2.3       Apart from the above mentioned attributes which identify an organized Group ‘A’ Civil Service, 
there are certain broad parameters wh ich ensure organized career planning of a direct recruit.  He/she is
assured of Senior Time Scale around 4 th to 5th   year of service and Junior Administrative Grade by 9 th
year of service.  Selection Grade by 14 th year and Senior Administrative Grade after 17 th year is 
ensured.  Besides a smooth and assured career progression, Group ‘A’ Civil Services undergo periodical 
cadre review once every 3-5 year s so as to provide reasonable pr omotional avenues to the cadre 
officers.  However, no such attributes and paramete rs were formulated for CISF officers with the
upgradation of the post of Assistant Commandant from Group ‘B’ to Group ‘A’ in 1988.   
2.4       In this backdrop, we may now trace the ge nesis of the grievances of direct recruit Group ‘A’
officers of CISF and explain the mala ise with the help of following points which have perpetuated the
plight of these officers: 
             
(i)         IRRATIONAL AND UNJUSTIFIED ROTA-QUOTA SYSTEM 
  
Even though CISF lacks the essent ial attributes of being a Group ‘A’ Civil Service, the 
magnitude of the sufferings of the direct recruit Group ‘A’ Offi cers would not have been as 
much as it is if the ROTA-QUOTA  system being followed in CISF  had not been there.  The real
culprit behind the sufferings of th ese officers is nothing but this  system alone.  Ironically, CISF
is the only organization wh ere it exists and therefor e has no parallel either  in any of the Central
Police Organisations or any of th e Group ‘A’ Civil Services.  It is this system which has done 
maximum damage to the career prospects of these officers.  The unjustness of the system can be
illustrated by stating that out of  10 vacancies in any given year, first five go to the promotees,
sixth and seventh vacancies are allotted to one  optee and one ex-army of ficer, respectively, and 
the last three are given to dir ect recruit officers.  This illu stration clearly shows that ROTA-
QUOTA system being followed in CISF is heav ily stacked against the direct recruit officers
whose career progression is doomed right from the moment they join  the CISF as a result of this
system.  But for some inexplicable reasons, this system has been allowed to continue much to the
agony of the direct r ecruit officers.  The Nikhil Kumar Committee which was set up by the
Ministry of Home Affairs to l ook into the grievances of these officers also realized the harm
caused by this system to the direct recruit o fficers and therefore recommended that it should be
done away with it.  But this  recommendation has not found favour with the Department o f
Personnel & Training due to which the anomalous ROTA-QUOTA system continues to exist as 
a thorn in the flesh for direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF. 
  
  
(ii)        DIRECT RECRUIT OFFICERS OF CISF - AN ORGANIZED CIVIL SERVICE O R 
AN ARMED FORCE OF THE UNION 
  
As stated earlier, the post of Assistant Commandant was elevat ed from Group ‘B’ to 
Group ‘A’ in 1987 and with this elevation be gan direct recruitment for it throu gh Civil Services 
Page 6 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Examination conducted by Union Public Serv ice Commission.  Sin ce it was elevated to
the Group ‘A’ status, the post of Assistant Comma ndant was treated at par with other Group ‘A’
services included in the scheme of examination meant for recruitment to various Civil Services. 
Based on this premise, the direct  recruit officers of CI SF were prevented from appearing in the
subsequent Civil Services Exa mination as they were perceive d to be belonging to a Group ‘A’
service.  Not just that, in case of some of the Officers who were give n extension of time fo r
joining CISF so as to enable them to compete fo r IAS, IFS and IPS in the next examination, they
were asked to join CISF even before their re sult for the examination was declared thereby
snatching the opportunity from them to join one  of the above mentioned services as some o f
them had,  in effect, qualified fo r one of these services .  This clearly proves that for all practical
purposes Group ‘A’ direct recruit officers of CISF  were deemed to be pa rt of a Group ‘A’ Civil 
Service even though CISF does not have the attributes of an or ganized Group ‘A’ Civil Service 
till date.  On the other hand, the Ministry now emphasizes that CISF is an Armed Force of the
Union and, therefore, cannot be equated or compared with an or ganized Group ‘A’ Civil 
Service.  Here the question arises whether the directly recruited Assistant Commandants of CISF
belong to an organized Civil Service or to an Ar med Force of the Union.  In response to this
question, the Ministry of Ho me Affairs has replied that CISF direct recruit Assistant
Commandants do not constitute or form part of  an organized Civil Service.  They are only
recruited through the Civil Services Examinat ion which is a ‘vehicle for recruitment ’ of direct 
recruit segment of Assistant Co mmandants of CISF.  CISF is an Armed Force of the Union
whose officers are governed by the CISF Act and Rules.  The reply of the Ministry leaves no
doubt as to the status of CISF.  But the point which engages the attention of the Committee is the
inconsistency in the Ministry’s stand on the stat us of the direct recrui t Group ‘A’ officers o f 
CISF.  Direct recruitment to  the post of Assistant Comma ndant began in 1987 whereas CISF
attained the status of an Ar med Force of the Union in 1983.  Therefore, it becomes amply clea r
that in 1987 when direct recruitment began, CISF was a full-fledged Armed Force of the Union.  
Since this is an undeniable fact , the question arises as to why the recruitment to the posts o f
Assistant Commandant was done through the Civil Services Ex amination?  How far was it
justified to recruit officers for an Armed Forc e of the Union and for organized Group ‘A’ Civil 
Services through a common competitive examin ation which was primarily meant to make
recruitment for various Civil Se rvices?  The point made by the Ministry that Civil Services
Examination was only a ‘vehicle of  recruitment’ for fi lling up the direct recruit segment of the 
posts of Assistant Commandants in CISF is well taken.  But the question arises if it was only a
vehicle of recruitment then why conditions such as bar on appearing in the same examination for
bettering their performance were  imposed on these officers on th e lines of an organized Civil
Service?  Should these officers not have been treated separate ly from their counterparts in
various Civil Servic es as the former were governed by CISF Act and Rules and the latter by
Civil Services Rules?  The fact remains that di rect recruit Assistant Co mmandants were and are
officers of an Armed For ce of the Union.  Therefore, they should not have been treated at pa r
with the officers of Civi l Services and if at all they were treated at par then the attributes of a
Group ‘A’ Civil Service should have accrued to th em.  Evidently, these of ficers were treated at
par with officers of Civil Services when they  were denied the opportuni ty to compete for othe r
Group ‘A’ Civil Services in the subsequent Civil Services Exam ination though they lacked the
attributes of an organized Civi l Service.  At the same time, when it came to evolving the
attributes of Group ‘A’ Civil Service in the CISF for thes e direct recruit of ficers, they were 
simply denied these attributes on the premise that they belonged to an Armed Force of the Union
and not to any Group ‘A’ Civil Serv ice.  This proven inconsistency vis-à-vis the status of direct 
recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF has caused immense sufferi ng to them.  So much so that their 
career prospects are totally doomed with no relief in sight. 
  
(iii)       DIRECT RECRUIT GROUP ‘A’ OFFI CERS OF CISF – A CIVIL SERVICE OR A 
Page 7 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

GROUP OF POSTS 
  
As explained above, the status  of directly recruited Assist ant Commandants of CISF has
been marked with inconsistency and utter conf usion.  The Gazette Notification for the Civil
Services Examination identifies these Assist ant Commandants as a Gr oup of Posts having a
Group ‘A’ status.  As per the Ministry of Home Affairs own admission these Group ‘A’ Posts do 
not constitute or form part of any organized Group ‘A’ Civil Service.  The veracity of the fact 
that these are only Group ‘A’ posts and do not form  part of a Group ‘A’ Ci vil Service, cannot be 
questioned.  But what can be highlighted is th e injustice done to these officers due to the
inconsistent stand taken by the Mi nistry vis-à-vis their status.  This inconsistency raises the 
question as to what is the di fference between Group ‘A’ posts a nd an organized Group ‘A’ Civil 
Service?  And if there is no di fference between the two then why the benefits accruing to one
should not be available to the other and vice ve rsa?  If there is any difference between the two
then why there should be a common competitive examination for them?  As mentioned earlier,
Civil Services Examination is primarily meant for filling up the vacanci es of Group A& B Civil
Services of the Union.  By incl uding Group ‘A’ posts of Assistant Commandants in CISF in this 
scheme of examination, an impre ssion, advertently or inadvertentl y, has been created that these
are also part of one of the or ganized Group ‘A’ Civil Services.  Thus, two patent errors have 
been committed.  First, it was totally illogical and irrational to club Group ‘A’ posts of an Armed 
Force of the Union with those of the Group ‘A’ Civil Services by holding a common competitive 
examination for them.  Second, it was even more  illogical and irrational to treat these Group ‘A’
posts of CISF at par with Group ‘A’ Civil Services and at the same time deny them the attributes
of a Group ‘A’ Civil Servi ce.  This is a classic example of having your cake a nd eating it too.  
The fact is that these Group ‘A’ posts of CISF have been percei ved to be part of a Group ‘A’
Service more often than not.  This can be s ubstantiated by quoting from a letter of the Home
Minister dated 26 March 2001 addressed to the Chairman, Committee on Home Affairs wherein
he has inter alia  stated that  CISF is one of the Group ‘A’ services under the scheme of Civil 
Services Examination.  This proves that technically it may be a Group of pos ts but generally it is
treated as a Group ‘A’ Civil Servic e by all concerned.  It is main ly due to this reason that all
those rules which are applied to other Group ‘A’ Civil Serv ices are also applied to direct recruit 
Assistant Commandants of CISF.  Had this not been the case, these direct recruit officers o f
CISF would have been allowed to compete for other Group ‘A’ Civi l Services like thei r
counterparts in CRPF, BSF and ITBP. 
  
3.         In view of the above mentioned, the following conclusions may be drawn: 
  
(a)                The ROTA-QUOTA Syst em being followed in the CI SF is the root cause for the 
grievances of direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers; 
(b)               Technically, CISF is an Armed Force of th e Union, the recruitmen t to Group ‘A’ posts 
of Assistant Commandant is  being done along with Group ‘A’ Civil Services through 
Civil Services Examination; 
(c)                Group ‘A’ direct recruit officers  of an Armed Force of the Un ion are treated at par with 
Group ‘A’ Civil Services pr imarily because they are recruited through a common 
competitive examination; 
(d)               Although, the common competitive examination i.e. Civil Services Examination is use d
mainly as a “vehicle of recruitment ” for filling up the direct r ecruit segment of Assistant 
Commandants in CISF, it is also used fo r denying them the oppor tunity to better thei r
performance in the same exa mination which is available to  their counterparts in CRPF,
BSF and ITBP; 
(e)                Despite being treated at par wi th Group ‘A’ Civil Services by virtue of being part of the 
same examination, CISF does not have the attributes of a Group ‘A’ Civil Service; 
Page 8 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

(f)                 Though Assistant Commandants are a mere gr oup of posts having Group ‘A’ status, the 
general impression is that they are part of an organized Group ‘A’ Civil Service since the 
former have been clubbed with the latter by way of a common competitive examination;
and 
(g)                The fact that direct recrui t Assistant Commandants of CI SF are generally perceived to
be part of a Group ‘A’ Civil Service is fu rther substantiated by Home Minister’s own 
statement that CISF is one of  the Group ‘A’ Services under th e scheme of Civil Services 
Examination.   
  
4.         Keeping these grievances in mind, the Committee, in its 54 th Report on Demands for Grants 
(1999-2000) of Ministry of Home Affa irs, dwelt at length with a view to persuade the Ministry to find 
some lasting solutions to the probl ems of Group ‘A’ direct recruit officers of CI SF.  Accordingly, it 
recommended for the realloca tion of direct recruit Gr oup ‘A’ officers of CISF to  Indian Police Service 
(IPS) or to any other Group ‘A’ service as no other solution was going to make any perceptible change
to their position because irrepara ble damage had already been do ne to them by the ROTA-QUOTA 
System. 
4.1       In response to the recommendations/obs ervations of the Committee as contained in its 54 th
Report vis-à-vis grievances of direct recruit officers of CISF, the Ministry of Home Affairs in its Action 
Taken Notes thereon, intimated that a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Nikhil Kumar, Special
Secretary (ISP) in the Ministry had been constituted to examine the service grievances of these officers. 
Further action in the matter was proposed to be taken after the recommenda tions of the Committee
became available. 
  
5.         Before moving to the recommenda tions of the Committee as contained in its 59 th Report, it 
would be pertinent to have a brief look into  the major recommendati ons of the Nikhil Kuma r
Committee.  The Nikhil Kumar Comm ittee made the following recomm endations relating to the caree r
prospects of the Group ‘A’ officers of the CISF: 
  
(i)         The promotion quota for cadre officers  in the rank of Commandant (both Junior     and
Sr. Commandants) may be increased to 80 per cent while the deputation quota for the IPS
officers be restricted to 20 per cent; 
(ii)                Promotion quota for cadre offi cers of CISF at th e rank of DIG may be  increased to 60
per cent and the quota for IPS officers may be reduced to 40 per cent.  The quota at the
level of IG may be retained at 33.3 per cent; 
(iii)               Rules relating to maintenance of seniority may be amended.  All directly recruited 
officers of one batch should be placed in a bunch, above the promotee officers of the
same year.  The year of decl aration of result of the releva nt Civil Services Examination
should be taken as the seniority year for the directly recruited officers as is done in case
of All India Services; 
(iv)              The Committee recommended that Group ‘A’ officers of CISF may be nominated fo r 
deputation to other forces and organizations so that the pr evailing stagnation is removed;
and 
(v)                The Committee did not find it fe asible to reallocate the directly recr uited Group ‘A’
officers of CISF to IPS and other Group ‘A’ Services. 
  
5.1       The recommendations of the Nikhil Ku mar Committee Report, though intended to improve the
service conditions of CISF officers, have not been ab le to make any substant ial change to the direct
recruits.  In pursuance to the recommendations of Nikhil Kumar Committee, the Ministry has done away
with the deputation quota of IPS Of ficers at the Commandant Level.  Promotion quota of  cadre officers
in the rank of DIG has been increased from 40 per cent to 60 per cent.  For providing better avenues o f
Page 9 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

deputation to CISF officers, instruct ions have been issued that if IPS officers are not available fo r
deputation to SPG, NSG, NCRB, BC AS, BPR&D, IB, R&AW, etc., officers of the CPMFs may be sent
on these deputations.  The Ministry has informed that the only recommen dation that could not be
implemented is the abolition of the ROTA-QUOTA system in the CISF. 
  
6.         In the meanwhile, the Home Minister  on 20 December, 1999 gave an  assurance on the floor o f
Lok Sabha that he would go into the grievances of these officers thoroughly and independently and
would try to see that no injustice was done to them.  He also assure d to have a candid interaction with
CISF officers and ensured that if there were any grievances on that score, particularly on the question of
parity, they would be removed.  Afte r this assurance, the Home Mini ster met the delegation of these
officers on 24 April and 24 July 2000.  Thereafter, the grievances of these officers were examined afresh
by the Ministry.  Although, it was not found feasible to re-a llocate them to the IP S or any other group 
‘A’ Central Service, the Ministry has taken following measures to improve the promotional prospects of 
the CISF Officers: 
  
(a)                There are 464 sanctioned pos ts of Assistant Commandant in the CISF (Junior Time
Scale).  The recruitment to these posts is carried out in the following manner: 
(i)         30 per cent by direct recruitment through Civil Services Examination 
(ii)                50 per cent by promotion 
(iii)               10 per cent Optees                           } failing which by Direct 
      Recruitment 
(iv)              10 per cent Re-employed personnel} 
  
It has been decided to revise th e recruitment rules to increase the quota of direct recruitment
from 30 per cent to 40 per ce nt and to reduce the recruitmen t of Optees and Re-employed 
personnel from 10 per cent to 5 per cent each.  The revised recruitment rules are expected to be
notified shortly. 
  
(b)               There are 270 posts in  the CISF at Deputy Commandant  level (Senior Time Scale). 
Promotion from Assistant Co mmandant to Deputy Commandant  is by promotion.  By an
order issued earlier this month, it has been decided to grant Senior Time Scale (STS) on a
non-functional basis, to Assistant Commandant s after completion of 6 years of service. 
This step will ensure grant of STS this y ear to all officers who joined as or became
Assistant Commandant between 1990 and 1995. 
  
(c)                At the Commandant level (Junior Administ rative Grade), there are 133 posts.  These 
posts also include 52 posts of Senior Comma ndant level in the Non-Functional Selection 
Grade.  The recruitment at this level used to be done in the following manner: 
(a)                50 per cent by promotion 
(b)               40 per cent by deputation from IPS 
(c)                10 per cent Optees and Re-employed personnel 
  
It has now been decided to do aw ay with the quotas for Deputationists, Optees and Re-employed 
personnel at this level, making thereby all the 133 posts available for promotion in the cadre.  As
a result, the cadre will get 66 additional posts at this level. 
(d)        At the DIG level, there are 24 posts, out of which 40 per cent were available to the cadre,
the remaining 60 per cent bei ng filled by the IPS Officers on deputation.  At this level,
the deputation quota has been re duced from 60 per cent to 40 per cent.  As a result, the
cadre has got 4 additional DIG level posts. 
  
(e)        There are 5 IG level posts in the CISF out of which 33.3 per cent i.e. 2 posts are already
Page 10 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

available to the cadre. 
  
(f)         Being a uniformed service, longe r residency periods had be en prescribed at various
levels of the CISF in order to give adequate  experience to an officer before promoting
him to the next level.  This seems to have come in the way of time ly promotions of the
officers.  Therefore, without compromisi ng on minimum length of experience required,
the residency periods at various levels have been reduced as follows: 
                         
(a)        DC—Commandant                              5 years – 2 years 
                                    (b)        Commandant – Sr. Commandant          4 years – 2 years 
                                    (c)        Sr. Commandant –DIG                         5 years – 3 years 
                                    (d)        DIG – IG                                             4 years – 2 years 
  
6.1       Even with these changes, the Ministry of  Home Affairs has admitted that measures taken so fa r
would bring , to begi n with, only limited be nefits with regard to the pr omotional prospects of the CISF
direct recruits and it will take some time before durable benefits begin to accrue to them. 
  
6.2       The Ministry has further informed that in deference to the wishes of the Committee, it has been
decided to set up a Commi ttee to look comprehensively into the cadre management of the CPMFs viz.
BSF, CRPF, CISF and ITBP and sugge st measures for improving the car eer prospects of direct recruit
Group ‘A’ officers.  The Committee will be specifically tasked to go into the special problems with
regard to seniority, promotions a nd deputation of the directly recrui ted Group ‘A’ officer s of the CISF 
which would also cover those who joined service between 1987 and 1996.  The Committee will be given
time upto 31 August 2001 to submit its Report.  The Ministry e xpects to implement the cadre
review/restructuring proposals by 31 August March 2002.  The Committee  has since been informed by
the Ministry of Home Affairs vide its letter  No.I-45022/58/2000-Pers.I dated 6 June 2001 that a 
Committee for the above mentioned purpose has been set up and it is likely to submit  its Report by 31
August 2001. 
  
6.3       The fact that the grie vances of direct recru it Group ‘A’ officers of CISF cannot be redressed by 
the measures taken so far by the Ministry of Home Affairs, has be en accepted by the Home Ministe r
also in his letter dated 26 March, 2001 addressed to th e Chairman, Committee on Home Affairs.  He has
stated that some of the problems of these officers are real ly genuine and deserve early solution.  He has
further stated that these problems are deep rooted and will not submit to cosmetic solutions. 
7.         In the meantime, the Committee wh ile considering the Demands  for Grants (2001-2002) o f 
Ministry of Home Affairs decided to present a separate report on the grievances of direct recruit Group
‘A’ Officers of CISF.  Accordingl y, it heard the oral evidence of the Home Secretary and the Secretary,
Personnel in its meeting held on 10 April 2001 for the purpose.   
  
7.1       The Home Secretary in his presentation before the Committee stated  that the Ministry had
carefully looked into the grievances  of these officers in consultation with the Department of Personnel
and Training in a bid to redress them.  He informed the Committ ee that the Ministry had made genuine
efforts to consider re-allocation and absorption of these offi cers in IPS or any ot her Group ‘A’ Central 
Service.  While doing s o, a comparison of the prom otional prospectus of th e direct recruit Group ‘A’
officers of CISF with their counterparts in IPS as well as other Group ‘A’ Central Services revealed that 
conditions of promotion were nearly  as bad in many of the Group ‘A’ Ce ntral Services as in CISF.  Fo r 
instance, in the Indian Revenue Service, the Junior  Administrative Grade wa s being given in thirteen
years against the norm or nine years.  Similarly, the non-functional Selection Grade was being given in 
twenty years against the norm of thirteen years.  Though, the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service
was only marginally better , the Indian Trade Service, Indian Po stal Service, Indian Defence Estate
Service, Indian Information Service, etc. were all reeling under similar stagnation.  It was so because the
Page 11 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

promotions in all these services were vacancy-based and they all followed rota-quota system.  He further 
stated that if CISF Officers were re -allocated to the IPS then officers of all these Central Services who 
secured higher ranks than CISF Offi cers, would have a better claim fo r re-allocation to  one of the All 
India Services then CISF Officers.  Thus, any atte mpt to absorb CISF Officers in any other Group ‘A’
Service which held better prospect s, would give rise to similar co mpeting demands from other services
which would be difficult to  resist on merits.  He submitted that it was one of the primary concern on
account of which a conscious decisi on had to be taken not to accept th e demands of CISF officers.  The
Home Secretary also apprised the Committee of the various steps take n by the Ministry to augment the
promotional prospects of CISF Offi cers.  These steps have already been mentioned elsewhere in this
report.  He further informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs was engaged in considering certain
proposals to increase the number of posts in higher levels.  He stated that the Ministry was committed to
make such structural changes as would bring durable and sustainable benefits in the career prospects o f
CISF Officers.  
  
7.2       The Secretary, Personnel while clarifying certain points raised  in the meeting, stated that the
Department of Personnel and Training was in full agreement with the Mi nistry of Home Affairs that the
CISF Officers who were recruited through Civil Servi ces Examination could not be absorbed in the
Indian Police Service.  There were some valid reasons for that.  One of those reasons was that CISF was
not an organized Group ‘A’ Service.  Of the four criteria  laid down to declare a service as organized 
Group ‘A’ service, CISF fulfilled only two out of f our.  Referring to the merger of Indian Frontie r
Administrative Service with the Indian Administrati ve Service, he clarified that the former was an
organized service and the Officers of both the services were doing the same job.  He admitted that there
was a feeling of disconten t among CISF Officers.  He stated th at both Department  of Personnel and
Training and Ministry of Home A ffairs were trying to find some solution to their problems.  He
submitted that if there was any proposal for removal of stagnation to improve the promotional prospects
of CISF Officers other than re-a llocation to IPS or a ny other Group ‘A’ Servic e, the Department o f 
Personnel and Training was prepared to consider it.  He further st ated that his De partment had not
agreed to only one proposal put forward by the Minist ry of Home Affairs which provided for time-scale 
promotion at all hierarchi cal levels of CISF.  That proposal wa s against the recommendations of the
Fifth Pay Commission.  He also refe rred to the six steps mentioned by the Home Secretary which were
taken to improve the promotional prospects of CISF Officers.  He  assured the Committee that the
Department of Personnel and Traini ng would take a very pos itive view insofar as steps for removal o f
stagnation were concerned. 
  
8.         As stated elsewhere, the Committee has given extensive treatment to  the grievances of direct
recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF in its 59th Report on Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of Ministry of 
Home Affairs.  The Committee in this Report has inter alia recommended while reiterating its earlie r
recommendation as contained in its 54th Report, that direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF who have 
been recruited through Civil Servi ces Examination should be realloca ted to IPS or any other Group ‘A’
Service. 
  
8.1       In response to the recommendati ons of the Committee as  contained in its 59 th Report, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, in it s Action Taken Notes, has stated th at Director-General, CISF along with 
some of the directly recruited (through Civil Services Ex amination) officers of the CISF met the Home
Minister on 24 April,2000 and made a presentation.  They have agai n met the Home Minister on 24
July, 2000.  The Government is cons idering the points raised by thes e officers again.  It has furthe r
stated that it is expect ed that the final d ecision on the issues relating to  grievances of the directly
recruited Group ‘A’ of ficers will be possible by 31 December, 2000.  However, the Ministry could not
meet the deadline and sought extension of time upto 28 February, 2001 for th e purpose vide its lette r
No. I-45022/58/2000-Pers.I dated 12 January, 2001.  The Ministry again failed to meet the deadline an d
Page 12 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

sought another extension of ti me upto 30 April 2001 vide its lette r of even number dated 5 March,
2001.  The Ministry failed to meet this deadline also and sought extension upto 31 August, 2001 vide its
letter of even number dated 6 June , 2001.  Even after this, the Ministry sought one more extension vide
its letter of even number dated 7 September 2001 stating that the recommendations of the Committee
appointed under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary (JKA) in the Ministry had not been received and
were awaited.  Further action on th e grievances of Group ‘A’ Office rs of the CISF and other CPMFs 
would be taken on receipt of the re port of the Committee.  In the ci rcumstances, the Ministry requested
for extension of time upto 30 November 2001.  
  
8.1.1    In response to the communication dated 7 Se ptember 2001 of Ministry of Home Affairs, the
Ministry was requested to inform the Committee about the factual position with regard to the term of the
Departmental Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary (JKA).  The Ministry was
requested also to inform whether any extension had been given to this Committee and by what time it
was likely to submit its report.   
  
8.1.2    In response thereto, the Ministry vide its le tter dated 1 October 2001 st ated that the following
terms of reference were made to the Committe e appointed under the Chai rmanship of Shri A.K.
Bhandari, Special Secretary (JKA), Ministry of Home  Affairs to consider the career prospects of Group
‘A’ Officers of the CPMFs: 
(a)                To examine the recruitment patterns in the past and suggest measures to remove any 
future bottlenecks in the promotions of the cadre officers of the Para-Military Forces; 
(b)               To consider the anomalies in the principles of maintenance of seniority in the Central 
Para-Military Forces and to suggest measures to remove such anomalies; 
(c)                To consider the quotas for the direct recruitment, promotion, deputation, etc. in different
ranks and suggest changes if any; 
(d)               To consider the restructuring of the CRPF, BSF, CISF and ITBP and to suggest a new
structure so as to enable these CPMFs, to face the emerging internal security challenges,
more effectively; and 
(e)                To look into the specific grievances of Gr oup ‘A’ officers of CISF and other CPMFs 
and suggest measures to remove such grievances. 
  
The Committee had held its meet ings on 6 June, 12 June, 25 J une, 27 August, 31 August and 10
September 2001.  The report of the Committee was in the final stages and it was expected that the
Committee would submit its report in October 2001. 
  
8.1.3    The above request of the Ministry of Home Affairs for ex tension of time upto 30 Novembe r
2001for submission of its ATNs wa s considered by the Committee in  its meeting he ld on 19 Octobe r
2001.  The Committee Members were ove rwhelmingly of the vi ew that the Ministry of Home Affairs
was adopting dilatory tactics by seek ing extension in tandem and procra stinating the matter for too long
a time with repeated atte mpts at misleading the Committee.  In view of this, the Committee authorized
its Chairman to draw th e attention of Home Minister to the manner in which the Ministry of Home
Affairs was handling the whole issue.      
  
8.1.4    Before the Chairman could write to the Home  Minister in this regard, the Ministry vide its
communication dated 4 December 2001, sought one  more extension upto 28 February 2002 fo r
submission of its ATNs, once again on the same old ground that the recommendations of the Committee
appointed under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary (JKA) had not been finalized and were awaited. 
  
8.1.5    The Chairman, Committee on Ho me Affairs in his above mentione d letter to the Home Ministe r
while expressing the feelings of the Committee inter alia stated that there was an urgent need for the
personal intervention of the Home Mi nister in the matter so that a just and lastin g solution to the
Page 13 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

grievances of direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF was found in an expeditious manner.       
  
9.         Having gone into the depth of the grie vances of Group ‘A’ direct recruit offi cers of CISF, the 
Committee has reached the conclusi on that a historical blunder was committed in 1987 when the direct
recruitment to Group ‘A’ posts of Assistant Commandant in CISF – an Armed Force of the Union –
began under the scheme of Civil Services Examination.  By bri nging these Group ‘A’ posts under the 
umbrella of Civil Services Exa mination, a false impression has been allowed to gain ground that these
posts are part of a civil service.  The fact that CISF was treated as a Civil Service can be substantiated by
citing the judgement of the Supr eme Court in Mohan Singhania Vs. Union of India (AIR 1992 Supreme
Court of India) case in which the apex court upheld  the stand taken by the Un ion Government that all
Group ‘A’ Services included in th e scheme of Civil Se rvices Examinations stood on equal footing 
within their respective gr oup of services/posts and that there was no point in competing for any one o f
the services by a candidate within the same Group ‘A’ services when he  has already been allocated and 
appointed to one of these services to which he has been selected  on his/her merit.  The above citation o f
the judgement of the Supreme C ourt upholding the stand of the Un ion Government leaves no doubt
about the identification of  Group ‘A’ posts of Assistant Comma ndants in CISF with  Group ‘A’ Civil 
Services.  Had this not been the case, thes e officers would not have  been prevented from
applying/joining other Group ‘A’ Civil Services.  Whereas the fact of the matter  is that these Group ‘A’
posts in CISF were never part of a Civil Service.  They were, in effect, some isolated Group ‘A’ posts in 
an Armed Force of the Union.  Therefore, it was to tally illogical and irrational to fill up these posts
through the scheme of Civil Services Examination.  The Government should have filled up these posts
along with their counterparts in CRPF, BSF and ITBP through Special Sel ection Board instead o f
bringing them under the scheme of Civil Services Examina tion.  The inclusion of these posts in the
scheme of Civil Services Examination has created an impression that these are also one of the Group ‘A’
Civil Services.  It also proves that the decision to  include these Group ‘A’ posts  in the scheme of Civil 
Services Examination suffer from myopia.  The decision makers fail ed to perceive the shortcomings
inherent in the decision.  The dir ect recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF are havi ng to pay for the lack o f 
foresight on the part of the decision makers. 
  
9.1       In view of this, the Committee strongly feels that these direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF 
should not be made to pay for the wrongs of the decision makers who failed to foresee the negative
fallout of their decision.  It, therefore, reiterates it recomme ndation as contained in its 54 th and 59 th
Reports that these officers be reallocated to IPS or any other Group ‘A’ Civil Service.  
  
10.       It has already been made amply clear that these Group ‘A’ Officers were deemed to be part of a 
Civil Service but as a matter of fact they were just  a few isolated Group ‘A’ posts in an Armed Force of 
the Union i.e. CISF.  Since these posts have been  filled up along with othe r Group ‘A’ Civil Services, 
these posts too should have been given the attributes  of a Group ‘A’ Civil Serv ice.  In the absence o f 
these attributes, the direct recrui t Group ‘A’ officers of CI SF have suffered a lot.  They may have 
preferred for CISF over other Group ‘A’ Services while applying for th e main examination of the Civil 
Services Examination thinking that it was a better option.  But in real ity it has proved to be the worst
option for them because service cond itions of other Group ‘A’ Services  are far better than CISF.  They 
now feel totally betrayed by the fa ct that some Group ‘A’ posts of an Armed Force were clubbed with 
Group ‘A’ Civil Services th ereby generating an impres sion that those posts were  also part of a Civil 
Service.  The situation as it exists  today calls for the reallocation of these officers to one of the Civil
Services so that the injustice done to them by allocating them to an Armed Force of the Union instead of
a Civil Service could be undone.  He re, it may be pertinent to mention the recommendation of the 5 th
Central Pay Commission which states that isolated posts in a Ministry should be  merged with organized
cadre within the Ministry.  As fo r the stand taken by the Ministry th at reallocation to IPS or any othe r
Group ‘A’ Service may lead to si milar demands from other servi ces, the Committee would like to
emphasize that the Secretar y, Personnel and Home Secretar y submitted before the Committee, in its
Page 14 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

meeting held on 10 April, 2001, that Group ‘A’ direct recruit Assistant Commandants of CISF are only a 
few isolated Group ‘A’ posts and not any Civil Service. Therefore, ba sed on this premis e it would be 
illogical to compare Group ‘A’ posts with Group ‘A’ Civil Services.  He nce, any reallocation or lateral 
shifting to any Group ‘A’ Civil Service should not raise any demands from any other Civil Service
because here the reallocation woul d be from a Group ‘A’ post to a Group ‘A’ Civi l Service.  Had the 
reallocation or lateral shif ting been from one Civil Service to th e other Civil Service for the sake o f
better promotional or career pros pects, the similar competing dema nds from left out Civil Services
would have been justified.  Therefore, in the view of the Committee, the apprehension of the Ministry of
Home Affairs and De partment of Personnel and Training that there will be competing demands from
similarly placed services for reallocation is nothing but an attempt to dodge the real issue.   
  
11.       The fallibility of the ROTA-QUOTA sy stem being followed in CISF has already been 
highlighted elsewhere in this Repor t.  Therefore, the Committee w ould like to lay emphasis on the need
for doing away with this system so that injustice caused by it to the hitherto recruited officers is not done
to the future batches of direct recruit officers. 
  
12.       The Nikhil Kumar Committee had recomme nded for adoption of a li beral deputation policy fo r
direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF so as to remove stagnati on.  The Ministry of Home Affairs has 
replied that for providing better avenues of deputation to CISF office rs, instructions have recently been
issued that if IPS officers are not available for deputation to Special Prot ection Group (SPG), National
Security Guard (NSG), National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), Bu reau of Civil Aviation Security
(BCAS), Bureau of Police Research  & Development (BPR&D), Intell igence Bureau (IB), Research &
Analysis Wing (R&AW), etc., office rs of the CPMFs may be sent on these deputations.  This measure
will benefit the CISF officers also. 
  
12.1     In sharp contrast to the above, the fact of th e matter is that the Minist ry has imposed restrictions
on these officers thereby preventing them from applyi ng for the deputation in other organizations.  
Deputations have now been totall y stopped for these officers.  Not only this, those who have already
been sent on deputation to  various other organizations are now being called back.  This proves how 
sympathetically the Ministry of Home Affairs is dealing with the grievances of these officers.  Instead of
providing any relief to them, the Ministry is persecuti ng them by blocking their deputation to othe r
organizations.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should adopt a
liberal deputation policy vis- à-vis these officers so that some tempor ary relief is provided to them till a 
lasting solution is found to their grievances.  The Committee would li ke to have a quarterly report on
this issue so as to know the number of officers actually sponsored and released for deputation. 
  
12.2     The Committee has also learnt that recentl y an exercise was done to send these officers on
deputation to Tripura Poli ce which happens to be a Group ‘B’ Serv ice.  This attempt to send these 
Group ‘A’ officers on deputation to a Group ‘B’ Serv ice raises serious doubts about the genuineness o f
Ministry’s efforts to redress their grievances. 
  
12.3     In the context of deputa tion of these officers, the Committ ee expressed its di smay over the fact
that the Ministry of Home Affairs went over the board by allowi ng a direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officer to 
shift laterally to RAW with bac kdated seniority while ignoring the similar de mands of 140 odd direct
recruit Group ‘A’ Officers. This sm acks of favoritism and crass disc rimination on th e part of the
Ministry. While deploring favori tism and discrimination, the Committ ee exhorts the Ministry of Home
Affairs to adopt a favourable and sy mpathetic attitude towards all thes e officers in the matter of thei r
lateral shifting to other organizations like RAW et c. The Ministry should desist from favouring a few
while ignoring and persecuting others . Such a blatant favoritism will further demoralize this already
distressed and harassed lot of officers. 
  
Page 15 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

12.4     In the same context, the Committee e xpresses its unhappiness over the perfunctory manner in
which the Ministry has gone about the task of sp onsoring/sending these officers on deputation to some
other organizations. Here, a referen ce may be made to the replies of the Ministry to the written queries
of three members of this Committee. In reply to  a query as to how many officers were sent on
deputation, the Ministry replied that following number of officers had b een/were being offered to
various organizations: 
  
             
-           142 have been offered to RAW in June 2001/July 2001. 
            -           12 have been offered to IB in Aug., 2001. 
            -           19 have been offered to SPG in June, 2001. 
            -           01 has been offered to BCAS. 
-           BHEL’s Tamil Nadu based units ha ve asked for deputation r ecently and officers are 
being asked for their willingness. 
            -           Offer has also been made to CBI and their response is awaited. 
            -           ONGC has asked for deputation-cum-absorption basis in the rank of  
                        Commandant but no response has been received from direct officers. 
  
However, the Committee learnt that  as a matter of fact not a single officer has been sent on deputation
till date. Moreover, what could be worse then the si tuation that the Director-General, CISF, in the first
instance, turned down the request of Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) fo r sending CISF officers on
deputation to that organization. Later, when the na mes of a few officers were sent to IOCL in deference
to the wishes of this Committee, it was already too late. The IOCL re fused to consider their names afte r
the expiry of the prescr ibed date for the purpose. This shows the indifference of the Ministry and
Directorate-General, CISF toward s the grievances of these office rs. The Committee strongly condemns 
such an attitude and hopes that so me sincere efforts will be made to ensure deputation and lateral
shifting of the direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF.  
  
13.       The Committee has been apprised that th e Ministry is now adopting intimidatory and vindictive
tactics such as circulation of Civil Service Conduct Rules which forbid outside influence for furtherance
of career prospects involving disciplinary action, granting of powers of susp ension of Gazetted Officers
to the Director-General, CISF, introduction of new pre- promotion cadre course with compulsory 
attendance and qualificatio n and making physical fitnes s mandatory for promotion.  Not just that, the
height of vindictiveness has gone to the extent that almost all the officers who met the Home Minister to
air their grievances have since b een transferred out of the headquarters either on one pretext or the
other.   All these steps smack of  some well thought out actions to  somehow victimise these already
harassed and persecuted direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF.  Keeping this in view, the Committee 
urges upon the Ministry of Home Affa irs not to indulge in these type of activities.  It should, instead,
come out with some positive policy measures to heal the wounds of these officers who have been going
through a lot of trauma.   
  
14.       The Home Secretary, in his oral ev idence before the Committe e held on 10 April 2001, had
apprised the Committee of the six steps taken to im prove the service conditions  of direct recruit Group
‘A’ officers of CISF.  One of these steps was to reserve all Commandant le vel posts for the cadre
officers.  In sharp contravention of this, the Commit tee has learnt that a Jharkhand cadre IPS officer has
recently joined CISF as a Comma ndant on deputation basis.  This clearly proves how serious is the
Ministry to improve the service conditions of these officers. 
  
15.       The Committee expresses its sense of displeasure and indignation over the perfunctory manner in
which the Ministry of Home Affair s has been handling the whole issue pertaining to the grievances o f
direct recruit Grou p ‘A’ Officers of CISF.  A series of extensions for su bmission of its Action Taken 
Page 16 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Notes (ATNs) on the recommendations  of the Committee vis-à-vis grie vances of these officers as 
contained in its 59th Report amply proves that the Ministry has been adopting dilatory tactics in order to
avoid taking a decision in the matt er.  Earlier, the Ministry misled  Committee by furnishing factually
incorrect replies and thereafter it put the whole issue on backbur ner first by referring it to a
Departmental Committee and then by seeking one extension after the other on the ground that the report
of the said Committee was awai ted.  The Committee takes a strong exception to the evasive and
lackadaisical attitude of the officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs in dealing with the issue.  It
perceives that an attempt is being made on the part  of the Ministry to dill ydally a satisfactory and
reasonable decision in order to a dd to the agony of direct  recruit Group ‘A’ Offi cers.  The Committee, 
therefore, deplores the officials of Ministry of Home Affairs for their lackadaisical and diversionary
attitude in the matter of finding a just and lasting solution to the grievances of these officers.   
  
CHAPTER-II 
CENTRAL SECRETARIAT SERVICE 
             
Introduction 
            Central Secretariat Service (CSS) cons isting of four grades, namel y, Assistant, Section Officer,
Under Secretary and Deputy Secret ary, has been devised primarily to  manage the middle level posts in
the Central Secretariat, which is the Head Quarters of the Union Government, housing the Offices of the
Central Ministries located in Delhi/ New Delhi.  The role of the servic e is also to ensure continuity in
administration and policies.   
  
1.1       Induction to this service is through direct recruitment both at the levels of Section Officer (Group
‘B’ Gazetted) and the Assistant (G roup ‘B’ non-Gazetted), but it is  different from other Group ‘B’
services, inasmuch as this service unlike most othe r Group ‘B’ services does not form feeder service to 
any of All India Services or any of th e Central Group ‘A’ services.           It is also different from othe
r 
two services found in the Centra l Secretariat, namely, Central Secretariat Clerical Service1 (CSCS) and 
Central Secretariat St enographers’ Service 2 (CSSS) which are designed to provide assistance to the 
members of CSS and other senior and top level officers in the Secretariat.     
  
1.2       The      Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT) of the Mini stry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions is th e cadre controlling authority 3 of all three Central Secr etariat Services i.e. 
CSS, CSCS and CSSS. 
  
Historical Background of the Service 
2.0       The Central Secretariat Service (CSS) is one  of the earliest organized  services in the country. 
The origin of the service can be traced back to the year 1919, when the Imperial Secretariat Service
came into being as one of the o ff-shoots of the Lewllyn-Smith Committee which had been set up on the 
eve of the introduction of the Montague Chelmsford Reforms.  The Committee envisaged the Secretariat
Organisation in the nature of a pyr amid, the apex of which was “the Secretary” and the base of the body 
of “Assistant Secretaries”.
 
  
2.1       In March 1946, a Committee set up unde r the Chairmanship of Sir Richard Tottenham,
diagnosed the then situation prevalen t in the Secretariat as one charact erized by “too few officers of the 
right kind and too man y clerks of the wron g kind”.  The Committee su ggested that “to im prove quality 
Page 17 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

and reduce quantity, each Under Secretary’s branch should contain two sections and each section should
consist of one Superintendent and three Assistants.  Each Superinte ndent should have a smaller charge,
but would be expected to do much more original work.  He would not just supervise the work of number
of Assistants. 
  
2.2       The Central Secretariat Service (Reorg anisation and Reinforcemen t) Scheme, submitted by Si r
R.A. Gopalaswamy Iyengar, which can  be regarded as the precursor of  the service as it stands today,
was evolved in 1949.  The Scheme gave concrete shap e to the service which was designed to consist o f
following grades which is produced in the accompanying table. 
             
TABLE -I 
  
2.3       The designations of “Assistant Secretary” and ‘Assistant-in-charge’ ceased to exist.  The scheme 
provided for 100 percent promotion to  Grade-I and II from  the ranks of Superi ntendent and Asstt. 
Superintendent, respectively.  Induc tion to Grade-III of the service wa s to the extent of 50 percent by
direct recruitment based on the results of the IAS etc. examin ations, 25 percent by the Annual
Departmental Examination and 25 pe rcent by promotion from  amongst senior most  Assistants.  But in
1959, both the grades of Grade-II (S uperintendent) and Grade-III (Asst t. Superintendent) were merge d 
and became known as Section Officer Grade-II.   The two grades were merged following II Central Pay 
Commission’s recommendation.  But the merged grade was classified as Class-II post (Gazetted). 
  
2.4       The Central Secretariat Service in its presen t form was constituted with effect from        
1October 1962, with the notification of CSS Rules 1962.  Rule 3 which deals with composition of the
service, states that there shall be four grades in the service, classified as follows:- 
             
TABLE-II 
CADRE STRUCTURE OF CSS 
  
Grade Designation & Scale of Pay Class 
Grade-I             Under Secretary 
(Rs.800-50-1150) 
Class-I 
  
Grade-II Superintendent 
(Rs.530-30-800) Class-I 
Grade-III Asstt.Superintendent 
(Rs.275-325-25-500) 
Class-II 
(Gazetted) 
  
Grade-IV Assistant 
(Rs.160-450) 
Class-II 
(Non-Gazetted) 
S.No. Grade Classification 
1. Selection Grade (Deputy Secretary to Government 
of India or equivalent) 
Grade-I (Under Secretary to  the Govt. of India or 
Central Civil Service Group ‘A’  
  
Central Civil Service Group ‘A’ 
Page 18 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
Recruitment and Promotion 
3.         Recruitment and promotion to various grades are governed by the CSS Rules, 1962,
supplemented by the CSS (Promoti on to Grade-I and Selection Grad e, Regulation 1964).  The present
mode of recruitment to various grades of CSS is given below:- 
  
(i)                  Assistant Grade 4:  Recruitment to this grade is made to the extent of 50 percent by 
direct recruitment through All India Open Competititve examination earlier by UPSC and
now by Staff Selection Comm ission and 50 percent by prom otion from the UDC level
with a minimum of 5 years’ approved  service in that grade. 
(ii)                Section Officers5: (a) 20 percent of the vacancies in this grade are filled up through the
Combined Civil Services Examination, held annually by the UPSC (b) 40 percent of the
vacancies through the Limited Departmental Competitive Examination held by the UPSC
for eligible Assistants/Grade ‘C’ Stenogr aphers; (c) 40 percen t by promotion from 
amongst Assistants with a minimum of 8 years approved service. 
(iii)               Under Secretary6:  Promotion to this grade are 100 pe rcent on the basis of selection out 
of Section Officers having fulf illed the eligibility condition of 8 years’ approved service 
as Section Officer. 
(iv)              Deputy Secretary 7: Promotion to this grade is ma de from amongst Under Secretaries
having 5 years qualifying service on the basis of seniority-cum-selection. 
Role of Central Secretariat Service 
4.0       While important structural changes ha ve been made several t imes since 1919, one common
thread running through all the stages of the evolution of  the service, has been the role of the service in
ensuring continuity of administrati on in the Central Secretariat  wh ich is in common parlance called
“Secretariat Administration  and House Keeping”. 
  
4.1       In the areas of policy making, where spec ialized unifunctional services are available and also in
areas where these are not av ailable, there is need at middle leve ls of the Government personnel who are
especially trained to coordinate various expert’s opinions, ideas to present a balanced picture.  Presently,
these jobs are being largely handled by officers of the CSS, and it is because of this new role that the
service today is different from what was originally envisaged for There is also a need  to have a strong
permanent bureaucratic set up at middle levels of the Government  who would be able to provide
necessary continuity to its admini stration and policies.  The better sk ills in noting and drafting and in
interpretation of rules and regulati ons by members of CSS is well-recogni sed.  As a matter of fact, they 
facilitate maintaining the vital li nk between Parliament a nd the Central Secretariat, especially when it
comes to handling of Parliament Qu estions, Assurances, Government Bills, etc.  Another important area
where they substantially contribut e is the work relating to cadre management of various organized
services, work relating to financial management and preparation of the budget of various Departments of
2. 
3. 
4. 
equivalent) 
Section Officer Grade    
  
Assistant Grade             
  
 
 
Central Civil Service Group 
‘B’    (Ministerial) 
Central Civil Service Group ‘B’ 
(Ministerial) 
Page 19 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

the Central Government and litiga tion work of the Central Governme nt, which are also largely being
handled by the CSS officers.  Thus, the CSS ensures continuity in  the policies of the Government o f
India.  
  
4.2       Performance of work in these areas requi re a definite kind of a sk ill and specialization and
officers of CSS by virtue of experience, become well-versed in these fields. In brief, the Central 
Secretariat Service performs the following roles: 
  
(i)                  To provide especially trai ned service personnel at lowe r and middle level management
to coordinate various expert ’s opinion, ideas and experience s and analyses and dissect 
these ideas to present a balanced view for policy formulation. 
(ii)        To provide personnel, who are better  skilled in noting and draf ting  and interpretation of
rules and regulations. 
  
(iii)       To provide personne l, who would be responsible for re cord management of the Central
Secretariat. 
  
(iv)       To provide personnel, who would gi ve continuity at lower and middle levels of the
Government and would serve as  carrier of the Secretariat tradition, bridge between the
past and the present and between lower and top management of the Government. 
4.3       The Committee observes the fact that CSS has successfully coped with the fast changing
environment to diversify and widen its role while maintaining its core role of coordinating various
experts’ opinion, ideas to present an  analytical and balanced view for policy formulation and providing 
continuity at the middle leve ls of Government, has been acknowledged by both the Bandopadhyay
Committee and the V Central Pay Commission.  The V Pay Commission has laud ed the role of CSS in
following words “the Central Secr etariat Service has undergone radical  and qualitative changes and the 
tasks performed by it have become more complex, va ried and function specific.  Members of CSS have
revealed their potentialities for being able to perform much larger and complex tasks and have
acquainted themselves as creditably  as members of other services. It  would therefore be desirable to
induct fresh blood at the level of Section Officer and we have acco rdingly recommended that direct
recruitment in the Section Officer grade may continue as at present” (para 45.23). 
  
Pay Structure and Strength of CSS  
  
5.0       Pay structure of officers at different cadre  of CSS at different point of time and strength of each
cadre,  as furnished by their cadre controlling aut hority,  to the Committee is given in the accompanying
table. 
  
  
TABLE- III 
CADRE STRENGTH AND PAY STRUCTURE OF CSS 
  
Sr.No. Grade Classi-
fication 
Strength 
as on 1 
March 
2001 
Pay scale given at different point of time (in Rupees) 
V 
Central 
Pay 
Commi 
-ssion 
IV 
Central 
Pay 
Commi 
-ssion 
III 
Central 
Pay 
Commi 
-ssion 
II 
Central 
Pay  
Commi- 
ssion 
Prior to 
II 
Central 
pay 
Commi 
ssion
Page 20 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
*Before the II Central Pa y Commission there existed a designation, namely, superintendent  in Grade
II/Class-I. 
  
Problems of CSS 
6.0       Till a few years back, this service wa s well-managed and smoothly r un in terms of promotion 
and proper pay scale.  Time ly release of panels for promotion of CSS officers  to Deputy Secretary and
the higher posts was ensuring availa bility of vacancies in lower gr ades for timely promotion of the
members of feeder grades.  But unfortunately during the last fifteen years the situation has periodically
deteriorated to such an extent that there is unprece dented stagnation in all grades of the service.  Even
after completion of 15-18 years in  the grades against the eligibili ty of 8 years for promotion, the 
Assistants and Section Officers have not been regularly promoted. The problem of stagnation is so acute
in Under Secretaries grade that even  after completion of 15 years of se rvice in that grade, against the
eligibility of 5 years for promoti on, most of them are still awai ting for regular panels in Deputy
Secretary grade. 
 
  
6.1       The CSS officers, especially in the grades  of Section Officer and A ssistant are aggrieved by the
recommendations of the V Central Pay Commission, which rejected th eir claim for upgradation of the
pay scales to Rs.8000-13,500 and Rs.6500-10,500 for Section Officers a nd Assistants,  respectively,
while upgrading a number of posts and services in cluding DANICS (Delhi and Andaman Nicobar Civil
Service)/ DANIPS (Delhi and Andaman Nicobar Police Service)  etc. and DASS Grade-I (Delhi 
Administrative Subordinate Service), which were eith er similarly placed or some of them were even
lower than the grades of Secti on Officer and Assistan t with regard to me thod of recruitment,
classification of service/posts, pay scales as recommended by the previous Pay Commissions. 
  
6.2       It has been reported that the members of CSS Forum ( a joint repr esentative  body of various
Associations of CSS) are on c ontinuous relay hunger stri ke since 4 October 2000 in support of thei r
demand for better promotional avenues and upgradation of pay scales of Section Officer and Assistants. 
The CSS Forum has submitted the following broad demands to the Ministry:- 
  
(i)                  Upgradation of pay scales of  Section Officer and Assist ants to that of Rs.8000-13,500 
and Rs.6500-10,500, respectively in parity with DANICS/DANIPS etc.and DASS 
respectively. 
  
(ii)                In-situ promotion of all elig ible Assistants, Section Offi cers, Under Secretaries and 
Deputy Secretaries. 
  
(iii)               Encadrement of GCS (General Civil Service ) ministerial posts e quivalent to Unde r 
1 Deputy 
Secretary 
Group A 288  
including 
in-situ
12000-
16500 
3700-
5000 
1500-
2000 
1100-
1800 
N.A. 
2 Under 
Secretary 
Group A 766 10000-
15200
3000-
4500
1200-
1600
 900-
1250 
800-
1150
3 Section 
Officer 
Group B 
(Gazetted)  
2353 6500-
10500 
2000-
3500 
 650-
1200 
 350-900 530-
800* 
275-500
4 Assistant  Group B 
(Non-
Gazetted) 
4906 5500-
9000 
1640-
2900 
 425-800  210-530 160-450 
Page 21 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Secretary and Deputy Secr etary in the Ministries/Departmen ts to regularize the in-situ Unde r 
Secretaries and Deputy Secretaries. 
  
(iv)              320 posts of Deputy Secretary (@ 40 per year ) which were filled by other services fo r 
want of regular panel in De puty Secretary grade should be  given to CSS for outstanding
panels from 1993-2000. 
  
(v)                Immediate Cadre Review of the CSS for  which posting of a CSS Additional Secretary
is necessary. 
  
(vi)              Filling up the posts of Deputy Secretary/Director only by CSS officers. 
(vii)             Earmarking of specific posts of  Joint Secretary for CSS re storing condition of 3 years’
eligibility for promotion. 
  
(viii)           Time-bound promotions and timely holding of DPCs in different grades. 
(ix)              Introduction of Non-Functional Selection Grade at Director’s level. 
(x)                Redesignation of ‘Section Office r’ as ‘ Assistant Secretary’ and that of ‘Assistant’ as 
Processing Officer/Examining Officer. 
  
(xi)              Restoration of open pass facility to Assistants. 
6.3       Although the CSS Forum has given a long list of demands to the Ministry, the Committee
observes that except the minor dema nds at Serial No.(xi),  there are broadly two demands viz. (a)
demand relating to better promotional avenues (demands at Serial Nos.(ii) to (x) and (b) demand relating
to better pay scale {(demand at serial No. (i)} 
  
6.4.0    In the meetings of the Committee he ld on 28 March 2001 and on 10 April 2001, most of the
Members expressed their anxiety over the continua tion of the  relay hunger strike by the members o f
CSS Forum.  Members were unanim ous that certain urgent steps s hould be taken by this Committee so
that both the Ministry and the ag itating officers came to  the discussion table to resolve the issues
through dialogue and negotiation and that the relay hunger strike was called off.   
6.4.1    The Ministry had informed that the represen tatives of the CSS Fourm ha d met Minister of State
(Personnel), Secretary (Personnel) an d other senior officers in the Mi nistry a number of times.  The
Secretary (Personnel), wh ile deposing before this Committee on 10 April, 2001,  had also mentioned
that the representatives of the CS S Forum met the senior officers of the Ministry  and the Minister on
several occasions.  He also allege d that the attitude of the representatives of the CSS Forum was not
conducive for a negotiation.  The Ministry, however,  could not give details of  the representatives who
met  the Minister (Personnel) or the senior officers in the Ministry.  The Ministry  also could  not furnish
the details of the dates, agenda items and discussi ons/negotiations held betw een the representatives o f
the CSS Forum and the officials of the Ministry of Personnel. 
  
6.5       The Committee feels that in the absence of the details of the discussions/negotiations, it is
difficult to say whether any fruitful  discussion between the Ministry and the CSS Forum, if at all, was
held.  Relay hunger strike by itself reflects that no formal negotiation/discussion with the representatives
of the CSS Forum had been held after the officers proceeded on strike.  The Committee is of the view
that the Ministry should not take  it as prestige issue for not inviting the agitating officers fo r
negotiations.  The Committee urge s upon the Ministrynot to adopt vi ndictive attitude towards the
agitating officers.  The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should take the initiative by
immediately inviting the agitating officers for negotiations for a meaningful solution of the problem and
Page 22 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

the agitating officers on their turn  should withdraw their relay hunger strike.  The Committee feels that
the inaction and apathy of the Mi nistry may prolong the agitation which may further vitiate the
atmosphere in the Headquarters of the Government of India and demo ralize and demotivate the officers
further. 
  
6.6       The Committee has already given a number of  recommendations in its earlier Reports relating to
Demands for Grants of the Mini stry, dealing with mo st of the demands of the CSS Officers. 
Continuation of their agitation for a long time without making any attempt by the Ministry to resolve the
issues through discussion across the table gives the impression that the Ministry is not responsive and
there has been complete failure of  the grievance redressal machinery in the Ministry.  The Committee
takes a strong exception to indiffer ence and insensitivity of the Mini stry towards the problems of CSS
Forum.  
  
6.7       In that  context, the Ministry has in formed that in pursuance of  the recommendations made by
this Committee, a Committee of Senior Officers headed by Additi onal Secretary (Pension) has been
constituted8 with effect from 28 th February, 2001, to go into the cadr e structuring of the CSS with the 
following terms of reference  and to submit its report within three months. 
(i)                  To assess the magnitude of stagnation in Assistant grade and to suggest remedial 
measures. 
(ii)                To assess the magnitude of stagnation in the grades of Section Officer, Under Secretary 
and Deputy Secretary and Director  of CSS vis-à-vis similarly recruited/placed officers of 
other services and to recommend measures to remove stagnation. 
  
(iii)               To review the structure of CSS keeping in view various recommendations and demands 
of the CSS Associations. 
  
6.8.0    The Committee takes note of th is step of the Ministry which ha s of late reali zed the gravity o f
the problem of stagnation being faced by the members of  CSS.  But looking at th e service profile of the
members of the Committee of Seni or Officers including th e Chairman himself, it appears that no
member of the said Committee be longs to CSS and this factor alone puts a question mark on the
impartiality and fairness of the Co mmittee.    But before the expi ry of the term, the Committee was
granted six months’ extens ion (twice the terms of original time given to the Committee)  in May 2001 
i.e. upto  the end of  November 2001.  Therefore,  the Committee in its m eeting held on 13 June 2001
decided to wait for the Report of the Departmental Committee and present its Report after going through
the recommendations of the said Committee. Till the pr eparation of this Report,  it has not given any
report.   Had the Committee submi tted its report or for that matter an interim report, this Committee
could have taken note of that in its report. 
  
6.8.1    The Departmental Committee  could not comp lete its report even duri ng  the extended period. 
Moreover,  the Chairman of the Departmental Committee did not show seriousness and urgency to
submit the Report before demiting th e  office of  Addition al Secretary (Pensions) in the Ministry  on 4
October 2001 at  the end of his tenure. 
  
6.8.2    In the meeting of the Co mmittee held on 19 October 2001, the Committee decided to present its
Report at the end of extended term of the Depart mental Committee i.e.  end of November 2001 without
wasting any further time.
 
  
6.8.3    It has been informed to the Committee th rough Department of Personnel and Training letter No.
21/214/2001 – CS-I, dated 29 November 2001, that the te nure of the Committee has been extended upto 
the end of Februar
y 2002.  It has been stated therein th at  the Government, however,  will give due
Page 23 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

consideration to the recommendations  of  this Committee, when recei ved.   Similar  reply  has been
given by the said Ministry to a Question9 of Rajya Sabha. 
  
6.8.4    It has been further informed that the said Committee has also been examining the order delivered
on 12 September 2001 by the Principal Bench, Centra l Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 197/1997,
MA. No. 243/1997 relating pay scales of the Section officers of  the CSS, in pursuance of the judgement
of the CAT. 
  
6.8.5    The Committee is not happy with the manner th e Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions has granted extension to the Departmental Committee without any plausible reasons.The
Committee takes a serious view of the fact that the Departmental Co mmittee is examin ing the issue o
f
CSS at snail’s pace in  perfunctionary manner.  The entire composition of the Committee has undergone
change with two members of it,  pos ted in the Ministry of  Personnel, Public Gr ievances and Pensions, 
has been reverted back to  their respective parent cadres.  The first Chairman of the Committee (Shri
Brahma)  fully knowing his tenure in Ministry of Personnel did not exhibit  any  seriousness and
urgency to submit the Report before his tenure. 
  
6.8.6    After perusal of replies to a set of 47 supplementary questions of  some Members of this
Committee on the subject, it appears that most of problematic areas of the CSS pointed out by this
Committee in this Reports have got referred to the Departmental Committee.   Further, the Ministry
could not furnish certain data in the replies to some of   the questions mainta ining that data are not
centrally maintained.  For example, to a question as to wh at is the total number of CSS officers who
have been recruited both as Direct  Recruit Assistant and Section Officer and ho w many of  them have
been promoted to higher gr ades and what is the percentage of  respective stream of recruitment in
promotional grades, the Ministry being cadre controlling authority of CSS, in brazen faced manner have
stated that no such data is centrally maintained/a vailable. To another question, as to what were the
details  of year wise break  up of the direct recruit and  promotee Assistants stating how many from each
stream of officers  made career   progression  to which grade/stage, the  Ministry have also given similar
reply.  The Committee is surprised  as to how the Departmental Committee could asses the magnitude of
stagnation in Assistant Grade of C SS (which is its  first terms  of    reference) without the basic
information which this Committee s ought from the Ministry.  Even til l the preparation of  the Report,
these informationwhich are not cent rally maintained was not collected 10 from the individual 
Ministries/Reports and furnished to the  Committe e.  This shows the lack  of seriousness of the
Department of Personnel and Training to bring an end to the  problems associated with  the CSS as a
whole and doubts usefulness of the  Departmental Committee.  Therefore, the Committee desires that its
recommendations on those areas which were stood re ferred to the Departme ntal Committee should be
considered seriously and judiciously. 
  
6.9       The Committee is also aware that a similar Committee of se nior officers headed by Shri A.R.
Bandopadhayay, the then Additional Secretary in the Mi nistry, was alsoconstituted in 1991 to look into
the problem of stagnation of CSS in each grade.  That Committee took nearly two years in finalizing its
recommendations.  It came out with flimsy and superficial measures like timely reporting of vacancies,
bringing down eligibility criteria of Assistants for taking Section Officer Grade Limited Departmental
Competitive Exam from five years to four, discontinuing direct recruitment in Section Officer grade, etc.
without making serious attempt to assess the acute stagnation crippling the various grades of the service
and the factors responsible for the problem.  The Comm ittee notes with deep re gret the failure of the
Bandopadhyay Committee to serve its purpose for which it was constituted in 1991. 
6.10     The Ministry in its reply has, however , not mentioned if the recommendations of the
Bandopadhyay Committee were discusse d in the Departmental Council of the JCM for soliciting the
viewpoints from the CSS Officers’ Associations before finall y deciding to acce pt or not to acce pt any
Page 24 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

recommendation through an offici al communication.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government of India being a mode l and responsive employer, presum ably having a transparent method
of working, should henceforth, place reports/recommendations of such Departmental Committee o f
officers/expert bodies etc. on personnel issues having direct bear ing on the service condition before the
related Departmental Councils of JCM, inviting the view-points of the Service Associations and shoul d 
notify the acceptance/ non-acceptance of the recommendations/repor ts along with the reasons therefore
through normal official channels of communication.  
  
6.11     Against this backdrop, the suggesti on of the two members of Bandopadhyay Committee,
contained in their dissenting note holds good, i.e. the entire matter of restructuring the CSS should be
considered in a threadbare manner by an High Powered Commi ttee headed by non-official o f 
appropriate status which may at least have 2-3 members who have an expertise in cadre management
and are thoroughly familiar with CSS and its ethos.  
  
6.12       The Committee feels that any delay in fi nalisation of the recommendations of the Departmental
Committee will defeat the very purpose for which it has been c onstituted.  The Committee furthe r
recommends that the report of the Departmental Committee may be discussed with the representatives of
the CSS Forum.  In case it results in a stalemate,  the services of an inde pendent consultant, having
expertise in cadre management and familiarit y with CSS may be commissioned to give its
recommendations on restructuring of  CSS with a view to relieving th e present problem of stagnation at
the middle management level posts like US, DS a nd Director while meeting the aspiration of the
members of CSS for career progression. 
  
Stagnation in  CSS 
7.0       The Committee feels that lack of promotiona l avenues  for all four grad es   of the CSS is the
major  cause of dissatisfaction amongst the officials of  the  CSS.  The problem of stagnation in the CSS
is analysed in  the following sub-heads: 
  
(a)                Stagnation in  Assistant Grade 
(b)               Stagnation in Section Officer and Under Secretary Grades  
7.1       To the question as to stagnation in the gr ades  of CSS and its comparable grades under Central
             Government against their normal period of eligibility for promotion to the next higher grade, the
Ministry has furnished comparativ e position of stagnation in various comparable grades  existing in
some other similarly  placed services, namely, Ar med Forces Hqr. Civil Service, Railway Board
Secretariat Service, which is reproduced in the accompanying table: 
  
TABLE-IV 
STAGNATION IN GRADES OF CSS AND COMPARABLE SERVICES   
IN THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
  
Name of 
Service  
Post or equivalent post/Group/Scale of pay Minimum 
Service 
prescribed for 
promotion from 
the lower grade 
Average 
time taken 
for 
promotion 
Central 
Secretariat 
Service 
Assistant (Group ‘B’) Rs.5500-9000 
S.O.(Group ‘B’-Gazetted) –Rs.6500-10500 
U.S.(Group ‘A’)-Rs.10000-15200 
5 Years 
8 Years 
  
13 years 
14  years 
  
Page 25 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
7.2.0        (a) Stagnation in Assistant Grade 
  
Assistant Grade is at the lowest rung of the CSS and is also feeder grade to the Grade of Section 
Officer.  Recruitment to Assistant Grade is made through two channels:- 
  
(i)                  Direct recruitment through Assistant’s Grade Examination conducted by Commission11
i.e. 50%. 
  
(ii)                Promotion from feeder grade i.e. UDC having five years approved services i.e. 50%. 
  
7.2.1    For promotion to the Grade of Section Officer, 8 years approved service in the grade of Assistant
is required.  Promotion to the Gr ade of Section Officer from amongst the direct  recruit and promotee
Assistants was tilted towards the di rect recruit in view of the proc edure of appointment meant for them
which has caused stagnation particularly amongst the promotee Assistants. 
  
7.2.2    As per the appointment pro cedure, a direct recrui t Assistant who got appointment in Select List
gets substantive appointment after completion of pr obation period of two years but for the promotion to
the grade of Section Officer the pe riod from the date of joining is counted as the approved service
whereas the case is not so in the case of prom otee Assistant who undergoe s the following types o f
appointment.  Usually it takes nor mally more than 16 to 20 years to  get promotion to  Section Office r
grade in the said procedure. 
  
7.2.3    Prior to dispensation 12 of Long Term Appointme nt, a UDC used to be  promoted/appointed to
the same post of Assistant, four time in the same pay scale which is as below::- 
(i)                  Short Term Appointment/promotion i.e. on ad-hoc basis – DOPT OM No.20/17/88-CS-
II dated 10.5.1988 
  
(ii)        Long Term Appointment – on Tempor ary/ Long Term basis- Ru le 13(7) of CSS Rules,
1962.  
            (counted for promotion through Li mited Department Exam for Section Officer  but does
not count for promotion through seniority quota) 
  
D.S.(Group ‘A’)-Rs.12000-16500 8  Years 
5 Years 
13 years 
13 years
Armed Forces 
Hqr. Civil 
Service 
Assistant  (Group ‘B’)-5500-9000 
A.C.S.O. (Group ‘B’-Gazetted) Rs.6500-
10500 
CSO (Group ‘A’)-Rs.10000-15200 
D.S. 
(Group ‘A’)-Rs.12000-16500
5 Years 
5 Years 
  
8 Years 
5 Years 
15 years 
18 years 
  
10 years 
17 
years
Name of 
Service  
Post or equivalent post/Group/Scale of pay Minimum 
Service 
prescribed for 
promotion from 
the lower grade 
Average 
time taken 
for 
promotion 
Railway Board 
Secretariat 
Service 
Assistant (Group ‘B’) –Rs.5500-9900 
S.O.(Group ‘B’-Gazetted)-Rs.6500-10500 
U.S.(Group ‘A’)-Rs-10000-15200 
D.S.(Group ‘A’)-Rs.12000-16500 
5 Years 
8 Years 
  
8 Years 
5 Years 
7 Years 
11 Years 
  
11 Years 
9 Years
Page 26 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

(ii)                Select  List Appointment  - Rule 13(6) of CSS Rules, 1962 
( counted for promotion through Limited Depa rtment Exam for Section Officer  but does
not count for promotion through seniority quota) 
  
(iv)       Substantative appointment – Rule 13(6), 18 and Regulation 3( 3) to Fourth Schedule o f
CSS Rules, 1962   
(counted for seniority for promotion through seniority quota.) 
7.2.4    After  dispensation of long term promotion, DOPT  came  up with a substitute policy o f
recruitment to regular vacancies instead  of to  substantive vacancies  and  temporary/long term
vacancies in 1991 13  those UDC who are appoint ed in the  Select List for the year 1981 were made 
eligible for consideration for appointment as As sistant against the recrui tment year 1989.  It is
mentioned that while the dispensation order was is sued, Select List for th e year 1985 was completed 
therefore Long Term appointees of  the years 1983-88 would have become consider for appointment
against the recruitment year of 1986 instead of recruitment year 1989.  
7.2.5    The approved service has been redefined in 1995 14  which  modified the definition of the term 
given in the CSS Rules,  thereby service rendered in  long term appointment  would not be  considered
for seniority. Thus long term Appointees ( LTA)  numbering 156015  in the Select  List year  1989 were 
the worst sufferer since th eir long term services became infructuous.  They have completed 12 years 
excluding  their  LTA  and yet to get the promotion to Se ction Officer grade. The Ministry has admitted
that the average  period taken for  Assistant  to Section Officer is 14 years of approve d service in both
direct recruit and promotee Assistants as against the eligibility period  of  8  years.  
  
7.3       On the issue of problem of stagnation in various grades of C SS, the Ministry has been
maintaining the stand that owing to protracted liti gation in Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) and
Supreme Court on inter-se se niority of Section Officers, panels of  CSS officers for promotion to Under 
Secretary and Deputy Secretary leve ls could not be finalized after 1986 for Under Secretaries and afte r
1993 for Deputy Secretaries. 
  
7.4       The Ministry has admitted that there is apparent stagnation in  Section Officer and Unde r
Secretary grades.  The Ministry has further stated that Section Office rs with 16 years or more service
were awaiting promotion to the next higher grade.  In order to reduce the prevailing stagnation in the
Section Officers’ grade of CSS, the Government de cided to give in-situ upgr adations to 225 Section 
Officers and orders were issued in September, 1998 in the fi rst phase.  Since the situation had still not
improved, it was decided to give personal upgradation to all such Section Officers with 12 years o f
approved service.  About 900 Section Officers have b een given in situ promot ion to the level of Unde r
Secretary in two batches in 1998 and 1999.  Simila rly, with a view to re moving stagnation, 256 Unde r
Secretaries were upgraded on persona l/in-situ basis and the senior-most 256 officers (based on common 
seniority list of Section Officers dated 3/12/1997) have been given the benefit of in-situ upgradation. 
  
7.5       The Ministry, however, has  admitted that there is stagnation in the grade of CSS Assistants. 
The Ministry has stated that for the purpose of promotion from Assistant grade to Section Officer grade,
approved service is taken with reference to the year of Select List in which they are so included.  On that
basis, as per the Ministr y, there are no such Assistan ts awaiting promotion with 16-17 years of service.  
Assistants belonging to Select List  of 1986 were being considered for promotion against the Select List
of Section Officer grade for the year 1999.  The Ministry has furt her stated that there are some
Assistants who have rende red 16-17 years of service, which al so include service rendered by them on 
“long term” basis.  The system of  ‘long term’ appointments was disc ontinued from the year 1988.  The
ad hoc service does not qualify for seniority or approved service.  In the case of Assistants, select list for
promotion to Section Officers grade were being issued regularly.  The Ministry is of the view that in the
Page 27 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

case of Section Officers, there wa s a protracted l itigation on the question of interpretation of rules
relating to inter-se seniority between promotee and direct recruit Section Officer due to which no regular 
select list of Under Secretary Gr ade could be issued after 1983.  As  the case of S ection Officer and
Under Secretary cannot be compared with Assistant grade, the Mini stry has declined to give the benefit
of in-situ promotion.  The Minist ry has further contended that fo llowing the introduction of Assured 
Career Progression (ACP),  career prospects of the Assistants can be well ta ken care of.  No separate
scheme of promotion can be devise d for Secretariat staff alone due to its wider legal and financial
implications.   
  
7.6       In reply to a question put by the Committee as to how many Assistants are eligible for promotion
to the Section Officer grade, the Ministry has replie d that out of a total of 4906 Assistants, nearly 2000
of them are eligible for promotion to Section Offi cer grade having put in 8 ye ars of approved service. 
The figure obviously does not include the promotee Assistants who have put in ‘ah-hoc’ and ‘long term’
service in Assistants’ grades.  In  another question as to what annua l inflow of regular vacancies in 
Section Officers grade is being made  available to these eligible Assi stants, the Ministry has given the
following data:- 
  
TABLE-V 
  
7.7       To another question as to what is the expe cted period by which the junior most eligible Assistant
as on 31 December, 2000, will be prom oted on regular basis, the Minist ry, instead of giving a definite
reply, has furnished an evasive re ply stating that their promotion would depend on several factors like
availability of vacancie s, impeding move of the Government to rightsize the Government machinery. 
The Ministry, to another question as to why in-situ promotion as an interim measure may not be given to
all eligible Assistants on year to year basis, has replied that in-situ upgradation after introduction of ACP 
scheme will open a Pandora’s Box.  The Ministry has, however, not furn ished the details as to how it 
will impact on all the Central Govern ment Departments and what is the total financial implication, if in-
situ promotion is given to  Assistants.  The Promotee  Assistants who are sta gnating  for more than 12
years are not eligible for promot ion under ACP Scheme, as they have  already  got  two promotions. 
Further Financial burden would not be  much on the  exchequer as all those A ssistant have crossed the
minimum limit of pay scale of Section Officer.   
  
7.8       The Ministry has claimed that a direct re cruit Assistant can easily ge t promoted to the grade o
f
Section Officer and Under Secretary or reach these levels unde r ACP scheme afte r 12 and 24 years o f
service respectively. On a question as to how   many direct recruit Assistants have been promoted up to
Under Secretary/Deputy Secretary rank giving the year-wise break-up, the Ministry has avoided to 
provide any such information stati ng that the grades of Assistant a nd Section Officers are decentralized
among 33 cadres and hence detailed information sinc e 1970 is not available.  This Committee observes
that the Ministry could have asked these cadres to provide requisite informati on. If concerned files are
not available, information can be obtained from the records like services books of the officers and the
Pay Bill Re gisters as these records are usuall y retained u pto 35-40 years.  This Commit tee directs that 
Year 
  
  
1 
Vacancies in Limited 
Departmental  Quota
 
  
2 
Vacancies in Seniority 
Quota 
  
3
Total 
(2+3) 
  
4 
1995 102 103 205 
1996 115 129 244 
1997  58 70 128 
1998  16 18  34 
1999  10 18  28 
Page 28 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

the Ministry should collect the requisite informati on and submit the same in the Action Taken Report. 
This Committee does not understand how could the Ministry make a sweeping claim about the normal
career progression of a direct r ecruit Assistant without having the requisite data/information.  This
Committee desires that th e Ministry should refrain in future from making such unsubstantiated and
unsupported claims.   
  
7.9       To another question whether statutory CS S rules provide normal care er progression of a direct
recruit Assistant upto Deputy Secretar y grade, i.e., for three promotions  and that if it is true, why the
Ministry intends to restrict their career progression by granti ng only two promotions under ACP 
scheme, the Ministry has given an ambiguous reply.  It has stated that there is  no specific provision
entitling CSS Assistants to progre ss atleast upto Deputy Secretary’s le vel, but they are eligible fo r 
promotion to Deputy Secretary as per CSS Rules.  On the point of ACP Scheme, the Ministry has
admitted that the ACP Scheme is not  specifically meant for the Assistant of CSS.  The Committee takes
serious note of the fact that the Mi nistry gave  correct and factual position only when faced with direct
and specific questions, otherwise either it suppresses information or gave ambiguous information.  
  
7.10     As per Rule 3 of the CSS Rules 1962, there shall be four grades in the Service, namely, Selection
Grade (Deputy Secretary), Grade- I (Under Secretary or  equivalent), Section Officer Grade an d
Assistants Grade.  In other words, as per stat utory provisions of the C SS Rules, the normal caree r
progression for a direct re cruit Assistant is upto the grade of Deputy Secr etary.  As per the terms o f 
conditions of service, a direct recruit Assistant has to be given a minimum of three promotions. 
  
7.11     The Committee has gone through the provisi ons of the ACP  Scheme, as circulated by the
Department of Personnel & Trai ning vide OM No.35034/1/97-Estt. (D) dated August 9, 1999.  In the 
opening para of the Scheme, the objective of the Scheme is declared to be as follows:-   
  
“The ACP Scheme needs to be vi ewed as a ‘Safety Ne t’ to deal with the problem of genuine 
stagnation and hardship faced by the employees due to lack of adequate promotional avenues”. 
  
The Scheme at para 4 states:- 
  
“Introduction of the ACP Sche me should however, in no case affect normal (regular)
promotional avenues available on the basis of vacancies.  Attempts needed to improve promotion
prospects in organizations/cadres on functiona l grounds by way of organizational study, cadre
review, etc. as per prescribed norms, should not be given up on the ground that the ACP Scheme
has been introduced”.   
At para 5 of the Scheme, it has been stated that- 
  
“vacancy based regular promotions , as distinct from financial upgradation, shall continue to be
granted after due scrutiny by regular DPC as per relevant rules/guidelines”. 
  
7.12     The Scheme further declares that- 
  
“while in respect of Group ‘B’,  ‘C’ and ‘D’ services/ posts, promotion shall continue to be duly 
earned, it is proposed to adopt the ACP Scheme in a modified form  to mitigate hardship in cases
of acute stagnation either in a cadre or in an isolated post.  Keeping in view all relevant factors, it
has, therefore, been decided to grant two financial upgradatio ns on completion of 12 years and
24 years of regular service, respectively”. 
  
7.13     The Committee, however, fails to understand why the Ministry has decl ined to grant in-situ 
promotion to eli gible sta gnating Assistants, sim ply on the ground that ACP Scheme has been
Page 29 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

introduced.  The Committee does not find any rationa le of linking the matter of introduction of ACP
Scheme with that of rejection of in-situ promotion to Assistants.  The Committee feels that granting o f 
in-situ promotion to eligible Assist ants is rather complementary inst ead of being contradictory to the 
introduction of the ACP Scheme. 
  
7.14     The Committee is of the vi ew that confining the bright young pe rsons selected on all India basis
in the Assistant grade to the purview of th e ACP Scheme, which provi des only two financial
upgradation, that too the first one after 12 years and the second one af ter 24 years, without subjecting
them to the process of selection, will be unjust on the part of the Ministry.  The Committee is also of the
opinion that the directly re cruited Assistants, unlike other subordinate services, are recr uited with the
specific purpose of assisti ng and in the process getting involved in the decision making process of the
Union Government and their career  progression has been designed upt o Deputy Secretary level in the
statutory recruitment rule itself.  Therefore, restricting their career progression to just two financial
upgradation, without undertaking the exercise of ca dre review/cadre-restruct uring for their timely 
upward movement, may lead to the violation of the service rules of the directly recruited Assistants, who
are governed by the service conditions prevalent at the time of their appointment.   
  
7.15     The Ministry has admitted that non-release of regular panels for promotion to Under Secretary
grade and Deputy Secretary grade re sulted in acute stagnation in Se ction Officer and Under Secretary
grades.  The Ministry, therefore, decided to give in -situ promotion to such stagnating officers in both
grades in phases.  But the contention of the Mini stry for not giving simila r benefit to stagnating
Assistants is not convincing.  Non-pr omotion of 1986 select list of Assi stants on regular basis even till 
today against the background of gra dual shrinking in number of vacanc ies in Section Officer grade fo r
promotion to the Assistants gives a fair idea that unl ess some drastic step by way of in-situ promotion is 
given, it is bound to have demora lizing effect on the officers a nd thereby seriously undermine thei r
efficiency and productivity. 
  
7.16     The Committee, therefore, recommends th at the Assistants who have put in ten years o f
approved service should be given in-situ prom otion pending completion of cadre review/cadre
restructure of the CSS. 
             
  
  
8.0       (b) Stagnation in Section Officer and Under Secretary grade 
  
            In reply to a question, the Ministry has admitted that as on 1 March, 2001, out of total number o
f
2353 Section Officers, 915 of them who were stagnating for more than fifteen years have been given in-
situ promotion to Under Secretar y grade and another 600 Section Offi cers are eligible for promotion to
the next higher grade having  fulfilled the eligibility condition of 8 years.  Since regular panels have not
been brought out since 1986, it is diffi cult to assess how many regular vacancies in Under Secretary
grade will be ava ilable to these 1500 Section Officers.  Since there ar e only 766 posts of Unde r
Secretary grade as on 1.3.2001,  made av ailable to CSS officers, it will  take not less than two decades
for promotion of these officers, if it is assumed that the expected number of annual vacancies in Unde r
Secretary grade will be about 100. 
  
8.1       The Ministry has not given any plan or c oncrete proposal to meet th e career progression of this
huge force of Section Officers against the limited vacancies in Under Secretary grade available only due
to retirement of the members of the service in view of the fact that 228 Under Secretaries who have been
given in-situ promotion as on date have not vacated these posts due to non-availability of physical posts 
of Deputy Secretaries.  Although Supreme Court had resolved the seniority issue between the two
streams of members of CSS in 1997 and thereafter the Ministr y has finalized and operated the Common
Page 30 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Seniority List (CSL) of the Sec tion Officers in order to prepar e the long pending panels of Unde r
Secretary and Deputy Secretary,the Ministry is still trying to avoid its responsibility by stating refrains
like  “protracted litigation”.  This approach of the Ministry reflects its insens itivity, lack of seriousness 
and sincerity to the genuine problem of stagnation in CSS. 
  
8.2       In the Action Taken Report on the 60 th Report of this Committee, the Ministry, while expressing
its inability to evolve a scheme to give  in-situ  promotion to all eligible Section Officers on year to year
basis until the panels of Under Secr etaries are prepared, has given the following reasons – (a) it is not 
feasible to evolve a scheme ex clusively for CSS officers; and (b ) it will be a precedent for othe r
comparable services to demand similar benefit, resu lting in “enormous” expendi ture.  But the Ministry, 
however, has not given details of such “enormous” expenditure. 
  
8.3       This Committee observes that the justif ication given for not accepting the recommendations o f
the Committee to clear stagnation of  CSS is far from satisfactory.  The Committee understands that by
agreeing to similar proposals of AF HQ and Railway Board Secretariat,  etc. which have similar siste r
services like CSS, the Ministry has already set a precedent for comp arable services.  The Committee
does not find anything wrong in the Ministry’s agreeing to such in -situ promotion proposals of the 
AFHQ and the Railway Board Secretariat.  But th e Committee does not accept the explanation of the
Ministry to deny similar scheme to CSS on the pl ea of “enormous expenditu re”, Non-acceptability o f 
the recommendation of this Committ ee by the Ministry on the plea of  huge financial burden is not
convincing especially at a time when a large number of Section Officers have crossed or are at the verge
of  crossing  the minimum of the pay scale of Under Secretary. The Co mmittee,  therefore, recommends
that the Section Officers  who have put in ten years of regular service should be given in-situ promotion 
pending cadre review/cadre restruct ure of the CSS for which a comm ittee of senior officers has been
constituted.  
  
8.4       The Committee reiterates its recommendati on given in para 19.4 of th e Sixtieth Report and asks
the Ministry to prepare the Select List (panels) of Under Secretaries and publish the same in a time
bound manner, failing which the Scheme of in-situ promotion on year to year basis should be given. 
  
8.5       As the process of preparation of regular panels and vacation of the posts by Deputy Secretaries
from other services will  take some more time, the Committee r ecommends continuation of  the scheme
of in-situ promotion to stagnating Under Secretaries also to keep the members of  the service motivated. 
  
Cadre Management of CSS 
  
9.0       As per the statistical data maintained by the Ministry, the number of  CSS Officers working at
Deputy Secretary and Un der Secretary posts as on 1.7.2000, was 117 and 533, re spectively. In reply to
a  supplementary question, the Ministry has admitt ed that there were only 60 CSS officers holding
physical posts of Deputy Secretary.  But surprisingly as per the latest data as on 1.3.2001, the number of
CSS Officers in Deputy S ecretary and Under Secretary posts has been shown to be 288 and 766,
respectively.  The Committee does not understand the reasons for sudden spurt in the increase of posts
made available to CSS officers with in a span of less than a year.  On a question posed to the Ministry
about the reasons for a sudden spurt of the physical posts of Deputy Secretary and Under Secretary that
too for CSS Officers only, th e Ministry has not categor ically admitted that ther e has been increase o f
physical posts.  The Ministry had replied that the figures indicating the number of CSS Officers working
on posts at Deputy Secretary and Under Secretar y levels as on 1.3.2001 are 288 and 766, respectively
and those reflect that such num ber of CSS Officers are working as Deputy Secretaries and Unde r
Secretaries.  The Ministry had furt her replied that in the figure of  Deputy secretary, the officers of CSS
who are working as Deputy Secretary on personal up-gradation basis have also been included as they are 
getting all the benefits of pay, status  etc., as admissible to the officers of the rank of De puty Secretary. 
Page 31 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

As far as the figure of Under Secretaries is c oncerned, it indicates th e number of CSS Officers
occupying physical posts at the leve l of Under Secretary. This Com mittee views that clubbing of two
different types of information, i.e ., the number of officers holding physical posts of Deputy Secretary
and the number of officer s promoted on in-situ basis, is wr ong and misleading.  This Committee,
therefore, rejected the reply/ information given by the Ministry and directed to give separate information
of physical posts in Deputy Secret ary grade held by CSS officers a nd in-situ Deputy Secretary in the 
monthly statement published by the Establishment Officer’s  office.    
  
9.1       In reply the Ministry has informed that as on 1.3.2001 only 60 CSS Officers are holding physical
posts of Deputy Secretary grade whereas members of IAS alone hold 122 physical posts of Deputy
Secretary.  This clearly proves that out of 288, as  many as 228 CSS Officers (288-60) are only given 
promotion to Deputy Secretary on in-s itu basis while holding the physical  posts of Unde r Secretary.  If 
the Ministry has added this number in Deputy Secretary grad e to show it to be 288, the posts of Unde r
Secretary should have been shown to be 538, i.e.(766-228), not 766. 
  
9.2.      To another question as to whether 228 CSS Officers holding equal number of physical posts o f
Under Secretary have been given in-situ promotion and that whether the number of ‘766’ shown as CSS 
Officers working in the level of Under secretary includes the figure of ‘228’ who have  been promote d
only on in-situ basis, the Ministry having been cornered by specific que stions, has admitted the facts. 
But when the Ministry was further as ked as to whether it is a fact that the fi gure ‘288’ shown as CSS 
officers working in the posts of Deputy Secretary as on 1.3.2001 has been inflated ( 60 physical posts of
Deputy Secretaries + 228 Under Secretar ies promoted on in-situ basis ), the Ministry instead of giving a 
straight forward clear reply has stated that the offi cers who have been promot ed as Deputy secretary on
in-situ basis have been included  in the figure as given on 1.3.2001 because they ar e getting all the 
benefits in the form of salary of  Deputy Secretary.  But to another query as to whet her the Ministry
admits that the figure ‘766’ show n as CSS officers working in the posts of Under Secretary as on
1.3.2001 has also been inflated by in cluding this figure of 228 with the number of Under Secretaries,
shown to be 533 as on 1.7.2001,  the Mi nistry, has admitted that in the figure 766, the officers who have
been promoted as in-situ Deputy Secretaries, have been included because the substantive posts held by
them are that of Under Secretary.  To a part questi on posed to the Ministry as  to what is the reason fo r
not including the figure of 915 CSS S ection Officers promoted as in-situ Under Secretaries in the figure 
of 766 shown to be the total number of CSS Under Secretarie s, the Ministry has stated that the officers
who have been promoted as Under Secretary on in-situ basis have not been included in the figure of 766 
as the cadre of the Section Officers is decentralized  and the Ministry of Pe rsonnel does not control such
officers.   
  
9.3.      The Committee observes with deep anguish  that the above replies of the Ministry are
inconsistent, ambiguous and self cont radictory. The Ministry applies two different se ts of norms in the
same situation and tries to justify its own cont radictory replies on each  occasion.  If 228 CSS Unde
r
Secretaries are promoted as in-situ Deputy Secretaries, and are included in the list of Deputy Secretaries, 
they shall not be included in the list of Under Secretar ies again.  Moreover, si nce 228 CSS Officers do
not hold the physical posts of Deputy Secretary, they can  not be compared on equal footing with othe r
members of Group ‘A’ and AIS o fficers appointed as Deputy Secr etaries though Central Staffing
Scheme.  All these actions of the Ministry on compilat ion of statistical data es pecially on CSS gives the
impression of its prejudiced and biased approach towards CSS.  By  giving such inflated figures of the
share of CSS both in Deputy Secretar y and Under Secretary grade in the Secretariat,  the Ministry tried
to mislead the Committee by depicti ng  a false picture of  better pr omotional avenues in CSS so as to
justify its inaction for managing the cadre of CSS effectively and smoothly.  This Committee takes
serious note of this approach and attitude of the Ministry of Personnel.   
  
9.4       The wa y, the statistical fi gures have been shown b y the office of Establishment Officer in the
Page 32 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Ministry, one cannot be naive to belie ve that it is just a clerical or typographical error.  The Committee
is convinced that this is an attemp t on the part of the Mini stry to inflate the figures in respect of CSS by
way of manipulating statis tics with the clear objective of mislead ing this Committee.  The Committee
has taken a serious note of this act of the Ministry and directs th e Ministry to enquire as to why the
inflated figures in respect of C SS Officers has been projected and fix responsibility and exemplary
punishment be given to the officer treating the Committee in such casual manner. 
  
Authorised Permanent Strength 
  
9.5       In response to another question, the Mini stry has shown the Authorised Permanent Strength in
Deputy Secretary grade of CSS to  be 133 as on 1.5.1984.  This Committe e fails to understand why the
outdated figures has been supplied when the question relates to current status.  The Ministry has not
explained as to why such data has been given.  The Ministry is the Cadre Controlling Authority of CSS
and the Deputy Secretary grade is the topmost cadre grade of CS S.  This Committee wonders if the
Ministry intends to say that the Authorised Pe rmanent Strength of Deputy Secretary has not undergone
any change during the last seventeen  years.  On a supplementary ques tion to the Ministry to state the
present Authorized Permanent Strength of CSS in  both the grades of U nder Secretary and Deputy
Secretary as on 1.5.2001, the reply of the Ministry is very strange and surpri sing.  The Ministry has
replied that the concept of Authorised Permanen t Strength of CSS in Grad e-I (Under Secretary ) an d 
Selection Grade (Deputy Secretar y) of CSS is no longer relevant  because all the posts of Unde r
Secretary and Deputy Secretary in various Ministries are now to be filled in accordance with the Central
Staffing Scheme.  
  
9.6.      The Committee does not understand how a statutory provision can be made irrelevant simply on
the plea of the Ministry that all the posts of Under Secretary and Deput y  Secretary are now to be filled
in accordance with the Central Staffing Scheme which is a mere compendium of  executive instructions. 
The Ministry intends to say as if  this appointment in these posts has been initiated just now.  The
Committee has been recording its obs ervations all through its earlier reports that there has been serious
undermining of the provisions of statutory CSS Rules in the appointment in the posts of Under Secretary
and Deputy Secretary.   
9.7. 0   Rule 6 of CSS Rules captioned as “Author ized Permanent Strength and Temporary Strength o f
the Service” spells out the following provisions:- 
  
(1)        The authorized permanent strength of the various grades of the service on the appointe d
day shall be as specified in the third schedule. 
  
(2)        After the appointed day, the authorized permanent strength of the various grades shall be
such as may, from time to time, be determined by the Central Government. 
  
(3)               The cadre authority may make temporary additions to a cadre as it may  
            deem necessary from time to time.”   
  
9.7.1    The plea of the Ministry that Authorized Permanent Strength is irrelevant is illogical as it
violates the statutory provi sions and hence is not acceptable. The negative approach of the Ministry is
deplorable. The Committee, therefor e, recommends that there shall be  clear-cut separa tion between the 
cadre posts of CSS and the posts wh ich will be filled up Central Staf fing Scheme by the officers othe r
than CSS.  The Ministry shall determine the posts specifically for CSS expressed in number, which shall
form the Authorized Permanent Strength of CSS bot h in the grades of Un der Secretary and Deputy
Secretary.  In view of acute and unmanageable stagnation in Section Officer grade, except a few posts,
all the posts of Under Secretar y and De puty Secretary should form the part of Authorized Permanent
Page 33 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Strength of CSS and should be in cluded in the third schedule of the CSS Rules of 1962 as provided
under Rule 6 of CSS Rules, 1962.  Th e Ministry should immediately in itiate prompt action to fix the
Authorized Permanent Strength of each grade of CSS,  i.e, Assistant, Secti on Officers Unde r Secretary
and Deputy secretary Ministry-Department wise and inform the Committee . 
  
9.8       The Ministry has taken this stand that al l the posts of rank of Unde r Secretary and above are to
be filled on tenure deputation basis from  All India Serv ices and the Central Group ‘A’  Services 
participating in the Central St affing Scheme excluding such posts  of Under Secretary and Deputy
Secretary as  filled by C SS Officers.  The Ministry  therefore conte nds that if the posts of Deputy
Secretary are reserved for the CSS, such reservat ion, apart from going against the spirit behind the
central staffing scheme, w ould also deprive the central government  obtaining the services of officers
from diverse sources of manning posts at that level.  Further such  reservation would also in effect deba r
officers of AIS and Central Group ‘A ’ services.  The Ministry further argues that allowing only the CSS 
which is basically a Group ‘B’ se rvice to man these posts would amount to depriving members o f
Group-‘A’ and AIS to come to the Secretariat on central deputation at Deputy Secretary level. 
9.9       In this context, the attention of this  Committee has been  drawn to the opening para of the
original version of the central staffing scheme which was introduce d by an executive instruction in
1957.  It stipulated that a ll the senior administrative posts  of  and above the post of Deputy Secretary
would be included within the purvi ew of central staffing scheme.  The Committee fails to understand
how the post of Under Secretary can be regarded as a “Senior administrative post”.  The factual position 
is that the post of Under Secretary is equivalent to Senior Time Sc ale (STS) post of All India Service
and Central Group ‘A’ Services.  The Ministry has been  consistently concealing the facts as to how and 
under what circumstances, the post of Under Secretary was included in  the Central Staffing Scheme o f
1957 when the Scheme was originally introduced.  The Committee however, has reason to believe that
the post of Under Secretary was intentionally included while finally de leting the words “Senio r 
administrative posts of th e Central Govt.” from  the scheme, as it is found in  the printed version of the 
central staffing scheme circulated on 5th January, 1996.  The action of the Ministry to distort the original
scheme is objectionable.  In spite of repeated recommendations of this Committee to exclude the post o f
Under Secretary which is the cadre post of CSS from the central staf fing scheme, it has fallen on dea f
ears of the Ministry. 
  
9.10     Even as per para 5(ii) of the 1996 Central Staffing Scheme, it has been categorically stated that a
specified number of posts at the le vels of Under Secretary and Deputy Secretary will be treated as posts
of their cadre and the posts over and above there will  be filled under Central Staffing Scheme.  A plain
reading of this reveals th at it is necessary to know  out of the total posts av ailable in De puty Secretary
level what is the exact number of posts which have  been earmarked to CSS,  which will facilitate
preparation of regular panels and enable a CSS Under Secretary to know when he/she will be covered in
the panel.  On the other hand, the earmarking of definite posts in Deputy Secretary Grade will also make
it clear as to how many posts will  be filled up from amongst the othe r services participating in the
Central Staffing Scheme.  The argument of the Ministry for not “reservi ng” the posts for CSS in Central 
Staffing Scheme does not hol d good in view of the sp ecific provision of the scheme.  The Committee,
therefore rejects such contention of the Ministry. 
  
9.11     The other argument of the Ministry that ‘res ervation’ of all the posts of Deputy Secretary to CSS 
would amount to debarring officers  of Group ‘A’ Services and allo wing only the CSS which is Gr.’B’
service to man these posts is also  not acceptable in view of  the fact that in accordance with the
schedule Part-I, of the Central Ci vil Services CCS  (Clarification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965,  
Central Secretariat Service in the grades of (a) Selection Grade (D eputy Secretary) (b) Grade-I (Unde r 
Secretary) is a Group ‘A’ Service.  As the CSS Officers of Grad e-I (Under Secretary)  are appointed as 
Deputy Secretary on promotion, the argument of Ministry is factually wrong and fallacious. 
  
Page 34 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

9.12     The attention of this Committee has been draw n to another fact that th e Statutory Rules of CSS
has debarred the Ministry to exclude  the duty posts of Selection Grad e (Deputy Secretary) and Grade-I 
(Under Secretary) from the cadre of CSS.  Rule 7 of CSS Rules, 1962, declares as follows: 
  
“Rule-7. Exclusion of duty posts from the cadre 
Except in the case of the Selection Grade or Grade-I of the Service, any duty post in a Grade may 
be declared by the cadre authority, with the conc urrence of the central government. in the Deptt.
of Personnel & Administrative Reforms in the Ministry of Home Affairs to be excluded from the
cadre- 
  
(i)
                  if such post is required for,  the time being, to be filled  by the appointment of persons
possessing special or technical qualification or experience; or 
(ii)                if it is necessary,  for the time being to fill such post by a person other than the cadre
officer of the appropriate grade and the post shall remain excluded from the cadre so long
as such declaration remains in force”. 
  
9.13     The Ministry has been asked to state whet her Rule 7 of CSS Rule, 1962 expressly prohibits the
Government from excluding any posts  in Grade-I (Under Secretary or equivalent) and Selection Grade 
(Deputy Secretary or equivalent) and if so, under what provisions of the constitutional/ statutory law, the
posts of CSS have been excluded from CSS and included in the Central Staffi ng Scheme which is a
mere executive order of the Gove rnment, and that this post are to  be filled up fr om amongst the
members of All India Services and Group ‘A’ services. In view of the explicit provision under Rule 7 of
CSS Rules, the Committee finds that there has b een violation of statutor y rule by the Ministry,
accordingly  it  expects  the Ministry to accept the fact. But instead of admitt ing the Ministry gives not
only an evasive but factually wrong reply with clear inte ntion to shy away from the pertinent and
specific question.  To the above quest ion theMinistry has replied that as per the provisions contained in
para 5(ii) of the Central Staffing Scheme, in so far as the officers from CSS are concerned, a specified
number of posts at the level of Under Secretary and Deputy Secretary are to be treated as part of thei r
cadre, and the posts over and above  these are filled under the Central Staffing Scheme.  As long as the
posts at the level of Under Secret ary and Deputy Secretary are held by CSS Officers, these posts stand
outside the Central Staffing Scheme.  The strength of the CSS in the Selection grade and Grade –I of the 
CSS is supposed to be fixed unde r the Central Secretariat Servi ce Rules 1962.  Besides under Central
Staffing Scheme no post is specifically reserved for any particular service/cadre.  The Cadre posts in the
Selection Grade and Grade-I of the CSS has not been identified.  However, every effort is made to 
appoint only CSS officers at the level of Under Secretaries and to adhe re to the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet’s directi ons of ensuring not less than 25% representation for the CSS at the
level of Deputy Secretary.  The Co mmittee observes that the reply of th e Ministry is evasive, factually
wrong, contradictory and misleading.   The reply of the Ministry is un tenable and the Committee directs
the Ministry to follow the provisi ons of statutory Rule 7 of CSS Rules, 1962, a nd if necessary, amend
the provisions of the Central Staffing Scheme in th e light of the statutory CSS Rules, giving  no scope
for ambiguity either in e xpression of the provisions of Central Staffing Scheme or in the interpretation
of such provisions.  
  
9.14     The Committee is of the opinion that whatever amendments that have taken place by way o
f
Office Memoranda, issued from time to time to ha ve the posts of Deputy Secretary and Under Secretary
included in Central Staffing Sche me, following introduction of stat utory CSS Rules in 1962, are void. 
The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry to amend the rele vant provisions of the Central
Staffing Scheme for excluding the cadre posts of CSS from the purview of Central Staffing Scheme. 
  
9.15     The Committee also finds that the office rs, belonging to All India Service (AIS) and Central
Group ‘A’ services, who are initiall y appointed as Deputy Secretary are also promoted to the Directors
Page 35 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

level automatically by simply upgrad ing the post of Deputy Secretary to Director  on personal basis on
fulfilling the eligibility condition st ipulated at para (6) of the Central Staffi ng Scheme.  The normal
practice is that these offi cers when they are in their respective parent cadre, are posted to the Directo r
level, only against available vacancie s and that too after due process to  be followed in accordance with
the statutory provision of service Rules.  Hence, in  the absence of any speci fic statutory provision mere
fulfilling of condition of number of  years in Deputy Secretary level doe s not confer automatic  right to
the incumbent to be promoted to Director’s leve l under Central Staffing Sche me.  The CSS officers on
the other hand, even if they fulfil eligibility c ondition and are empanelled, they are not posted as
Director for years together.  The Committee is of the considered vi ew that undue advantage is being
bestowed on these officers by giving them automati c promotion.  The Committee intends to make it
clear to the Ministry that Centra l Staffing Scheme is not a device to  be used as means for additional
avenues for promotion for the me mbers of AIS and Central Group ‘A ’ services, who have already ha d 
their promotional avenues in their respective parent cadres.   The CSS is the only service which can have
promotional avenues in the middle and higher level available in the Central Secretariat.  The Committee,
therefore, directs the Ministry imm ediately to amend the relevant provisions of the Central Staffing
Scheme and stop automatic appointment  of the officers in Deputy Secr etary level as Directors, simply
on the ground of fulfilling of eligibil ity condition of years of service.  The Committee also recommends
to the Ministry not to keep the posts of Deputy Secretar y and Director on floati ng basis so as to make
conversion and re-conversion of the posts easily in arbitrary manne r as per the sweet will of the 
managers of the Central Staffing Scheme.  
  
Lateral entry of CSSS to CSS 
  
9.16     The V Central Pay Commission, having due regard   to the fact that th ere is acute stagnation in
the CSS at the level of Section Officer and Under Secretary to the grades of Under Secretary and Deputy
Secretary as also the improved promotional prospects of Central Secretariat Stenographer Service
(CSSS)  Officers, in their own line, feels that a review of the existing promotion in terms of which CSSS
officers are allowed lateral entry into CSS is  overdue.   The V Central Pay Commission accordingly has
recommended at para 45.37 (iv) that lateral entry of Privat e Secretaries to the gr ade of Under Secretary
should be discontinued.  
  
9.17     The Committee is of the view that  the V Pay Commission has made a commendable
recommendation to improve the se rvice condition of the CSS. Bu t the Ministry has so far not
implemented the above recommenda tion of the Pay Commission.  This Committ ee notes the grievance
of the CSS Assistants as point ed out by CSS Forum with regard  to their limited opportunity o
f
promotion to Section Officers grade through Limite d Departmental Competit ive Examination (LDCE)
to which Steno Grade ‘C’ are not only allowed to compete with the CSS Assistant for promotion to 
Section Officer grade, but  also allowed to compete with fell ow Grade ‘C’ Stenos in the Limited 
Departmental Competitive Examinat ion for promotion to Pr ivate Secretary Grade.   The Committee is,
therefore, of the view that this is an unfair against the CSS Assistan ts. The steno grade ‘C’ officers are 
apparently enjoying double advantage of promotion in their own cadre as well as in Section Officers
grade at the cost of CSS Assistants.  The channe ls of promotion for CSS Assistant and Grade ‘C’
Stenographers are different from each other.  As the promotiona l prospects for Grade ‘C’ Stenos have 
improved over the years in  their own cadre and as they are enjoying the opport unity to compete in the
Examination for promotion to Privat e Secretary Grade, the Committee is of the considered view that
only CSS Assistants shall be allowed to compete in the LDCE for CSS Section Officers.  The provisions
which allow the Steno Grade ‘C’ to compete in Limited Departme ntal Competitive Examination fo r 
promotion to CSS Section Officer may be deleted from the Rules.   
  
Centralization of CSS Cadre 
  
Page 36 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

9.18     The V Central Pay Commi ssion has also recommended at pa ra 45.23 (j) that having due regard
to the fact that DOPT is already fixing the Zone for promotion and handling work relating to recruitment
at the level of Section Of ficer, preparation of Common Seniority Li st of Section Officers for promotion
to Under Secretary grade, the CSS cadre may be ce ntralized and computerized so that the existing
disparities in the promotion prospe cts of CSS officers in differen t Ministries are removed and the
seniority of those who move out be cause of non-availabilit y of vacancies in the own cadre to other  
cadre is protected.  
  
9.19     The representatives of CSS Forum in their Memo randum have submitted that
Ministry/Department-wise decentralization in the gr ades of Assistant and Section Officers is another 
cause for disorganization of the or ganized service of the CSS.  As observed by this Committee while
discussing the problems of CSS, du e to the concept of decentrali zation, the cadre of CSS has been
rendered orphan inasmuch as  neither the Ministry  of Personnel nor the Ca dre-Ministry/Department 
owns the responsibility to nurture the cadre of CSS. It has been re ported  that there has been no prope r
reporting of vacancies and the Cadr e-Ministry/ Departments tend to s uppress the vacancies in order to 
give undue benefit of ad-hoc prom otion to the most favoured ones. The representatives of CSS Forum 
have also submitted that the Minist ry of Personnel virtually does all the functions of cadre-management 
of CSS both in the grades of Assistant and Section Officers except in respec t of the officers who are
adjusted in the same Ministry/Dep artment on the promotion to Assist ant grade and a few cases of the
Assistants on their promotion to Section Officers grade in the sa me Ministry/Department based on
seniority-cum-fitness.  It has also been alleged that due to decentralization of cadres, junior Assistants in
certain large cadres get the undue adva ntage of getting promoted earlie r to their senior counterparts in
small cadres. This creates anomalous situation for th e Senior Assistants. Keepi ng in view of what has
been discussed above, the Committee is in full agreement with the V Pay Commission that the cadre o f
CSS in all four grades shall be  centralized and com puterized. Centralizati on will facilitate prope r
movement of the CSS  officers in all grades from one Ministry/Department to another for cross
fertilization of ideas and experiences. 
  
9.20     The Committee therefore, recommends th at on promotion to each grade of CSS (Assistant,
Section Officer, Under Secr etary and Deputy Secretary), the offi cers shall be transf erred out of the
Cadre-Ministry/Department where the of ficer is working irrespective of availability of vacancies in the 
cadre Ministry/Department.   It is also recommended that the Ministry may restructure the cadre sections
of each Ministry/Department, so the officers in the level of Deputy Secretary/Director in charge of cadre
section will be made directly account able to the Ministry of  Personnel in respect of CSS issues in that
Cadre-Ministry/Department in order to implement the recommendations  of the V Pay Commission with 
regard to centralization of CSS cadre. If necessary, some staff working  in the cadre may be deployed in
the Ministry of Personnel to handl e the work.  This exercise will  not involve any major financial
implication by way of creation of posts or building of any additi onal infrastructure. The Committee also
recommends that all the Section Of ficers who have completed eight years of service in the grade and
have been promoted to Under Secretary on in-situ basis shall also be subjected to transfer as per rotation 
policy applicable to ad hoc/ regular Under Secretaries and Deputy Secret ary/ Director.  The plea of the
Ministry that Section Officer grade is decentralized is not be acceptable to the Committee. 
  
9.21     It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Establis hment Wing of the Ministry
vide its OM No AB-14017/ 2/97-Estt (RR) dated 25 th May 1998,  has instructed the 
Ministries/Departments to amend the existing servi ce Rules/Recruitment Rules on a priori ty basis so as
to provide promotion from the feeder Grade scale to the merged (promotional) grade scale according to
the revised qualifying service as per Annexure “A ” to the that Office Memorandum. It has been 
provided at serial No. 20 in the sa id Annexure that the fixed qualifyi ng service for promotion from the
feeder grade scale of ( Rs. 5500- 9000) to the merged ( promotiona l) grade of Rs. 6500-10500 is three 
years. 
Page 37 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
9.22.    On a question addressed to the Ministry if  the qualifying service from the pay scale of Rs. 5500-
9000 to Rs. 6500-10,500 has been  fixed to be three ye ars and if so what are the reasons for not
amending the relevant CSS Rules to fix the qualifying service for Assistant ( present pay scale Rs. 5500-
9000) from the present  ‘eight’  year s to ‘three’ years for promotion to Section Of ficers grade ( present
pay scale Rs. 6500-10,500), the Ministry has stated that  the instructions are essentially in nature o f
guidelines and if any cadre inte nds to prescribe higher residenc y requirement in a pay scale fo r
promotion to the next higher grade, it is for the cadre to decide.  The pr ovision for qualifying service
which is eight years from the grade of Assistant to Section officer is statutory in nature and therefore,
the Ministry does not consider it appropriate to amend the same to three years.    
  
9.23     The Committee does not understand how the in structions issued by one wing in the Ministry fo r
compliance to amend the statutory rules is being dismissed by another wing in the same Ministry stating
that the instructions are mere in th e nature of guidelines.  All the gu idelines/ instructions are issued on
behalf of the Govt. with certain specific purpose.  If these are not complied with by any authority within
the Government on the ground they are mere  guidelines, the whole purpose of issuing the
instructions/guidelines is defeated.   The Committee is of the considered view  that this action of the
authority in the Ministry not to comply the instruction appears to be arbitrary.   
Cadre Review of CSS 
  
10.0     The opening para of the Chapter 3 of the  “Annual Report” of the Mi nistry captioned ‘Cadre 
Review’ states the following :- 
  
“Periodical review of the cadre structure of a regularly constituted service/Cadre is an important
cadre management function.  It attempts to bring about congruence between functional needs o f
the organization as well as the legitimate aspirations of the members of the service.  The main
thrust of the cadre review is  on manpower projections and recr uitment, planning on scientific
lines aiming at rati onalization of the cadre structure of the service in order to achieve the
objectives of improved efficiency, morale and effectiveness of the cadre.” 
  
10.1     The Committee is shocked to know that th e Ministry has not done cad re review of CSS during
the last 40 years ever since the fo rmulation of CSS Rules in 1962, in spite of Ministry's homily given in
a separate chapter on "Cadre Review" in the Annual Reports of the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore,
urges upon the Ministry to initiate  the exercise of Cadr e Review immediately and to complete it on wa r
footing basis by  fixing a deadline.  The Ministry should not take the plea that grades of  Asstt. and S.Os
are decentralized, grades of US an d DS are incorporated under Central Staffing Scheme or participating
Cadre Ministry/Department are not cooperating to provi de requisite data, etc.  The Ministry should
however, complete the exercise of  cadre review of CSS within six months. 
  
10.2     The Ministry has been asked if the Ministry is responsible for reviewing the cadres of  three All
India Services and 58 Group ‘A’ services, what are the reasons for not carrying out cadre-review of only 
service of CSS of which the Minist ry is also the Cadre Controlling authority? The Ministry has also
been asked what are the cadre struct ure of these 61 organized services  which are also recruited through
UPSC like  CSS and whether the me mbers of these services get a mi nimum of four promotions ( even
more than that) normally during thei r career? The Ministry has replied that the cad re structure of these
61 services is not maintained by the Department of Pe rsonnel & Training.  As far as promotional
prospects within various grad es of each of such Services is conc erned, the issue pertains to the othe r
Ministries/Departments which contro l the cadre of these Se rvices without giving a specific reply as to
why no cadre review of CSS has been  done since this is also one of  the organized Central Civil Group
‘A’ Services ( The Schedule to Cl assification and Control  and Appe al Rules, 1965), the Ministry has
just given an assurance that a committee of    senior officers has been set u p to under take a review o f
Page 38 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

cadre structure of CSS a nd Government will give due consider ation to its recommendations.  The
Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry.  It is  just unthinkable how the Ministry,
on the one hand claims to be responsible for cadr e review of 61 services, yet on the other hand, it
pretends its ignorance of ca dre structure of any of such services , that too stating the ground that the
cadre-structure of these services is not maintained by the Ministry.  The Committee does not understand
how can the Ministry remain ignoran t of the promotional prospects of  each of these 61 services on the
plea that these services are cont rolled by other Mini stries/Departments, wh ile undertaking periodic
cadre-review of each of these Services.  The e xplanation of the Ministry  suppressing the pertinent
information is not acceptable to th e Committee.  This clearly proves the apprehension of the Committee
that the Ministry is heavil y prejudiced against CSS.  The Ministry is therefore,  directed to furnish the
specific information to the specific question put by the Committee in the Action Taken Report.  
  
10.3     To another question, the Ministry has stated that Govern ment has proposed to create some
additional posts of Under Secretar y to upgrade the posts of Desk Officers.  But the Ministry has not
carried out the exercise on the ground of alleged serious difference of opinion between direct recruit and
promotee Associations.  The Committ ee is happy to note that the Minist ry has initiated certain concrete
step to relieve the section officers who are stagnating for a quite long time.  But at the same time it is not
understood if there is any provi sion under the Rules which require s eliciting the opinion of the
Associations for upgrading the posts.  The Ministry is  supposed to carry out the exercise of upgradation
of the posts in accordance with the existing rules and common practice followed in this regard.   This
Committee, therefore, recommends  that the Ministry should ensure  upgradation of the post of Des k
Officers to that of Under Secret ary in accordance with the prevai ling rules and Common Seniority List
and that the Ministry shoul d not drop the proposal in the pretext of  alleged serious differences between
direct recruit and promotee Associations.  
  
10.4     The Ministry has informed  in reply to a question that the Stenographer Grade ‘D’ ‘C’ and A&B 
(merged) of Central Secr etariat Stenographer Service (CSSS) has be en restructured in the ratio of 40:
40: 20 with effect from 1 st November 1993 with a vi ew to provide better promotional avenues to
Stenographers.  The Ministry has also informed that  two more grades of Pr incipal Private Secretary
(equivalent to Under Secretary) and Senior Principal Private Secretary ( equivalent to Deputy Secretary)
have since been constituted in Ce ntral Secretariat Stenographer Servic e.  The Ministry has assured that
the committee of Senior Officers which has been constituted, will look into cadre-restructure of CSS.    
  
10.5     To a question as to whether the Govt. has already introduced an NFSG ( Non-functional 
Selection Grade) in the scale of Rs. 14,300-18,300 on fulfilling the re sidency requirement of 18 years 
for DANICS/DANIPS, the members of which also belong to Group ‘B ’ and are recruited through Civil 
Services Examination conducted by UPSC like CSS Section Officers and if so,  what are the reasons fo r
not introducing similar grade in CSS, the Ministry has admitted that a Non-functional Selection Grade in 
the scale of Rs. 14,300 – 18,300 has been introduced in DANICS and DANIPS  with effect from 
1.1.1996  for which Junior Administrative (JAG) Grad e Officers (equivalent to  Deputy Secretary) with
not less than 18 years  of approved service are elig ible to be considered for appointments.  Ten
percentage of the total number of dut y posts sanctioned for each of the two services shall be operated in
this grade subject to the condition th at the number of posts to be so operated shall not exceed the total
sanctioned strength of posts in th e JAG of the respective Services .  The DANICS/DANIPS rules are
being a amended suitably.  With regard to the other part of the question, the Ministry has replied that the
demand for introduction of NFSG to CSS officers is, inter alia under the examination of the committee
of Senior Officers and the Mini stry has assured that due cons ideration will be given to the
recommendation of the committee in this regard.  
  
10.6     The Ministry has further intimated that foll owing are the grades of se rvices structure of the
Armed forces Head Quarters (AFHQ) Civil Service which is the sister service of CSS havin g the same
Page 39 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

pattern of nature of duties, job responsibility and method recruitment:- 
  
TABLE-VI 
  
  
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry shall also consider giving a similar cadre-structure 
to CSS forming certain posts of Joint Secretary at the apex of the structure. 
  
10.7     The Ministry had claimed that directly recruited Section Officer can move upto the level o f
Secretary to the Government of India and the Secretary (Personnel) while deposing before the
Committee on 10.4.2001, informed that so me CSS officers had been a ppointed as Secretary to the
Government of India.  But he, how ever did not give details of appoi ntment of any CSS officer at the
level of Secretary.  In th e absence of such information, the Commit tee is not in a position to take note
that the CSS officer can move upto  the level of Secretary to the G overnment of India in the present
scenario of stagnation in all the gr ades of CSS.  This Committee, therefore, directs the Ministry to
furnish such instances of appointme nt of any CSS Officer as Secretary to the Government of India even
during last fifteen years stating all relevant service particulars, including entry/induction in the service(s)
of such officer(s) to justify such possibility. 
Group “A” status to Section Officer 
11.0     In its Sixtieth Report, the Committee had recommended that Section Officer of CSS should be
conferred/awarded Group 'A' status and the post of Section Office r may be re-designated as 'Assistant 
Secretary' to the Govt. of India. 
  
11.1     In the Action Taken Reply, the Ministry ha d stated that a Departmental Committee headed by of
Sh. A.R.Bandopadhyay, which was c onstituted in December, 1991, for examining the desirability and
practibility of restructuring CSS  considered inter alia, the suggest ion of the CSS Asso ciations of giving
Group ‘A’ status to Section Officer s of CSS.  The Departmental Co mmittee had concl uded that it was 
neither feasible nor tenable to recommend for conferring Group 'A' status for Section Officers and
suggested that the matter be placed before the next Pay Commission.  The V CPC considered the matter
keeping in view the fact that the observations of the Bandopadhyay Committee were based on rational
consideration and did not recommend placement of the Secti on Officers in the exis ting pay scale of Rs.
2200 – 4000 with Group 'A' stat us or constitution of the CSS as a group 'A' service (para 45.23).  The
Ministry has, therefore, declined to redesignate th e post of Section Officer as  "Asstt. Secretary" with
Group 'A' status. 
  
11.2     The members of CSS specially those who are di rectly recruited as Section Officers are placed in 
a disadvantageous position vis-à-vis their batch ma tes in other services w ho are similarly recruite d
through Civil Services Examination.  It is true that prior to the amendment of CSS Rules in 1984, the
direct recruit Section of ficers were enjoying certain " levera ge” over their promotee counter parts by 
way of added years of seniorit y which enabled onl y a few of them to go upto the level of Additional
Sl. No. Name of the grade No. of 
posts
 Pay scale (in Rs.)  Category 
1. Princi pal Director 2 18,400-500-22,400 Grou p ‘A’
2 Directo r 9 14,300-400-18,300 -do-
3. Joint Directo r 72 12,000-375-16,500 -do-
4. De puty Director 253 10,000-325-15,200 -do-
5. Section Officer 683 6500-200-10,500 Group 
‘B’(Gazetted)
6. Assistant 1709 5500-175 -9000 Group –B (Non-
Gazetted) 
Page 40 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Secretary.  But with the amendmen t of CSS Rules in 1999 resulting in  the 'added year s of seniority'
gone, a direct recruit Section Officer recruited after 1998 can not go beyond the level of Deputy
Secretary.  Even in the present scen ario of stagnation of CSS at all levels upto Director,  non posting o f
empanelled Director from CSS (Annexure) in the post of Joint Secretary coupled with the amendment of
the eligibility conditions for CSS from 3 to 7 years,  no CSS Officer would ever be posted as Additional
Secretary after the supera nnuation of the serving A dditional Secretaries.  After some years no CSS
officer would ever be posted as Joint Secretary and still after so me Years no CSS officer would be
posted as Director.  In such a scen ario what career prospect lies for a direct recr uit Section Office r
recruited after 1998?  The Ministry has failed to give reasonable explanation to this issue. 
  
11.3     It is in this backgro und the Committee has recommended Grou p ‘A’ status to Sections Office
r 
with restoration of earlier designation of “Asstt. Secr etary”.  Conferment of Group ‘A’ status to Section 
Officer should not, therefore, be confused with constitution of a Group ‘A’ Service for Section Officers. 
In other words, three grades (D.S., U.S. and S.O.) will belong to Group ‘A’ category and since Assistant 
grade will continue to be in Group ‘B’ (non-gazetted) from where the service star ts, CSS will continue 
to be Group ‘B’ service.   Conferring Group ‘A’ status to CSS Section Officers will enable them to place
themselves on equal footing with other members of  Group ‘A’ services participating in the Central 
Staffing Scheme.  This is because  the service rendered in Section Officer grade be ing Group ‘B’ does 
not reckon counting for consideration to higher level posts under Central Staffing Scheme.  The
Committee understands that conferme nt of Group A status to Section Officers will provide  a viable
permanent set up in place  of existing weak  and frag ile  setup of the Secretar iat  in order to provide
more stability, continuity  and ac countability.  It would also remove  ad-hocism and total dependence o f 
Secretariat on other uni-functional services on tenure basis to man its senior level posts.  It will also help 
to provide  a service  specially tr ained for requirements of the Central Secretariat with all India look.  It
would provide a set up to the Secretariat having judicious mix of a permanent component and a
temporary component through  deputati on at senior levels.  Conferment of Group ‘A’ status will also 
allow Central Secretariat to have the benefit of special  attribute of CSS officer at senior levels of the
Government such as, expertise in  Parliamentary work, policy form ulation and impl ementation, Court
cases, procedures and practices of  the Secretariat, noti ng and drafting, vigilance matters, cadre review,
and inter-action with independent bodies/organisations such  as  Supreme Court, Parliamentary 
Committees, Planning Commission, State Government and national level institutions. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation made at para 19.8 in its Sixtieth report. 
  
Anomalous Pay Scales 
  
12.0     Another issue which has been agitating the CS S officers is that the Pay Scales granted to Section
Officers and Assistant are quite lower to that of the services/ posts which are equal or some of these are
even lower to Section Officers in terms of classifi cation, method of recruitment and nature of duties and
responsibilities.  The grievance of the Section Officers is that their pay anomaly originated from the
recommendation of the IV Pay Co mmission who had granted them onl y replacement scale of Rs. 2000-
3500.  Following the direction of the Principal Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal  in 1989 in the
OA No. 1538/87 in which the Hon’
ble CAT acknowledged the pay anomaly of Assistants who were
recommended Rs. 1400-2600 pay scale by the IV Pay Commissi on and directed the Govt. to consider 
their pay anomaly, the Govt. revi sed the pay scale of Assistants  from Rs. 1400-2600 to Rs. 1640-2900 
with effect from 1.1.1986.  But the Govt. did not cons ider the pay anomaly of Section Officers who had
disturbance of pay scale with regard to both vertical and horizontal relativity – vertical relativity with the
revision of pay scale of Assistant and horizont al relativity with many services like Deputy
Superintendent in CBI whose rank  was lower than CSS Section Offi cers in the merit list but were
granted the pay scale of Rs. 2200- 4400, by a suo moto action of the G overnment in 1991.  The Section
Officers’ Association had been cons istently submitting before the G ovt. to upgrade their pay scale from 
Rs. 2000-3500 to Rs. 2300-3700 based on the principle of parity with the Section Officers of Su preme
Page 41 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Court who have been granted the scale of Rs. 2300-3700 at that time.      
  
12.1     But the Ministry of Pers onnel had not considered the matter .  After some i ndividual Section
Officers filed an original applic ation before the Principal Bench, CAT, praying for removal of the pay
anomaly, the Hob’ble CAT disposed off the cas e based on the submission of  the Ministry of Personnel 
that as the V Pay Commission had been constituted  by the time, the pay anomaly of the pay scale o f
Section Officers would be considered by the Pay Commission. But the V Cent ral Pay Commission vide
Member Secretary’s d.o. letter date d January, 1996 addressed to  all Secretaries to the Govt. of  India, 
expressed its inability to consid er past anomalies arising out of  recommendations of the IV Pay
Commission.  It  requested the Mini stries to take decisi on on their own in this regard.  But finding that
the issue was reverted back to s quare one, the CSS Sectio n Officers filed an OA No. 197/97 before the
Principal Bench of CAT praying for directing the Govt. to remove the pay anomaly and revise the scale
to Rs. 2300-3700.  The Hon’ ble CAT vide its orde r dated 12.9.2001 has acknowledged that there is 
prime facie pay anomaly in the pay scale of Rs. 2000 -3500 granted to CSS Section Officers.  It directe d 
the Govt. to refer this pay anomal y to the committee of Senior Offi cers which has been constituted to
look into the cadre review and restructure of CSS.  Th e committee of Senior Offi cers will listen to the
submission of the representa tives of the Association and to give its recommendations in the report.  A
copy of the said order of the Hon’ble CAT was made available to the Committee by the CSS Forum and 
has been forwarded to the Ministry for necessary action. 
  
12.2     This Committee is of the considered view that pay scale anomaly of the CSS Section Officers
which was not properly looked into  by the Govt. ever since the recommendation of the IV Pay
Commission, deserves fair and judi cious consideration. If the pay an omaly of the S ection Officer as
pointed out above, which continue from IV Pay Co mmission, their grievance for the pay revision as pe r
the recommendation of the V Pay Commission can also be simultaneously taken care of since the V  pay
Commission has only given normal replacement of sc ale of Rs. 2000-3500 to Se ction Officers.  The 
Committee,   therefore, desire s that the Committee of senior officers give due and sympathetic
consideration to the past pay anom aly in the pay scale of Section Of ficers and recommend for removal
of the anomaly.  
  
12.3     The Committee has been informed that V CPC while upgrading pay scales of a number o f
services/posts  rejected the simi lar upgradation of pay s cale of CSS Section Offi cers and Assistants to
Rs. 8000-13500/- and Rs. 6500-10500, respect ively,on the principles of parity and relativity.  The CSS 
Officers protested not only agains t rejection of upgradation of thei r pay scales but also against
introduction of an intermediary gr ade (Group-B) between the grades of Section Office r (Group-B) and 
Under Secretary (Group-A).  The G overnment took a decision not to ope rate the intermediary grade in 
the CSS and also to constitute a Fast Track Committee of Secretaries to look into  the distortions and
disturbance of existing relativiti es on this account of such cate gories of employees like Mail Engine
Drivers, Diesel Assistants in Ra ilways, Engineering Assistants in  Doordarshan, CSS employees, Senio r
Auditors and Accoutants etc.  The decision with re gard to non-operation of in termediary grade in CSS 
was promptly conveyed to representatives of CSS Of ficers' through  Ministry's letter No. 8/2/97-CS.I 
dated 21.7.1997.   But while notifying the constitution of the Fast Track Committee and its terms o f
reference through OM No. 2/24/97-PI C issued on the same date i.e 21.7.97, the Ministry surprisingly
omitted the demand of CSS Officers for upgradation of  pay scale as an independent item of terms o f
reference and instead incorporated the other demand of CSS for removal of intermediary grade which, in
fact, had already been decided and conveyed to the representatives of CSS. 
  
12.4     The Ministry instead of giving specific reply to the specific query  made, has given rathe r
irrelevant information.  To anot her query as to under which provisi on of the Transaction of Business
Rule, the decision of the Cabinet not to operate Desk Officer grad e in CSS, taken in July 1997was
referred to Fast Track Committee of Secretaries a gain, the blunt re ply of the Ministr y was that the
Page 42 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Government has the inherent powers of referri ng any issue to Committee of Secretaries without
specifically replying to the question of the Committee, has not been appreciated by this Committee. 
  
12.5     The Committee was informed that the Fast Track Committee of Secret aries in  their Report
expressed the view that the Sc ale of pre-revised Rs. 2000-3200 (rev ised Rs. 6500-10500)  is generally 
operated at Group"B' Non-Gazetted level.  On a query as to the r easons for not revising the pay scale of 
CSS Assistant (Group B Non-gazetted) to Rs. 6500-10500 the Ministry of Personnel has avoided to give
specific reply to this question.  The Committee has also noticed that the Ministry has not only avoided to
give specific answer to specific  question it has also tried to suppr ess relevant information by way o f
stating irrelevant and unrelated issues to specific questions.  The Ministry has also expressed its inability
to provide certain documents like  report of Fast Track Committee of Secretarie s, decision of Group o f
Ministers thereon  on the ground of "Secrecy".  In cidentally, some members of Committee produced a
copy of the Fast Track Committee report before the Committee on 28.3.2001 and authenticated the same
to be true copy of the Report.   
  
12.6     The Ministry has been cl aiming that the matter relating to demand for up-gradation of scale o f 
pay was not referred to the Fast Track Committee of Secretaries but it only considered the issue along
with the case of DANICS/ DANIPS etc. But the Ministry has su ppressed to provide the information
relating to Fast Track Committee’s recommendations on the pay scale of Section Officers and Assistants 
of CSS in its report which wa s submitted on 01.10.1997. To a query rais ed by the Committee that when
did the Govt. consider the recomm endations of the Fast Track Comm ittee and what was the decision o f
the Govt. on the report of the Fast Track Committee, and that when did the Govt. notify the replacement
pay scales of Section Officers and Assistants to be Rs . 6500-10,500 and Rs. 5500-9000,  respectively –
whether prior to or after the recommendations of the Fast Track Committee were submitted, the Ministry
has suppressed the information re lating to the decision of the G ovt. on the implementation of the
recommendation of the Fast Track Committee.  The Ministry has simply stat ed that the Fast Trac k
Committee submitted its report on 01.10.1997 which was considered by the Union Cabinet on
03.10.1997.  The replacement pay scale of CSS Section Officers and Assistants was granted vide
Ministry of Finance’s notificat ion dated 30.09.1997 as per the recommendation of  the V Central Pay 
Commission. This very admission of the fact by the Ministry in reply to the query of the Committee has
proved that the statements of the Secretary and the subsequent clarif icatory written st atements of the
Ministry in this regard are false and misleading.    
  
12.7.    The Ministry has made anothe r false claim that the issue of  ‘D esk Allowance’ to Desk Officers 
was referred to the Fast Track Comm ittee for consideration.  But to a query that which of the issues –
whether the issue of Desk Allowan ce to Desk Officers’ or the issue of “ demand of the CSS to remove 
the intermediate pay scale in  the grade of    Rs. 2500- 4000(Pre-revised)” was referred 16 to the Fast 
Track Committee  and that if it is the latter, i.e. removal of intermediate pay scale of Rs. 2500-4000 was 
referred to the Fast Track Committee, when was the issue of “ Desk Allowance to Desk Officer”
referred to the Fast track Committ ee and through which order (the Mini stry was requested to furnish a
copy of such order), the Ministry adm itted the fact that it is only the i ssue of “ removal  of intermediary 
pay scale” and not “Desk A llowance” was referred to the Fast Tr ack Committee for consideration.  But 
the Ministry has maintained a stunning silence on the other fact as to why this very issue was referred to
the Fast Track Committee after the G ovt. had already decided to remove  the intermediary scale and this
very decision had been communica ted to the CSS Forum representatives on the same date, i.e.,
21.7.1997.  This clearly proves that the Ministry has given false and misleadi ng information.  Without
mentioning as to when the issue of  ‘Desk allowance to De sk Officers’ was referr ed to the Fast Trac k 
Committee, it has been further stated giving misleadi ng information that “ since the pay scale 
recommended by the Pay Commission has not been operated for the officers of CSS as demanded by
them, it was felt necessar y to decide the quantum of S pecial Pa y to be granted to the Desk 
Page 43 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

functionaries.”  This has again proved that the claim of the Ministry for refere nce of the matter relating
to “ Desk Allowance to the Desk Officer” , to the Fast Track Committee for consideration is false an d
misleading. As the Ministry has failed to produce a copy of the Govt. order through  which the issue of “
Desk allowance to Desk Officer” wa s referred to the Fast Track Commi ttee, it  appears that this issue
was never referred to Fast Track Co mmittee for considerati on.   Thus, it appears th at the claim of the
Ministry is factually wrong and misleading.  The Ministry has tried in vain to mislead and confuse the
Committee by raising the issue of “ Desk Allowance to Desk Office r” which was presumably decide d 
subsequently, by the Govt. separately.   
  
12.8     The Committee is convinced that the Minist ry has acted in a vary unfair and prejudicial  manne r
in rejecting the upgradation of pay s cale of Section Officer . Contrary to the stand taken by the Ministry
pertaining to upgradation of pay scale of DANICS  / DANIPS and DASS Grad e-I vis-à-vis Section 
Officer and Asstt. of CSS, the recommendation of Fast Track Committee to reject the upgradation of pay
scale of both of DANICS / DANIPS and DASS , clearly established th e parity and relativity between
these two grade of services.  It  has also confirmed the Committee's apprehension that the Fast Trac k
Committee consciously rejected  the upgradation of pay scales of  DANICS/DANIPS & DASS,  on the
ground  that similar upgradation of pa y scale had to be acceded in the case of Section Officer and Asstt.
of CSS. 
  
12.9     The Ministry in it's reply to Rajy a Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2786 for 14.12.2000 has stated
that the Govt. has carefully c onsidered the recommendations of the V CPC and decided that the
following pay structure may be allowed to DANICS/DANIPS,etc.: 
  
  
12.10.  The Ministry has been mainta ining this stand that the Pay co mmission which is  an expert body
examines various aspects like inter-se- horizontal/ vertical relativities, e ducational qualifications, 
recruitment procedure, duties and responsibilities etc. of each po st and recommended appropriate pay
scales. These recommendations, wherever accepted by the Govt. were implemented.  To a question as to
whether representatives of CSS Forum have been continuously a nd consistently demanding for up-
gradation of pay scales of Sect ion Officers and Assistants sin ce January, 1997, the Ministry, without
specifically admitting or denying the fact, has stated that representations were received from CSS Forum
for the need for  upward revision of pay scales of Assistants and Sect ion Officers.  To another question
as to why the Ministry has not written to the CSS Forum so far along wi th details of reasons if the Govt.
rejected their demand for re vision of pay scale, and that how did the Ministry maintain that it was very
late stage to consider their demands when the fact is that non- issuance of any communication in writing 
expressing the decision of the Govt. presupposes that the matter is under consideration/ examination, the
Ministry, without giving any specific  reply, has simply stated that the representations were examined in
details.  However, looking to the recommendations of the V Pay Commission and merits of the case, the
Govt. could not agree to upward revision of scales of pay, as demanded.  Representatives of CSS Forum
have been meeting official from time to time and position has been apprised to them during discussions. 
  
12.11.  The Ministry has been as ked if non-grant of pay scales  of Rs. 8000-13,500 and Rs. 6500-10,500 
to Section Officers and Assistants of CSS, res
pectively,  by the Govt. is based on G ovt’s decision not to 
On initial appointment Rs. 6500-10,500 /- 
On completion of 4 years Rs. 8000-13500 /- 
On fulfilling the residency requirement of 8 years Rs. 10000-15200 
On fulfilling the reside ncy requirement of 13 
years 
Rs. 12000-16500/- 
On fulfilling the reside ncy requirement of 18 
years 
Rs. 14300 – 18300/- 
Page 44 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

disturb the original recommendations of the V Central Pay Commission?   Without giving the direct and
specific reply, the Ministry has st ated that pay scales of Rs. 6500 -10,500 for Section Officers and Rs. 
5500-9000 for Assistants of CSS have  been  recommended by the Pa y Commission and the same have
been accepted by the Govt.  To the next  part of the question that if so  what are the reasons for suo moto
action of the Govt. to upgrade the pay scales of Pragramme Executiv es and Transmission Executives o f
Doordarshan, Field Assistants and Fi eld Supervisor of Cabinet Secret ariat, Postman of  Department o f
Posts and various categories of Para-military forces and Defence Forces, the Ministry although admitted
the fact and stated that the Govt. considered the alleged anomalies in the recommendations of the V Pay
Commission and after due considerat ion allowed high pay scales to ca tegories on merit in each case.
The Ministry was asked vide the ot her part of the question that whet her all the recommendations of the
V  Pay Commission regarding replacement of upgraded pay scales have been accepted on merits and if 
so what are the reasons for non -acceptance of the V  Pay Commissi on’s recommendation for upgraded 
pay scale of Rs. 8000-13,500 with Group-‘A’  status to DANICS and DANIPS?  The Ministry has again
without giving any specific and to the point reply, has stated that the recommendation of the V Pay
Commission regarding up-gradation of pay scales was considered and accepted on merit and where any
modification was required the same was done.  It has further stated that the V Central Pay Commission
recommended entry level pay scal e of Rs. 8000-13,500 for DANICS/DANIP S etc. in Junior Executive, 
category with initial pay scale of Rs. 8000-13,500 which is equivalent to Group-‘ A’ as per the present 
classification of various groups of posts, the Ministry, in its usual re sponse of suppressing the facts and
not replying specifically, ha s stated that the classifi cation of Govt. servants into various categories, as
recommended by the V Pay Commissi on, was not accepted by th e Govt. The Ministry has just attached
a Govt. gazette notification 17as per which the Ministry has simply indicated the replaced pay scales o f 
the posts as per the existing classification in the following manner.  
  
TABLE-VII 
  
  
12.12.  While denying to another question that whether it  is a fact that the reasons for non-acceptance o f 
the sole recommendation for upgraded pay scale of  Rs. 8000-13500 were to deny rightful claim of the 
same scale of pay to Section Offi cers of CSS on parity, the Ministry  stated that the recommendations
relating to DANICS/DANIPS were cons idered on merit.  It was decide d to grant the entry pay scale o f
Rs. 6500-10,500 and the pay scale of Rs. 8000-13,500 after four years of  service after taking into 
account all factors which are relevant to DANICS/DANIPS. 
  
12.13   The Committee has noticed that  the Ministry has tampered with  the original recommendation o f
V CPC for upgraded pay scale of Rs. 8000-13500/ - to DANICS/DANIPS. While deciding such 
tampered pay structure to DANICS/DANIPS , the Ministry has forgotten  the fact that scale of Rs. 6500-
10,500 is also the pay scale for its feeder grade i.e DASS Gr.I.  On a question as to whether the decision
of the Ministry has resulted di sturbance of the internal rela tivity between Supervisor Grade
(DANICS/DANIPS ) and Su pervised grade (DASS Gr.I ), the Ministr y has re plied that as per De ptt.
Sl. No.  Description of  posts Classification of 
posts 
1. A Central civil posts carrying a pay or a scale of pay  scale with 
maximum of  not less than  Rs. 13,500. 
Group ‘A’ 
2. A Central  civil posts carrying a pay or a scale of pay  with 
maximum of  not less than  Rs. 9000 but less than 13,500.
Group ‘B’ 
3. A Central civil posts carrying a pay  or a scale of pay of with 
maximum of not less than Rs 4000 but less than Rs. 9000
Group ‘C’ 
4. A Central civil posts carrying a pay  or a scale of pay  with 
maximum of  less than Rs. 4000.
Group ‘D’ 
Page 45 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Expenditure O.M No. 169/2/2000-IC dated 24.11.2000  the feeder grade and promotion grade post can
be same.  The Committee has gone through the said  OM of Deptt. of Expenditure issued on 24.11.2000
and has found nothing as clai med by the Ministry.  It is true that  the V CPC has merged the pre-revised 
scale of Rs. 2000- 3200 with pre-revised scale of Rs. 200 0-3500 having replacemen t scale of Rs. 6500-
10500 for DASS Gr.I.  But the Pay Commission has also  upgraded pay scale of DANICS/DANIPS   to
Rs. 2200-4000 (Pre-revised) with replacement scale of Rs. 8000-13500/ - .  Therefore, the anomalous
situation between supervisor grade (DANICS/DANI PS) and supervised grad e DASS having the same
pay scale of Rs. 6500-10500 has arisen only due to meddling with the original recommendation of the V
Pay Commission. 
  
12.14   On analyzing the statements, made by the Mini stry and clarifications furnished to the queries
raised it has been noticed that there are inconsistenc ies and incoherences in the statements.  Information
given in the statements is incomple te at some places and at  other places irrelevant and misleading.   The
Ministry has maintained double standards with regard to decision of the Govt.  in principle and the
implementation of the same in th e case of CSS.  The Committee does not understand the reason as to
why the Ministry is so heavily biased against CSS when it knows that it is this Ministry of Personnel
who is responsible for nourishing th is Service being the Cadre Controll er.  The Ministry has not stated
how it considered the normal replacement pay scale to CSS Section officers and Assistant was adequate,
after the representatives of CSS Forum had convi ncingly given the reasons  as why there was the
necessity of upward revision of pay scale based on parity and principles  of both vertical and horizontal
relativities.  On the one hand the Ministry has been  maintaining that the reco mmendations of the V Pay
Commission which is an expert body are final and are beyond the purview of the Govt. to change, but on
the other, the Govt. has in a number of cases including the case of  Pr ogramme Executives and
Transmission Executives of Doordars han, Field assistants and Field Su pervisors of Cabinet Secretariat,
Postmen of Department of  Posts and various categories of para -military forces and Defence Forces, 
revised the pay scales upwardly on its own after finding anomalies in such pay scales as recommended
by the Pay Commission.  But the Ministry did not apply the same yardstick in the case of CSS in spite of
the representatives of CSS Forum earnestly submitted their case before the Ministry.  It also supplied no
reasons/ grounds as to why it should not  apply that yardsticks in the case of CSS.  In spite of denial o f
the Ministry to deny the DANICS/DANIPS etc. of  the recommended  scale of Rs. 8000-13,500 with 
Group-‘A’ status by the Pay Commission, this Comm ittee is of the consid ered view that the 
DANICS/DANIPS etc. we re in fact denied  their rightful due only because  the same would be given to
CSS Section officers based on pari ty and relativity.  The Ministry has acted in such an unfair manne r
that it did not hesitate to  ta mper the original recommendation of the Pay Commi ssion by granting the
entry scale at Rs. 6500-10,500 and the scale of Rs. 8 000-13,500 after 4 years of en try scale in order to 
given false impression that the initial entry s cale for both CSS Section officers and DANICS/DANIPS
etc. is same, i.e., Rs. 6500-10,500.  In  order to justify its arbitrary and prejudiced action, the Ministry 
has been offering a number of false, inconsis tent, incoherent and inco mplete explanation.  This
Committee has, therefore, taken st rong exception and rejected all such replies, statements, clarifications
which are factually wrong, ambiguous, inconsistent incoherent and mi sleading.  This Committee is o f
the considered view that since th ere is direct recruitme nt in both the grades of Section Officer and
Assistant on the basis of Civil Serv ices and All India Competitive Exam inations, the need of attracting
fresh young talents of gradua tes of the Universities can not be ove rlooked in view of the important role
played by the officers of C SS in the middle level of d ecision- making of the Govt . of India.  But if the 
Ministry does not      revise their pay scales ba sed on parity and relativity  on any plea, it is bound to
demoralize and demotivate the members of the se rvice and the fresh and young talents will not be
attracted to this service.  As the quality of the service will deteriorate  so also it will lead to decrease  the
efficiency and productivity. 
  
12.15   In view of the foregoing, th e Committee strongly desires that in the interest of justice and
fairplay, the original parity between DANICS/DANIPS and CSS may be restored . The Committee also
Page 46 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

strongly recommends that the upgr aded pay scale of Rs. 6500-10500 as granted to the DASS Gr.I, 
(Gp.'B'  Non-gazetted) may also be granted to CSS Assistants (G p.B Non-gazetted) on the basis o f
traditional  parity and relativity. 
  
Publications of CSS Rules 
  
13.0     The Committee has noticed that the last edition of the CSS Rules was printed fifteen years ago. 
The copies of th e earlier edition of the Rules are not av ailable.  Meanwhile, although a number o f
amendments have taken place, no ef fort has been made by the Ministry  to publish a new revised edition
of CSS rules.  The Committee, ther efore, recommends that the Minist ry shall publish a fresh edition o f
CSS rules incorporating all amendments made therein within a deadline of six months.   
  
13.1     In reply to a question, The Ministry has ad mitted that the guidelines containing instructions to
Cadre Controlling authorities in the Ministries/ Departments were issued vide OM No. 1/2/88-CS-I 
dated 19.1.1989 that the issue of one time confirmation in the service of Govt. employees in the existing
recruitment rules of organized servic es stood modified.  But to the other part of the question that if so,
what are the reason s for amending relevant provisions  in  CSS Rules only in February, 1999, the
Ministry has replied that the acti on for amendment to CSS Rules was initiated in the right earnest on
30.5.1988. However, it required examinat ion/ consultation/concurrence of the Establis hment Division,
Ministry of Law, UPSC, etc. and the process took considerable time.  But this Committee is surprised to
find that an action which could have taken ten months  or so to complete the process of the so-called 
examination, consultation, concurren ce etc. among the Ministries, it lo ok ten long years to amend the
CSS Rules.  This Committee does not understand how could the Ministry  took so much of time, if it
claimed that it initiated the pro cess in right earnest.  This Com mittee is not satisfied with  the
explanation of the Ministry and is  convinced that there has been negligence and deliberate attempt to
thwart the process.    This  is  clearly  in cont ravention  of different reco mmendations of the Committee
on Subordinate Legislation. The Ministry has given a vague expl anation to hush up the issue.  This
Committee, therefore, desi res that the Ministry shal l enquire into the matter in order to find out why
there was delay, looking into every stage of movement of the concer ned file and m ovement of othe r
relevant document/ papers on th e basis of normal average time ta ken for each occasion of movement
file/papers.  The Ministry shall fix responsibility  wherever lapse/negligence has been found.  The
Ministry shall submit details of the enquiry and action initiated/ taken to the Committee. 
  
13.2     In response to another question that whethe r action regarding filling up of vacancies in Section
Officer grade, maintenance of thei r respective cadre seni ority, etc. were bei ng taken every year in
accordance with the instructi ons OM No. 18011/1/86-Estt.(D)  dated 28.3.1998 pending amendment o f 
CSS Rules, the Ministry has replied that Section Officer grade is decen tralized into 33 cadre controlling
units.  While instructions were issued to all the cadre controlling authorities to include all regula r
vacancies, but it appears that all of them did not follow these inst ructions.  To another query that
whether the Ministry had monitored, if its in structions issued on 19.1.1989 were being carried out
properly by Cadre Units in letter and spirit and if so, how many cadres had failed to follow the
instructions, the ministry has adm itted that no monitoring was done.  It simply be lieved that all cadre
authorities were expected to follow  the instructions as responsible units of governmental system.  This
Committee has noticed that  when the Ministry itself did not act in a responsible and responsive manner,
how could it expect the cadre units of CSS act in  responsible and responsive manner.  This has been
viewed very seriously by this Comm ittee.  The Committee desires th at the Ministry  should mention
about  the cadre units of CSS ha d not complied its instructions  contained in the OM dated 19.1.1989
along with the reasons and furnish a report in this regard in the ATR. 
  
13.3     The Ministry has been asked what are the reasons for ch anging the position of DR Section
Officers recruited after 1988 in the Combined Seniorit y List in contravention to the instructions issued
Page 47 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

vide OM No. 18011/1/86-Estt.(D) date d 28.3.1988?  The Ministry has replie d that the instructions vide 
OM dated 18.3.1988 could not be given effect to immedi ately as recruitment to  the grade of Section
Officer is governed  by the CSS Rule s which have statutory  force.  Till the rules could be amended,
seniority of Section Officers between  DR and promotee were required to  be interpolated in terms of the
existing CSS Rules.  This committee has noticed that the Mi nistry has been inte rpreting the statutory
force of the rules as per its ow n sweet-will, convenient to justif y its own action/inaction.When this
Committee has invited the attention of  the Ministry to the statutory fo rce of the CSS Ru les over Central
Staffing Scheme which is an executive order of the Govt. in the areas where the provisions of CSS Rules
and Central Staffing Scheme overlap, like Rule 7, Rule 3 of CSS Rules on th e one hand, and para (3)
and para (5) of the Central St affing Scheme 1996 on the other, the Ministry has been taking an
ambiguous stand and avoiding to give  a direct reply.  This  Committee takes serious  note of such  the
ambiguous reply of the Ministry.  
Training of CSS Officers             
  
14.0     The Committee is surprised to  note that notwithstanding the fact that India is fa st emerging as a
global IT super power, at the apex level of the Government viz. th e Central Secretariat, no specific
programme has been drawn up by the Government for training Central Secretariat Service officers in IT
related areas. The Committee would like the Ministry to  draw up a firm progr amme for imparting
adequate level of proficiency in IT related areas in a time bound ma nner not exceeding two years. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progr amme so drawn up by the Government within a period
of three months from the date of this Report. 
  
14.1     The Committee has taken note of the data furnished by DOPT with re gard to the training o f
officers of various services abroad in  the past few years. In view of th e fact that the Central Secretariat
Service is operating at the apex of Union Govern ment the Committee recomm ends that a minimum o f
25 percent of all the slots in training programme abroad should be reserved for officers of CSS. 
  
14.2     The V Central Pay Commission has recommende d in its Report (Vol.-I) for field posting of CSS 
officers in the following words: 
  
“We are of the view that  the effectiveness of CSS officers can be definitely improved if they are
given filed posting in the states where they would get an opportunity for learning on the job. This
will be an improvement over the scheme of field training.  We therefore recommend that training
posts should be earmarked in the States for CSS officers and the DOP & T should evolve a
scheme of field training involving independent posting to various posts in States for a period o f
three years”.(para 45.23) 
  
14.3     The Committee is given to understand th at the Ministry has not  implemented the above
recommendation of the Pay Commission.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommen ds that the Ministry
shall reconsider the recommendati ons of the V Central Pay Commissi on in this regard.  The officers
may be given the option for posting in their respectiv e home States.  If there are more candidates for a
particular State, a panel of the officers may be prepared to depute them in batches/phases.  The Officers,
so deputed for the field posting may be allowed to retain thei r Government accommodation, if allotted,
in order to enable their families to stay at the Headquarters. 
  
Central Staffing Scheme  
  
15.0     The Central Staffing Scheme was introduced  through Government of India Resolution No. F. 34
(3)-E.O/57 dated 17 October, 1957, which was subs equently published in Gazette of India on 26
October, 1957. The scheme was introduc ed with clear-cut intention to provide systematic arrangement 
for mannin g senior administrative posts at the Centre of and above the rank of De puty Secretar y.
Page 48 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Subsequently,  the Central Secretariat Service Rule was en acted in 1962. Rule 3 of the said Rule speaks
about the composition of service which includes Assistant at the bottom and Deputy Secretary at the top.
The Bandyophadyaya Committee and the DOPT has maintain ed that CSS is specifically created to man
lower and middle management level posts in Central Secretariat. 
  
15.1     In the face of above two ru les, it is difficult to understand whether the post of  Deputy Secretary
is actually middle level or senior level administrative post. The Committee is of the considered view that
such provisions of the Central Staffing Scheme  are in consistent with the statutory Rule viz. the Central
Secretariat Service Rules, 1962.  It is surprising to know that the DO P&T has continued to operate the
Central Staffing Scheme, which prima facie contravenes the provisions of the Central Secretariat Service
Rules to the detriment of the Central Secretariat Servic e all these years. In keeping with this scheme and
the CSS Rules, as stated above, al l posts in these grades  should be filled up by  the CSS officers. The
Committee notes from the reports of III and IV Pay Commi ssion that the Centra l Secretariat Service
held much higher percentage of De puty Secretary/Director level posts in  the Secretariat in earlier years.
However, their representation has gone down considerably in percentage terms over the years and has
reached as low as 10 percent  Such a situation apparently goes against the letter and spirit of Central
Secretariat Service rules. 
  
15.2     The Committee desires that the Resolution  of Government of Indi a on Central Staffing Scheme
should be reviewed in the light of Rule 3 of CSS Rules, 1962. 
 
 
15.3     The Committee had desired to know from th e Ministry as to whet her the post of Deputy
Secretary was a cadre post for the Central Se cretariat Service and if so, what was the
authorized/sanctioned cadre strength in that grade. While the Ministry has not categorically informed the
Committee of the fact whether or  not the post of Deputy Secretary is a cadre post of the Central
Secretariat Service, it ha s indicated that the authorized permanen t strength of the Central Secretariat
Service in Deputy Secretary grade was 133 as on 1-5-1984 (that is roughly 17 years back) as per the 
Civil List of the Central Secretariat Service officers and that Deputy Secretary is the highest grade in the
Central Secretariat Service. To present such outda ted data to the Committee is against the spirit o f
responsive administration especially for a Department that also happe ns to be the Cadre Controlling
Authority of the Service. The Mini stry has nowhere explai ned as to why such out dated data was being
furnished to the Committee or how come the aut horized permanent strengt h of the Service has not
undergone any revision for 17 long year s. The negligence of the Mini stry as the Cadre Controlling
Authority is clearly manifested fr om the reply furnished to the Committee. Besides, when the yearly
panels of Deputy Secretary have not  been brought out from 1993 onwards , such data does not have any
reliability or nexus with the ground reality. The Ministry s hould immediately take action to revise the
position in conformity with the rele vant Rules and also in the light  of the recommendations of the
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
15.4     The Ministry has in it s reply also informed that as on 1.3.2001, 288 Central Secretariat Service
officers are working in the grade of Deputy Secretary including those on personal upgradation basis and
out of them, 60 Central Secretariat Service office rs are working against th e regular posts of Deputy
Secretary. The Committee has been informed that th e officers working as De puty Secretary on personal
upgradation basis are working agai nst the posts of Under Secretar y and they are not recognized as
regular Deputy Secretary in so far as their deputati on elsewhere, their eligibil ity for promotion to the
post of Director or any other entitlements are concerned. To that extent, in Committee’s view, there is no 
logic in including the officers upgraded on persona l basis in the total num ber of posts of Deputy
Secretary held by the officers of the Central Secretariat Service. If  the figure of 60 Deputy Secretary o f
CSS indicated by the Ministry is co rrect, in percentage terms, agai nst the combined strength of around
1000 in the grade of Deputy Secretar y/Director, this represents a miniscule pe rcentage (10 percent to
20percent) especially in view of the fact that De puty Secretary is a cadre post of the Central Secretariat
Page 49 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Service. It is surprising that over 80 per cent of the posts in the grade continue to be filled up by drawing
officers from other Services notwi thstanding the fact that there is  acute stagnation in the Central
Secretariat Service and th is has duly been acknowledge d by the Ministry. In f act, the grade of Deputy
Secretary being part of middle management (for which specially the Central Secretariat Service has been
contributed), should not have been included in the Central Staffing Sc heme which is basically a scheme
for filling up Senior Administrative Grades posts i. e. Joint Secretary and a bove where decision making
in substantially involved. 
  
15.5.    The Ministry has been aske d whether the participa tion of Central Group ‘A ’ Services not (AIS) 
is justified in the grades of De puty Secretary and Director in the Secretariat through Central Staffing
Scheme on the ground of these se rvices being unifunctional and their character of functional
specialization in these posts? If so, what are the details of all the po sts of Deputy and Director Ministry /
Department wise filled up from amongst Central Gr oup ‘A’ Services through  Central Staffing Scheme, 
nature of duties/ responsib ilities  of each of such  posts in both grade of De puty Secretary and Director,
and the members of which Central Group ‘A’ Service holding the posts individual-wise as on 1.4.2001?  
The Ministry in its reply reproduced para (4) of Ce ntral Staffing Scheme, which states that the raison d’
etre of the Central Staffing Scheme is the Central Govt’s need for fres h inputs at senior levels in policy 
planning, formulation of policy a nd implementation of programmes fr om diverse sources namely AIS
and Group ‘A’ services.  The experience gained by th e officers while working in their cadres could be
effectively utilized in po licy planning, formulation of policy etc. in the Govt. of India.  The experience
gained by the officers while working in the Govt . of India could be effectively utilized  in
implementation of the policy in impl ementation of the policy when they work in their cadre.  This two-
way movement of the officers as envisaged unde r the Central Staffing Sc heme has proved to be
beneficial to the service cadres and Govt of India.  But this Committee does not understand all these
officers who have hardly put in nine years of service in th e field, how much experience they have
gained, so as to justify their pos ting in the Central Staffing Scheme .  The reply give n by the Ministry
may hold true in so far as member s of AIS are concerned. But what purpose dose it serve with regard to
members of Group-“A’ services num bering more than 300 officers pos ted as Deputy Secretaries out o f 
563 posts through Central Staffing Scheme.  For example, if an officer of Indian Postal Service is posted
as Deputy Secretary of Establishm ent in a Ministry/Department in what way the Govt. of India is
benefited from his so-called field experience of management of postal affairs and in what way the Deptt.
of Post will benefit for the manage ment of postal affairs from the ex perience of that officer posted as 
Deputy Secretary in a Ministry/Depar tment.  This Committee is of the considered view that the posts in
the level of Deputy Secretary whic h can be managed/ handled by CSS officers, shall be  filled up from
amongst CSS officers only.  This Committee therefore,  directs that the Ministry of Personnel shall
identify such posts in the level of Deputy Secretary in all the Ministries/Department to be cadre posts o f
CSS immediately and shall fill these posts from am ongst the panels of CSS of ficers only.  With regard
to other part of the question, the Mi nistry has replied that the details of nature of  duties/responsibilities
of each post of Deputy  Secretary/Director he ld by a member of Group –‘A’ Service in each 
Ministry/Department in the  Govt. are not maintaine d. This Committee is not satisfied with the reply
given by the Ministry and therefore, rejects it.  The Ministry is again urged  to furnish the information,
as sought by this Committee in the ATR.  
  
15.6     The Ministry has been claiming that the members of Gr oup-‘A’ services have to be 
accommodated in Deputy Secretary grade in spite of these posts not being seni or level posts keeping in
view of provision of Central Staffing Scheme.  The Mi nistry has been asked that what is the Central
Deputation Reserve (CDR) for each of service (AIS  and Group-‘A’ Services ) participating through 
Central Staffing Scheme as per their respective serv ices Rules and that whether the quota is meant fo r
each grade ( i.e. JTS, STS, SG etc.) separately of a pa rticular service or is taken together for that service
as a whole? What criteria are followed by the cadre authorities to send the officers on Central deputation
without creating any imbalance within the grades of that Service?  The Ministry in its startling reply has
Page 50 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

stated that some of the Central Group-’A’ Services do not have a deputation rese rve at all, some of the
services do have a deputation reserve though such re serve is not exclusively for deputing officers to
posts under Central Staffing Scheme.  The Ministry has pret ended  its ignorance st ating that it is not
aware of any specific criteria fo llowed by the cadre controlling aut horities while spons oring the names
of the officers for central deputation.  This Committee does not understand how the Ministry is manning
the Central Staffing Scheme by making tall claims without ascertaining basic facts/ information from the
cadre authorities of the group – ‘A’ services participating under Centra l Staffing Scheme. The 
explanation of the Ministry is fa r from satisfactory and is not ac ceptable.  This Committee therefore,
directs the ministry to collect relevant information as asked by this Committee from the cadre authorities
and furnish the same to the Committee. 
  
15.7.    The Ministry has been furt her asked whether the members of Gr oup-‘A’ services have their own 
promotional channel and career progr ession in their respective cadres /services at least up to Deputy
secretary/ Director level as per th eir respective service rules?  The Mi nistry has also been asked if the
members of these Services would have got normal promotion at leas t up to Deputy Secretary/Directo r
level in their respective cadre/se rvice had they not joined the posts  under Central Staffing Scheme up to
Deputy Secretary level? The other pa rt of the question is that has there been a ny instance wherein a
member of a particular Service who had joined a lower grade under Central Staffing Scheme and had
been appointed to the next higher grade by upgradin g the post by adjusting th at officer against an
available vacancy on fulfilling of requi site years of service as prescribed  at para (6) of Central Staffing
Scheme, but subsequently the officer was reverted to the lower grade on his repatriation to his parent
service/ cadre due to non-availability  of vacancies?  In stead  of giving reply to th ese four parts of the 
question separately, the Ministry clubbed together the parts of the question and gave a very vague reply
while admitting the fact that members of these se rvice have their own prom otional channel and caree r
progression in their respective cadres /services not only up to Deputy S ecretary/Director level, but even
beyond Joint Secretary and above.  The Ministry has fu rther stated that the Ce ntral Staffing Scheme has
laid down specific eligibility crite ria for holding the post s of Under Secretary a nd above.  The officers
who fulfill these criteria while on Central deputatio n, are appointed to the posts to which he/she is
eligible, irrespective of the post which he or sh e would have held, had he /she not been on central
deputation under Central Staffing Scheme.  The Committee has obs erved that the Ministry has
deliberately clubbed the reply togeth er in order to suppresses the in formation. This Committee is not
satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry.   
  
 15.8    The Ministry has been asked to inform this Committee as to how many officers of Central Group
–‘A’ Officers and All India Servi ces were appointed as Under Secr etary/Deputy Secretary and Directo r
through Central Staffing Scheme and how many of such officers were repa triated on completion o f
tenure or otherwise to their respect ive parent cadres in each of the financial y ears during the last eight
years as on 31.3.2001?  The Ministry  has replied that a ll officers appointed under Central Staffing
Scheme at the level of Under Secr etary, Deputy Secretary and Director  are reverted after completion o f
their prescribed tenure.  Information in respect of of ficers appointed and reverted  in the last eight years 
has not been maintained.  To another question that what is the total annual expenditure incurred by the
Govt. of India in each of the financial years during the preceding eight years as on 31.3.2001 with regard
to Traveling Allowance, Daily Allowances and Transportation of personal effects etc. in respect of each
of such officers (including fa mily members) on their appointme nt as Under Secretary/Deputy
Secretary/Director through Central Staffing Scheme a nd/or their repatriation to  parent cadres and that
what is the total annual expenditu re incurred by the Govt. of India towards thei r Deputation Allowance
to these officers of Group ‘A’ servi ces and All India Services in the levels of Under Secretary, Deputy 
Secretary and Director in each of the financia l years during the precedi ng eight years and on 31.3.2001,
the Ministry has declined to pr ovide information stating that the expenditure incurred by the
Ministry/Department on these heads is not centrally maintained. But this Committee is not satisfied with
the reply given by the Ministry and hence rejects the replies.  This Committee is of the view that this is a
Page 51 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

very vital piece of information to assess the operation of Central Staffing Scheme.  This Committee
must see if the expenditure incurred  for the purpose is justified and if  not, how best and effectively the
work of the Govt. can be managed in the Secretariat wit hout such expenditure.  The Ministry can not
escape its accountability to provide information on the plea of non-ma intenance of the expenditure on 
their heads.  This Committee, therefore, direct s the Ministry to collect  the data from the othe r
Department/ Ministries and furnish the same to the Committee. 
  
15.9     The Ministry has been asked whether the participation of the memb ers of these services unde r
Central Staffing Scheme up to Deputy Secretary level in the Secret ariat is not an additional benefit to
them in view of the fact that  they are already enjoying smoot h promotional ch annel and caree r
progression at least up to Deputy Secretary/ Director  level? The Ministry ha s shied away to give a
specific reply to this ques tion.  In its ambiguous reply it has stated that the sp ecific purpose the Central
Staffing Scheme is to induc t officers at “ senior” leve l from diverse sources.  Their appointment at the 
centre at various levels for a fixed tenure is not only beneficial to them but also to the Govt of India. 
  
15.10.  It is observed that in view of the very admission of the fact by the Ministry that members of both
Group-‘A’ services and all India Services have their own promotional channel and career progression in 
their respective cadres/ services, it is, in fact an additional benefit for members of these services to join a
post in the Central Secretariat through Central Staffi ng Scheme.  More the repr esentation of a particular
service through Central Staffing Scheme means wider the purview of the cadre of that  particular service
and hence more opportunity for the members of th at service for promotio nal channel and for wide r
career progression.  As the member s of a particular serv ice who have joined th e Central Secretariat
though Central Staffing Scheme, got their promo tion in  time bound manner on fulfillment of the
eligibility period as prescribed in the Scheme during their period of deputation, they need not come back
to the cadre in normal circumstances before completion of deputation.  This Committee understands that
this is the reason as to why there is so much craze for members of these Services to seek posting through
Central Staffing Scheme especially in the level of Deputy Secretary/Director and Under Secretary which
will not only widen the area of thei r respective cadres, but  also will provide an opportunity for them to
stay in Delhi.  But for the members of CSS on th e other hand, their career pr ogression is only confined
to the posts of Under S ecretary and Deputy Secret ary in the Central Secret ariat.  Hence as the
representation of the Gr oup-‘A’ services and AIS in the Centra l Secretariat at the level of Deputy 
Secretary/Director grows, so the promotional opportunity for the memb ers of CSS shrinks.  In this way
the members of the CSS are at a disadvantage positi on.  This Committee, theref ore, desires that the
members of CSS shall be given fair treatment by the Ministry by way of clear demarcation of their cadre
posts up to Deputy Secretary grade out of Central Staffing Scheme so as to give them fair and equal
opportunity for their career progression.  This Committee recommends accordingly. 
    
15.11.0            Another question whether it is a fact that career progression of  CSS officers is confined
only to the posts of Under Secretar y and Deputy Secretary av ailable in the Secretar iat as per statutory
CSS Rules, the Ministry has replie d that as per Rule 3 of CSS Ru les, 1962 the composition of the CSS
cadre is up to the selection grade of the CSS (equivalent to Deputy Secretary grade).  The CSS officers
are entitled to be promoted up to level of Deputy Secretary.  The posts of Director and above are outside
the CSS cadre.  In order to satisf y the aspirations of the CSS cadre for representation at higher levels o f
the Central Secretariat, through an  administrative modality, the CSS cadre has been included as one o f
the participating services  in the Central Staffing Scheme for the posts at th e level of Director and
above.   
  
15.11.1            The other part of the question put be fore the Ministry is that whether it is a fact that all
posts of Under secretary and Deputy Secretary have been taken away from the purview of statutory CSS
Rules and placed under Central St affing Scheme vide an office me morandum, inasmuch as no fixed
percentage/ number of posts have been given to CSS as their cadre posts and that the career progression
Page 52 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

of CSS officers has been squeezed due to non-d emarcation  of fixed number of posts of Deputy 
Secretary and Under Secretar y?  The Ministry has habi tually evaded to give sp ecific and direct reply to
the question neither denying or admi tting the fact.  The Ministry has merely quoted the provisions
contained at para 5( ii) of the Central Staffing Scheme as per which in so far as the CSS officers are
concerned, a specified number of posts at the level of Under Secr etary and Deputy Secretary are treated
as part of their cadre, and posts over and above these will be fill ed under the Central Staffing Scheme. 
As long as the posts at the  level of Under Secr etary and Deputy Secretary are held by CSS officers,
these posts stand outside the Centra l Staffing Scheme.  The Ministry ha s further stated that the Central
Staffing Scheme is a compendium of executive instructions issued by the Government from time to time
and it lays down the methodology for making the “senior” level appointme nts.  The Ministry has also 
claimed that the Scheme has stood the test of the time and provisions contained in the scheme have been
upheld in the Court.  But the Ministry has not gi ven the details of the cas es filed in the Courts,
challenging which provisions of the Central Staffing Scheme and  the ruling of the Court thereon. The
Ministry has also claimed that there is no contradiction between  the CSS Rules 1962 and the Central
Staffing Scheme. 
  
15.12.  This Committee has observed th at the Ministry has not specifica lly denied the existence of CSS
cadre up to the level of Deputy Secretary as per Rule 3 of statutory CSS Rules.  But this Committee does
not understand unless the number of posts in the grades of Under Se cretary and Deputy Secretary are
specified in number and distinctly demarcated how can the cadre would be constituted? Unless the cadre
of CSS in Under Secretary and Deput y Secretary is constituted, how c ould it be known as to how many
posts of Under Secretary and Deput y secretary will be kept over and above the CSS cadre posts to be
filled under Central Staffing Scheme? The stand of the Ministry that “ as long as the posts at the level o f 
Deputy secretary and Under Secretary are held by CSS officers, th ese posts stand out side the Central
Staffing Scheme”, is devoid of reason and logic is not  acceptable to this Committee.  This Committee is
of the view that this is a ploy de vised by the Ministry to keep the to tal number of posts at the level o f
Deputy Secretary and Under Secretar y in floating so as to maneouver  filling the posts through Central
Staffing Scheme to the maximum extent possible when the CSS officers demit office in Under Secretary
and Deputy Secretary grad e by reasons of retire ment or promotion.  Th e Committee, therefore,
recommends that the posts of De puty Secretary and Unde r Secretary shall be specified in numbe r
Ministry/Department wise to the treated as CSS cadr e posts and these shall re main outside the Central
Staffing Scheme to be fi lled up only by CSS officer s in terms of CSS Rules 1962.  In case at a given
time, CSS officers are not availa ble to fill up a cadre post of CS S by any reason, such posts of CSS
cadre may be filled up te mporarily through Central Staf fing Scheme on loan basis.  But as soon as CSS
officers are available, ei ther these cadre posts so filled up through Central Staffi ng Scheme shall be
vacated for CSS officers, or equal number of posts which remain inside  Central  Staffing Scheme shall
be filled up from amongst the CSS of ficers in accordance with CSS Ru les treating these as CSS cadre
posts.   
  
15.13   This Committee also unders tands that since the members of CSS have not separate cadre fo r
promotion to the posts of Director and above outside the Ce ntral Secretariat, it is high time that the
Ministry shall consider the post of Director and above in the Mi nistry/Departments for which CSS
officers are suitable to ha ndle, to be the cadre posts of CSS.  This shall be done  to provide caree r
prospects to CSS DR Section Office rs who join the service through Civil Services Examination. This
Committee is not happy with the present arrangement of keeping all the posts of Under Secretary and
above within the purview of Central Staffing Scheme without givi ng a separate cadre for CSS. This is
because posting under Central Staffing Scheme means posting on tenure basis.  Whereas posting of CSS
officers in the Secretariat can not be treated as tenure post.  Because unlike members of other services of
Group-‘A’ and AIS, they ar e not reverted to parent  cadre on completion of te nure.  They continue to
remain in the Secretariat even if  they are transferred from one Mi nistry to another on the basis o f
rotation transfer policy.  However, the Ministr y is of the considered view that once their cadre is
Page 53 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

constituted up to Joint Secretary leve l, the rest of the posts shall re main within Central Staffing Scheme
for which the CSS officers shall continue to have their right to participate as the selection for these posts
will be based on suitabilit y of the officers for the specific posts and on tenure basis.  The CSS officers
shall be reverted back to their cad re like members of other services on completion of the tenure.  This
Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry shall review the provisions of Central Staffing
Scheme.  The Ministry shall initiat e an exercise to name each post in the grades, of Deputy Secretary,
Director and Joint Secretary Mini stry/Department wise, based on the job description of each post and
specifically put the  suitability c onditions of each post while invi ting nominations from the eligible
officers of the services participating in the Central Staffing Scheme.  The Ministry shall devise the ways
and means so that the selection process to be completed in time so that no post sh all be left vacant at a
given time.  This Committee believes that this recommended arrangement  will bring transparency in the
operation of the Central Staffing Scheme and will reduce the feeling of heart- burning among members 
of different services participa ting in the Central Staffing Sche me.  This Committee recommends
accordingly. 
  
15.14   The Ministry has also sought  to misrepresent the facts to the Committee inasmuch as it has
intimated that the powers to make appointment at Deputy Secretary’s level pos t is vested with the 
Minister in charge of Ministry of Personnel. The fact  is that the process of fo rwarding the panels of the
officers to the concerned Ministries  is initiated by the DOP&T and th e Minister in charge comes into
picture only after  grading of the officers placed in  the panels by the DOP&T has been finalized by the
Civil Services  Board (CSB) headed by the Cabi net Secretary. The Committ ee learns that the
Establishment Officer rarely forwar ds the panels of CSS officers to the concerned Mini stries and since
very few panels are forwarded, le sser CSS officer get selected. The preponderance of probability in the
circumstances suggests that the enti re process of preparation of pane ls and selection of officers fo r
appointment in the Ministries ha s been mismanaged by the DOP&T with malafide intensions and
consequently, the interests of the Central Secretariat Service officers have continued to be harmed. 
  
15.15   In reply to a specific question put by the Co mmittee, about junior of ficers of various Services
being appointed against the senior posts in the Central Secretariat, the Ministry has sought to mislead the
Committee and taken refuge behind the provisions of the Central Staffing Scheme , which is in fact
highly in-equitious as far as Central Secretariat Service officers are conc erned in view of the fact that it
violates the statutory rules. Instea d of taking steps to remove the am biguities from the Central Staffing
Scheme, the Department has sought to take refuge behi nd it not realizing the fact  that the scheme to a
great extent is ultra vires and inc onsistent with statutory provisions. The Ministry has not categorically
replied to the question as to whether officers of various Group A services who are still in the senior time
scale (equivalent to Under Secretary)  in their parent cadre and many of whom are nor in fact eligible to
be appointed to the Junior Administra tive Grade (equivalent to Deputy S ecretary) in their parent cadres,
have been appointed to the Grade of Deputy Secretary as well as Di rectors in various  Ministries and
Departments including the Cabinet Secretariat. 
  
15.16   The fact that the Ministry ha s sought to be evasive on this ground  lends credence to the fact that
Central Staffing Scheme is being operationalised so as to ensure that Central Secretariat Service officers
do not get promoted to the higher gr ades in time. The Committee notes that CSS officers promoted way
back in 1984 as Under Secretary have not been promoted on regular basis as Deputy Secretary even now
whereas officers of other services  who got STS (equivalent to US ) in 1998 have been appointed as
Deputy Secretary. Even  if a person we re to be recruited afresh in 1984 from the market in the lowest o f
Group ‘A’, he would have become eligible for appointment in Dir ector’s grade, but the Central 
Secretariat Service officers in the senior scale are ye t to be promoted to the next higher grade.  The
appointment of Group ‘A’ Officers under Central Staffing Scheme and subs equently promoting them in
Central Secretariat while their prom otions are not due in their respective parent cadre poses stumbling
block on the wa y of promotion CSS Officers who ha ppens to be more ex perienced than the Grou p ‘A’
Page 54 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Officers appointed/promoted under Central Staffing Scheme. 
  
15.17   The Committee is of the op inion that at the apex level of the Government, persons with
sufficiently higher seniority need to  be inducted and the circumstances wherein the officers of different
services, who are still not eligible or have not been appointed to  equivalent posts in their respective 
parent cadres should not be appointed at the apex of the Government in higher positions. Besides
undermining the position of the Government, such a scheme also dilutes the decision making process. In
any case, an officer who is not deemed to be fit to man the DS or Director level post in his parent cadre,
should in Committee’s considered view not merit consideration for ma nning posts at these levels at the 
apex of the government. 
  
15.18   The Ministry has sought to justify non-preparation of panels of Grade I and Selection Grade on
the ground of persistent litigation between Direct Recruit and promotee officers over a number of years.
The Committee understands that at no given point of time, the prepar ation of panels for Grade I o
r
Selection Grade of the Central Secr etariat Service had not been stay ed by any Court and at any given
point of time, a seniority list of Section Officers was in existence. The panels of Grade I and Selection
Grade, could as such have been br ought on an yearly basis subject to  the decision of the Court in such
cases.  The Committee is aware of th e fact that litigation between the direct recruits and promotees is a
phenomenon not specific to CSS and exists in all othe r services also, but unlike in the CSS, the process
of empanelment has not been withhe ld elsewhere. The Department is  trying to justify its inaction in
preparing the panels of Grade I and Selection Grade on the pretext of litigation relating to seniority in
Section Officer’s Grade. Th e Committee learns that the ACRs of the officers of drawing part Panel o f 
1993 have been pending with various  officers for over a year now  and even though some panels o f
Grade I of CSS were brought out a bout a year back, no panel of Se lection Grade has been brought out
even after that. Such enormous dela y in the process is not at all ju stifiable. The Committee had earlie r
recommended that all outstanding pa nels of CSS be brought out in a time bound manner. However, the
Ministry has failed to do so. The Committee now directs that all outstandi ng panels of Central
Secretariat Service be brought out wi thin four months and a comprehens ive report should be sent to the
Committee. 
  
16.0     The Government has stated in reply to a question of the Committee that the rationale for revising
the eligibility criterion for Additi onal Secretary was to correct the a nomaly earlier existed in respect o f
CSS officers on the one hand and th e officers of All India Services and Group ‘A’ Central Services on 
the other in this regard.  It furthe r stated that while a CS S officer with th ree-year service in the Joint 
Secretary grade, irrespecti ve of his total length of service, part icularly Group ‘A’ service, was eligible 
for consideration for empanelment at    Additional Secretary level, the officers of a ll other services
became eligible only after they had completed 20 year s of Group ‘A’ service and at least seven years in 
Joint Secretary’s grade.  Further, th ere were inequity within the CSS al so.  While a junior officer in the
CSS suitability list getting replacem ent as Joint Secretary earlier than  his senior, became eligible fo r
consideration for Additiona l Secretary level empanelment after co mpleting three years service in Joint
Secretary’s grade, the seni or who might have been appointed as Joint Secretary later than his Junior,
could get left out at that point in  time.  This inequity was corrected  by doing away with the requirement
of actual service as Joint Secretar y as a criterion for Additional Secr etary level empanelment.  It is
adequate if the officer has been in  the Joint Secretary’s su itability list for at least 7 years for being 
eligible for consideration for empa nelment at Additional Secretary leve l.  The Department of Personnel
and Training’s note  further states that as per the revise d eligibility condition, 16  CSS officers are at 
present eligible for consideration for empanelm ent for appointment to the grade of Additional
Secretary.  It concludes by saying that  there is no proposal at present to revert to the earlier eligibility
condition of three years service in the grade of Joint Secretary for Central Secretariat Service Officers. 
  
16.1     The lengthy explanation furnished by the Department earlier to the Committee is a well-thou ght 
Page 55 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

out action to ensure that the CSS officers should never become Add itional Secretary.  It is not correct to
say that the CSS officers only with 3 years service as Joint Secret ary were eligible for consideration fo r
empanelment as Additional S ecretary.  This is only half  the truth.  In fact, th e condition hitherto was 3
years actual service as Joint Secret ary and two years to retire.  Even  with these requirements very few
CSS officers in the past had the distinction of reaching the high pos t of Additional Secretary.  There
were only one or two who coul d reach this level.  It is only in the recent past that five CSS officers over
a period of last few years have reached this level and that too almost towards the fag end of their service
career.  In fact, they have received a sort of ‘bonanza’ because of increase in retirement age from 58 
years to 60 years.  Otherwise, th ey would have not even enjoyed th e benefit of drawing the average
pension of Additional Secretary’s pay of one year.  It will be useful to know as to how many CSS officer 
made to the grade of Additional Secretary during last fifteen  years prior to the present five officers who
are in position as Additional Secretary. 
  
16.2     The Ministry has stated that there are 16 CSS officers at present eligible for consideration fo r
empanelment for appointment to the gr ade of Additional Secretary.  It is this ‘large number’ which has 
suddenly arisen which has prompt ed the Ministry to change the criterion for empa nelment of CSS
officers to the level of Additional Se cretary and not that earlier rules which have been in existence since
1957 were iniquitous.  In any case, these 16 officer s have only become eligib le for consideration fo r
empanelment as Additional Se cretary.  The point to be noted is as to how many of them , if at all, some
of them do get into the pa nel.  Further, how long more will they  have to wait before  they actually get
placement? 
  
16.3     It will be relevant to add that the officers who have reached se nior administrative grade of ‘Joint 
Secretary equivalent’ can be appoint ed as Additional Secretary immediate ly if the post is available in 
their respective cadre.  The appoint ment in the Central Secretariat Se rvice for other Group ‘A’ services 
provides an additional avenue to them for promotion. 
  
16.4     The Committee has also noted that the DO P&T talks of parity betw een CSS and other Services
only when such parity is used as an instrument to harm the interest s of CSS, otherwise they refuse to
acknowledge that CSS is a Group ‘A’ Service. How else  can the Ministry explai n the fact that the CSS
officers who form ‘Group ‘A’ Service’  do not get parity with other e qually placed offi cers from other 
Group ‘A’  services? It is a matter  of law and natural ju stice that once an offi cer gets inducted into
Group ‘A’ service, he should get all the entitlements of Group ‘A’ services in matt ers of promotion and 
placements. 
  
16.5     The Committee is not convinced with the argument furthered by the Mi nistry. Firstly, in the
matter or appointment in the Cent ral Secretariat, there is no questi on of any parity between Central
Secretariat Service officers and offi cers of other Services. As far as Central Secretariat Service officers
are concerned, the post of Additional Secretary is a promotion post and officers of other Services get
their promotion within their cadres. 
  
16.6     The Committee, therefore, recommends that  the eligibility conditions  of Central Secretariat
Service officers for appointment as  Additional Secretary may be revi sed and the period of residency in
the suitability for Joint Secretaries be reduced from  seven years to three year s as it had been earlier,
without any restriction wi th regard to the total number of ye ars of service in Group ‘A’.   The 
Committee finds it paradoxical whil e the Ministry steadfastly has been referring to the Central
Secretariat Services Rule 1962 to further the career progression opportunities for the CSS officers
without any valid and good r easons, but at the same time has been  unnecessarily modifying the rules to
the disadvantage of CSS officers purely with a view to destroy and harm the service.  The time has come
when this retrograde step should put to an end so as to provide justice to the service. 
  
Page 56 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
   
 
Page 57 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

MINUTES 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesda y, 28 March 2001 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab MukherjeeChairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
5.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
6.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
  
            LOK SABHA 
  
7.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
8.         Shri Samar Chaudhary 
9.         Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10.       Shri Vijay Goel 
11.       Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
12.       Shri Arun Kumar 
13.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
14.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
15.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
16.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
17.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
18.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
19.       Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma 
20.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
21.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
22.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
            WITNESSES 
             
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
  
1.         Dr. P.D. Sheno
y, Additional Secretary
Page 58 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

2.         Shri G.K. Pillai, Joint Secretary 
3.         Shri N.A. Viswanathan, Financial Adviser 
4.         Shri P. Sudhir Kumar, CCA 
5.         Shri P.C. Rastogi, Director 
6.         Shri P.K. Swain, Dy. FA 
7.         Shri S.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
  
Representative of the Ministry of Personnel, PG& Pensions 
  
1.         Shri B.B. Tandon, Secretary 
2.         Shri K.R. Nair, Additional Secretary & EO 
3.         Shri V.K. Agnihotri, Additional Secretary (AR & PG) 
4.         Shri D.C. Gupta, Additional Secretary (S&V) 
5.         Shri P.K. Brahma, Additional Secretary (Pension) 
6.         Shri Harinder Singh, Joint Secretary (Estab.) 
7.         Shri R.K. Tandon, Joint Secretary (AT&A) 
8.         Shri O.P. Agarwal, Joint Secretary (Trg.) 
9.         Shri NA. Vishwanathan, Joint Secretary & F.A. 
10.       Shri A.K. Saxena, Secretary, PESB 
11.       Shri B.K. Mishra, Secretary, UPSE 
12.       Shri P.C. Sharma, Special Director, CBI 
13.       Shri SNPN Sinha, Secretary CVC 
  
2.0       *                                              *                                              *
 
3.         *                                              *                                              *           
3.1       *                                              *                                              * 
4.         *                                              *                                              * 
5.         *                                              *                                              * 
6.         Thereafter, Chairman and Members sought several clarificati ons. Members expressed thei
r
serious concern over the agitation of the CSS  Officer s and the grievances of the CISF Direct Recruits
Officers. Queries pertaining to the functioning of U PSC, CBI and CVC, promotion prospects o f
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Trib es employees, the accountability an d  transparency in the Ministry
were also  raised. 
7.         The Secretary, Personnel responded to so me of the queries and assu red to send written response
to the remaining points.   
(The meeting adjourned at 2.35 P.M. and  reassembled at 4:00 P.M.) 
8.         *                                              *                                              * 
_____________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matters. 
9.         *                                              *                                              * 
10.       *                                              *                                              * 
11.       *                                              *                                              * 
12.       A verbatim record of the 
proceedings was kept.
Page 59 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

13.       The meeting adjourned at 5.08 P.M. to meet at 11:00 A.M. on 29 March 2001. 
  
***  Relates to other matters. 
  
  
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesda y, 10 April 2001 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab MukherjeeChairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
             
2.                  Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.                  Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
4.                  Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
5.                  Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
6.                  Shri Drupad Borgohain 
7.                  Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
8.                  Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta 
9.                  Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  
            LOK SABHA 
  
10.           Shri S.K.Bwiswmuthiary 
11.              Shri Samar Choudhury 
12.              Shri Arun Kumar 
13.              Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
14.              Shri Subodh Ray 
15.              Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
16.              Shri Anadi Sahu 
17.              Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18.              Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
19.              Dr.Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
20.              Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
21.              Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
             
  
WITNESSES 
Page 60 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
Representative of the Ministry of  Home  Affairs 
  
1.                  Shri Kamal Pande, Secretary 
2.                  Shri M.B. Kaushal, Special Secretary 
3.                  Shri N.A. Viswanathan, Financial Advisor 
  
Representative of the Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grivances and Pensions  
  
1.                  Shri B.B. Tandon, Secretary 
2.                  Shri D.C. Gupta, Additional Secretary 
3.                  Shri P.K. Brahma, Additional Secretary 
4.                  Shri K.R. Nair, Establishment Officer 
  
2.0       *                                              *                                              * 
2.1       *                                              *                                              * 
2.1.0    *                                              *                                              * 
2.1.1    *                                              *                                              * 
2.2.0    *                                              *                                              * 
2.2.1    *                                              *                                              * 
  
2.2.2    *                                              *                                              * 
2.2.3    *                                              *                                              * 
2.3.0    *                                             *                                              *
 
2.3.1    *                                             *                                              * 
2.3.2    *                                             *                                              *  
2.4.0    *                                             *                                              * 
2.4.1      *                                            *                                              *
 
2.5.0    *                                             *                                              * 
2.5.1    *                                             *                                              *
 
2.6.0    *                                             *                                              * 
2.6.1    *                                             *                                              * 
2.7       *                                             *                                              * 
3.0       *                                             *                                              *  
4.0       *                                             *                                              * 
4.1       *                                             *                                              * 
*** Relates to  other matters. 
4.2       *                                             *                                              * 
(The Committee adjourned at 1.00 P.M. and reassembled  at 3.00 P.M.) 
5.         The Chairman welcomed the witnesses from the Ministry of Home  Affairs and Ministry o
f
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pe nsions and drew their attention to the Committee’s dissatisfaction 
Page 61 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

over the Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the recommendations of  the Committee contained in its
earlier Reports. He apprised the Members of the le tter forwarding a note of CISF to the Home Ministe r
to which an interim reply from the Home Minister had been received which indicated the requirement of
some more time to resolve the issue. But on the issue of reallocation of CISF officers into IPS, the Home
Minister has expressed his difficulties and mentioned that it would not be possible to do the same. 
6.         He, then invited the witnesses to indi cate their views on what ma nner the Department plans to
resolve the problem of the grievances of  CISF and CSS officers. 
7.         The Home Secretary at this point made  a brief sketch of the pr omotion prospects of Direct
Recruit Group ‘A’ CISF Offi cers with their counterparts in I PS as well as other Group A Central
Services concluded that the conditi ons of promotion in ot her Group ‘A’ services were more or less the 
same due to the fact that promotions in these services are vacancy-based and prevalent follow rota-quota 
system. He mentioned that reallocat ing CISF officers to IPS would give rise to similar competing
demands from other services which would be difficult to resist on merits. He also apprised the Members
of the  six steps the Department ha s taken to augment the promotional prospects of officers in the CISF
as well as its sister Para-military Forces. 
8.         Most of the Members voiced their desire  to propose a sensible soluti on on the issue and resolve
the deep-seated and legitimate dissa tisfaction of these officers and to  have the assura nce given by the 
Home Minister on the floor of the House fulfilled in a rational and just manner at the earliest.  Members
also expressed their disappointment at the DOPT’s disposal of the Mi nistry of Home Affairs’ proposals 
for improving the service conditions  of the CISF Officers. 
9.         The Secretary (Personnel) at this point offered justifications and highlights of the steps taken by
the Department to improve the promotion prospects of these Officers. 
10.       Some Members also wanted to know how  this Civil Service was converted into CISF and
therefore requested for more information on its recruitment. 
11.       The Chairman while concluded the interactions on the issue of CISF with a request to Secretaries
of Ministries of Home Affairs and Personnel, Public Grievances and Pe nsions to furnish written replies
within the next three days and a suggestion to find a way out and resolve this genuine grievances
amicably.  He then invited the Secretary (Personnel) to give a brief presentation on the grievances of the
CSS officers and steps taken to resolve the issue. 
12.0     The Secretary (Personnel) gave a brief sket ch of the agitation of th e CSS officers and informed
the Members  that   eleven demands have been specified with regard to this. 
12.1     The first demand specified was an increase in  the pay scale in tune wi th employees of Supreme
Court. The second demand is that all eligible Assistants, Section Officers, Under Secretaries and Deputy
Secretaries should be given in situ promotion. 
12.2     Other demands included all posts of Deputy Secretaries should be  filled up by the CSS, panel o f
Deputy Secretaries should be made, open pass facility for Assistants, CSS should be gi ven a Group ‘A’
status and the Section Officers should be given Under Secretary’s scale ,etc. 
*** Relates to  other matters. 
12.3     The Secretary also brought to the notice of  the Members that a Depa rtmental Committee had
been set up on 28 February 2001   to look into the gr ievances of these officer s and present its Report
within three month’s time. 
13.       Most of the Members expressed thei r strong resentments over the manner the Government
handles  the issue and urged the Mi nistry  to solve the problems at the earliest. Suggestions were also
made that immediate intervention of  the Department to bring the ag itating officers of CSS to the  
negotiating table was the need of the hour.
Page 62 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

14.       The Chairman noted that  the agitational path chosen by the CSS officers was not conducive to a
proper working  atmosphere. However, he stressed that no vindictive action fr om any side should be
resorted to. He made suggestions as to whether it is possible to stop direct recruitment of Section
Officers, keep all posts of Unde r Secretary level on the promotion quota, reserve 50 per cent of Deputy
Secretary posts of promotion quo ta for Under Secretaries who ar e promoted from the CSS cadre,
bringing down the length of service for the CSS of ficers for promotion, give some more in situ
promotions and regular cadre review to subdue the agitation.  
15.       The Chairman then asked the Secretary (Personnel) to send written replies to the queries raised. 
16.       A verbatim record of  proceedings was kept. 
17.       The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee adjourned at 5:27 P.M. 
  
  
XX 
TWENTIETH    MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday,  13 June  2001 in  Committee  Room ‘C’,  
Ground  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab MukherjeeChairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
3.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
4.         Shri Drupad Borgohain 
5.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
6.         Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
7.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
8.         Shri M.O.H. Farook 
9.         Shri Arun Kumar 
10.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11.       Shri P.H. Pandian 
12.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
13.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
14.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
15.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
16.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
17.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
18.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Page 63 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
2.0       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed th at some members of the
Committee and a few other Members of  Parliament had requested him to  invite the offi cers of Central
Secretariat Service, who were on relay hunger strike for quite some time and the Director-General, 
CISF, to hear their viewpoints on the personnel policy of CSS and CISF, respectively, before the
Committee.   He then told the Members to consider the draft Report on the personnel policy of CISF and
CSS, as circulated to them, as a preliminary document and give suggestions/comments thereon. 
2.1         The Chairman mentioned that if th e Committee so desired, Dir ector-General of CISF and 
representatives of CSS Forum might be invited to appear before the Committee before the draft Report
on the subject was finalized and sought the opinion of the Members. 
3.0       Members expressed diverse views on the issue.   Most of the Members we re of the view that the
DG, CISF could be heard regarding the genuine grievances of CISF officers.  As  regards hearing the
agitating CSS Forum officers, Members differed in th eir opinion.  Some felt that representatives of CSS
Forum be heard whereas others were of the view  that  the agitation of the Forum smacks  of indiscipline
and they should not be encouraged  by giving an a udience before the Committee.  Again some Members
were of the view  that inviting the representatives of the CSS Foru m before the Committee would set  a
bad precedent.   
3.1       Some Members expressed the view that st rictures  may be passed  against the Home Secretary
and Secretary (Personnel) for furn ishing  wrong replies to the Commit tee, on CISF and  CSS issues. 
Another Member brought to  the notice of the Committ ee that six months extens ion had been  given to
the  Brahma Committee, which was instituted to go into the personnel policy of CSS. 
3.2       After due deliberations, the Committee tent atively agreed that the  Director-General, CISF may 
be invited  in connection with the grievances of direct recruit Group ‘A’ CISF Officers.   
3.3       Regarding invitation to the  representati ves of CSS Forum, the Committee agreed that the matte r
be left to the Chairman to take a decision.   It also decided that the Report on CISF and CSS  be taken up
at a later date after considering every aspect of the issues involved. 
4.0       *                                              *                                              * 
4.1       *                                              *                                              * 
5.         The Committee adjourned at 11.45 A.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 25 June 2001. 
  
*** Relates to  other matters. 
  
  
XL 
FORTIETH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M.  on Friday, 19 October, 2001 in Committee Room  ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukher
jee             ––        Chairman
Page 64 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
5.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
6.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
7.         Shri P.H. Pandian 
8.         Shri Subodh Ray 
9.         Shri Anadi Sahu 
10.       Shri  Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
11.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
12.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
13.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
14.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
  
WITNESSES 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
  
Shri A.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
Shri K.V. Eapen, Director 
Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Director 
  
  
2.0       At the outset, the Committee took up fo r consideration Memoranda Nos. 1 & 2 pertaining to
personnel policies of Central Industria l Security Force and Central Secret ariat Service. In that context,
the Chairman informed the Committee that he alongwith another member of the  Committee [Shri Anadi
Sahu, MP (LS)] had met Home Minister sometime  ago and urged upon him to use his good offices to
find an early solution to the problems of the direct  recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF and also of the 
members of the CSS.   He further informed that the matter, however, had re mained unresolved and two
Departmental Committees (Bhandari Committee on CISF and Brahma Committee on CSS), constituted
to look into the grievances, had been given extension of time uptil the end of November 2001.  
2.1       Thereafter, the Chairman drew attention of the Committee to the draf t Report of the Committee
on “Personnel Policies on CISF & CSS’   which had been circul ated to the Members and the 
consideration thereof was deferred.   In those circumstances, he sought the opinion of the members as to
the course of action to be adopte d. He suggested two course of ac tion for the consideration of the
Committee i.e. (i) the Committee could wait for the re ports of the two De partmental Committees or (ii)
Page 65 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

the Committee could reiterate it s views/observations/recommenda tions and present its Report to
Parliament. 
3.0       Some of the Members desired that the Committee should wait for reports of the two
Departmental Committees and fina lise its Report after taking into account the recommendations made
therein. 
3.1       Another strand of opinion was that the Committee should not wait for the reports of those
Committees and straightway finali se its Report as the Committee had already waited for too long.
Certain Members wanted that the Committee should pass severe strict ures against the Home Ministry
and the Ministry of Personnel for their casual and perfunctory manner of handling the subject and
repeated attempts at misleading the Committee and procrastinating the subject for too long a time. 
4.         The Chairman striking a balance between the different strands of opi nion of the Members of the
Committee suggested that the Committee may wait till the end of Nove mber by which time some inputs
were expected to be received. He also suggested that in the in terim the Committee may authorise him to
write to Prime Minister in respect of CSS and Home Minister in respect of CISF, conveying the feelings
and decision of the Committee in the matter. The Committee endorsed the suggestions of the Chairman. 
(At this point the witnesses took their seats) 
5.0              *                                                          *                                                          * 
6.0       *                                                          *                                                          * 
6.1       *                                                          *                                                          *  
7.0       *                                                          *                                                          * 
7.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
7.2.0    *                                                          *                                                          * 
7.2.1    *                                                          *                                                          * 
7.2.2    *                                                          *                                                          * 
7.3       *                                                          *                                                          * 
8.0       *                                                          *                                                          *           
8.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
8.2       *                                                          *                                                          * 
8.3       *                                                          *                                                          * 
*** Relates to  other matters. 
  
9.0       The Chairman informed the Committee that  clause – by-clause consid eration of the Bill woul d 
be taken on 1 November, 2001 as more than fifteen members had alrea dy made their observations.  He
requested the Secretary (Personnel) to send their submission on the queries by 30 October 2001. 
  
10.       A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
  
11.       The meeting was them adjourned at 1.20 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 30 October 2001. 
  
XLIX 
FORTY-NINTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 11 December 2001 in Committee Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
Page 66 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
3.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
  
            LOK SABHA 
  
4.         Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
5.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
6.         Shri M.O.H.  Farook 
7.         Shri P.H. Pandian 
8.         Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
9.         Shri Subodh Ray 
10.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
11.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
12.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
13.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
14.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
  
              
SECRETARIAT 
  
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
            Shri A. K. Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
2.0       *                                              *                                              *
 
2.1       *                                              *                                              * 
3.         *                                              *                                              * 
3.1       The Chairman informed Members about the letters he had written to  Prime Minister  and Home
Minister with regard to the feel ings of the Committee on issues of personnel po licies of CSS and CISF,
respectively.    
____________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to  other matters. 
  
3.2       He also suggested to  the Members that if they  desire any change  in the draft Eighty-third 
Report, they may write to the Secretariat within the next four days. 
4.         At this point, a Member while making a reference to  the agitation of the CSS Forum, observed
that the CSS could  not be compared with  All India Service.  He also opined that it was not desirable o f
the CSS to put pressure on the Govern ment by resorting to the agitation.  He also pointed out that since
the Central Secretariat Service constitutes  upto the rank of De puty Secretary, the members of CSS have
legitimate claim upto De puty Secretary and their representation beyond Deput y Secretary may not be
emphasised   and that there should be no weightage from Deputy Secretary and above. 
Page 67 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

4.1       Some Members observed that the Parlia mentary Committees were lo sing credibility and the
Government was not taking their reco mmendations/suggestions seriously especially with regard to this
Committee’s recommendations on CSS and CISF. Othe r Members observed that the agitation of the
CSS was constitutional and, therefore, should be viewed  sympathetically. 
  
5.0       The Committee, however, adopted the draft Eighty-third Report and decided to present  the same 
to both  the Houses of Parliament on 19 December 2001. 
5.1       The Committee authorised its Chairman a nd in his absence Shri S.  Ramachandran Pillai, MP
(RS) to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha.  It nominated Shri Anandi Sa hu and in his absence Dr.
Raghuvansh Prasad Singh MPs (LS) to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha  
5.2       *                                              *                                              * 
6.0       *                                              *                                              * 
6.1.2    *                                              *                                              * 
6.2       *                                              *                                              * 
6.2.2    *                                              *                                              * 
6.3.0    *                                              *                                              * 
6.3.3    *                                              *                                              * 
6.4.0    *                                              *                                              *                                  
6.4.1    *                                              *                                              *                      
6.5.0    *                                              *                                              * 
6.5.1    *                                              *                                              * 
6.6.0    *                                              *                                              * 
6.6.1     *                                             *                                              *
 
6.7.0    *                                              *                                              * 
6.7.1        *                                              *                                              * 
6.8.0    *                                              *                                              * 
6.8.1    *                                              *                                              * 
6.9.0    *                                              *                                              *  
____________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to  other matters. 
  
6.9.1        *                                              *                                              * 
6.10.0  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.0  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.1  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.2  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.3  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.4  *                                              *                                              *
Page 68 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

6.11.5  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.6  *                                              *                                              * 
6.11.7  *                                              *                                              *          
6.12.0    *                                              *                                              *  
6.12.1  *                                              *                                              * 
6.13.0  *                                              *                                              * 
6.14.0  *                                              *                                              *          
6.14.1  *                                              *                                              * 
6.14.2  *                                              *                                              * 
6.15.0  *                                              *                                              * 
6.15.1  *                                              *                                              * 
6.16.0  *                                              *                                              *
 
6.16.1    *                                              *                                              * 
6.17.0  *                                              *                                              * 
6.17.1  *                                                          *                                              * 
6.18.0  *                                                          *                                              * 
6.18.1    *                                                          *                                              *          
6.19.0  *                                                          *                                              * 
6.19.1    *                                                          *                                              * 
6.20.0  *                                                          *                                              * 
6.20.1    *                                                          *                                              * 
6.21.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.21.1  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.21.2  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.22.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.22.1
     *                                                         *                                              * 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to  other matters. 
6.23.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.23.1     *                                                         *                                              * 
6.24.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.24.1
     *                                                         *                                              * 
6.25.0     *                                                         *                                              * 
6.25.1  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.25.2  *                                                         *                                              * 
Page 69 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

6.26.0  *                                                         *                                                * 
6.26.1  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.27.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.27.1  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.28.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.28.1
     *                                                         *                                              * 
6.29.0  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.29.1     *                                                         *                                              * 
6.30     *                                                         *                                              * 
6.30.1  *                                                         *                                              * 
6.31     *                                                         *                                              * 
7.         The Committee adjourned at 5.05 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M.  on 19 December, 2001. 
  
*** Relates to  other matters. 
  
  
ANNEXURE 
ANNEXURE-I 
(See page 41, para 11.02 of the Report) 
  
A list of Central Secretariat Service Officers who are empanelled to hold posts of Joint Secretary 
and still awaiting placement is given below:- 
  
1.         Shri B.L. Bhadu 
2.         Shri R.K.M. Bhattacharya 
3.         Smt. Jayashree Gupta 
4.         Shri P.M.  Sirajuddin 
5.         Shri R.T. Pandey 
6.         Mohd. Aslam 
7.         Shri J.B.Sinha 
8.         Shri S.S. Sharma 
9.         Shri Mohinder Singh 
10.       Smt. Gargi Mukherjee 
11.       Smt. P. Mohan 
12.       Shri D.P. Roy 
13.       Shri Joginder Singh 
14.       Smt. Veena Brahma 
15.       Shri P.K. Seth 
16.       Shri H.C. Jayal 
17.       Shri Harcharan J. Singh 
18.       Shri  A. Banerjee 
19.       Dr.(Smt) Kiran Chadha 
20.       Shri Surender Dev Singh 
21.       Shri S. Gopal 
22.       Shri P.N. Thaku
r 
Page 70 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

 
1 Central Secretariat Clerical Service consis ting of two grades viz. LDC (Lower Division Clerk) and UDC (Upper Division Clerk), w ho 
usually report to Section Officers, is subordinate to CSS and is also the feeder service to CSS at Assistant level. 
  
2 Central Secretariat Stenographers’ Service, consists of four grades viz. Grade ‘D’ (Steno) Grade ‘C’ (Personal Assistant) Grade 
‘B’ (Private Secretary) and Grade ‘A’ (Principal Private Secretary).  Grade-‘D’ Stenographers normally assist the Section Officers/Desk 
Officers/Under Secretaries, Grade ‘C’ Stenographers to Deputy Secretary/Director, Private Secretaries to Joint Secretary and Principal 
Private Secretary to Additional Secretary/Secretary to the Government of India in discharge of their duties. 
3 Annual Report (2000-2001) of Ministry of Personnel Public Grievances and Pensions,p.8 (para 2.9)
 
  
  
4 Central Secretariat ( Rules, 1962), Rule 13(6). 
5 Ibid, Rule 13(1) 
6  Ibid, Rule 12(2) 
7 Ibid, Rule 12(1) 
8 DOPT  Order No. 21/6/98-CS-I dated 28 February 2001. 
9 Unstarred question No. 1323 dated 29 November 2001. 
10 The Ministry in the reply to the Unstarred Question  No.1741 dated 28 November 2001 has  assured that the said information is being  
collected and would be laid on the Table of the House. 
11 Prior to the year 1989 the Union Republic Service Commission (UPSC) and now the Staff Selection    
    Commission(SSC).  
12  DOPT OM No. 12/4/87-CS-11,  dated 12 October  1980. 
13 DOPT  Order No. 5/28/89-CS II (iii) , dated 12.11.1991. 
14 Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Notification, dated 21 June 1995. 
15 Annexure to DOPT OM No. 5/26/89-CS II(iv),  dated 12.11.91. 
16  DOPT OM No.2/24/97-PIC, dated 21.7.1997. 
Page 71 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm

17 DOPT  order No. 13012/1/98-Estt(D), Dated 20.4.1990.
Page 72 of 72PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/83rdreport.htm