Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
220
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on th December, )11 2019
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December, )11 2019
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained  in  the Two  Hundred  Fifteenth  Report  on Working
Conditions  in  Non-Border Guarding  Central Armed  Police
Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve
Police Force and National Security Guard)
TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained  in  the  Two  Hundred  Fifteenth  Report  on  Working
Conditions  in  Non-Border  Guarding  Central  Armed  Police
Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve
Police Force and National Security Guard)
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 11th December , 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 432


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)-(vii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-40
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................................................ 2-10
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations on which the committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply................ 11-19
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the committee........................ 20-33
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply
of the Government have not been received ............................................. 34-40
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ......................................................... 41-48
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 4 9-52
7. A PPENDIX .............................................................................................................................. 5 3-60

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September , 2019)
1. Shri Anand Sharma —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya
4. Shri Manish Gupta
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P .P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Additional Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Twentieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the
Two Hundred Fifteenth Report On ‘Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding Central Armed Police
Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force and National Security Guard)’.
2. The Two Hundred Fifteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the
12th December, 2018. After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of
Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee
on 3rd July, 2019.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24 th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Twentieth Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 9th December, 2019.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
Anand Sharma
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
9th December, 2019 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  18, 1944 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

           ACRONYMS
AIIMS : All India Institute of Medical Sciences
ARC : Aviation Research Centre
AAI : Airport Authority of India
ASG : Aviation Security Group
ASI : Assistant Sub-Inspector
BGF : Border Guarding Forces
BSF : Border Guarding Force
BOO : Board of officers
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BPR&D : Bureau of Police Research and Development
BDDS : Bomb Detection & Disposal Squad
BSNL : Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
BHEL : Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited
BTCP : Bomb Threat Contingency Plan
BISAG : Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics
CAPF : Central Armed Police Force
CPC : Central Pay Commission
CTS : Central Training School
CBI : Central Bureau of Investigation
CT : Constable
CBE : Computer Based Examination
CASO : Chief Airport Security Officer
CWF : Central Welfare Fund
CWS : Central Weapon Store
CoS : Committee of Secretaries
CoBRA : Commando Battalion for Resolute Action
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CRPF : Central Reserve Police Force
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
(iv)

(v)
DCPO : Driver-cum-Pump Operator
DoP&T : Department of Promotion and Training
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DGCA : Director General Civil Aviation
DSPT : Digital Satellite Phone Terminals
DSIIDC : Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation
DDA : Delhi Development Authority
DIG : Deputy Inspector General
DG : Director General
DPR : Detailed Project Report
DDO : Drawing and Disbursing Office
DTH : Direct-to-Home
FSSAI : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
GD : General Duty
GBS : Government Building Security
GOI : Government of India
GMS : Grievances Management System
GMHAT : Global Mental Health Assessment Tool
GPR : Ground penetrating radar
GDA : Ghaziabad Development Authority
HBA : House Building Advance
HC : Head Constable
IB : Intelligence Bureau
IBUS : Immediate Backup Support
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research 
IFD : Integrated Finance Division
IPS : Indian Police Service
IAF : Indian Air Force
ITBP : Indo Tiberal Border Police
ITPO : India Trade Promotion Organisation

(vi)
IEDs : Improvised Explosive Device
LWE : Left Wing Extremism
MT : Motor Transport
MDINY : Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MOD : Ministry of Defence
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MoRD : Ministry of Rural Development
MACP : Modified Assured Career Progression
NSG : National Security Guard
NPA : Non Practice Allowance
NIMHANS : Neurological Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NTRO : National Technical Research Organisation
NCB : Narcotics Control Bureau
NCR : National Capital Region
NIA : National Investigation Agency
PSF : Processing and Storage Facility
PPO : Pension Payment Order
PSUs : Public Sector Units
PST : Physical Standard Test  
PET : Physical Endurence Test
RTC : Recruit Training Centres
RCP : Road Connectivity Project
RO : Reverse Osmosis
RRP : Road Requirement Plan
R&AW : Research and Analysis Wing
SSB : Sashastra Seema Bal

SSG : Special Security Group
SVPNP A : Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy
SPG : Special Protection Group
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SI : Sub Inspector
UBGL : Under Barrel Grenade Launchers
UAV : Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
VRS : V oluntary Retirement Scheme
(vii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifteenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the Working Conditions in Non-Border
Guarding Central Armed Police Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force
and National Security Guard). The said Report of the Committee was presented to the Parliament on
12
th December, 2018.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs in respect of the observations/
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Fifteenth Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : The Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Paras: 2.4.4, 3.5.3, 3.9.3, 3.9.4, 3.11.5, 3.15.4, 3.15.6, 3.17.2, 3.20.2, 3.22.4, 4.7.2
and 4.8.6 (of the Two Hundred and Fifteenth Report)
TOTAL : recommendations - 12.
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted twelve of its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter II : The Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies:
Paras: 2.8.8, 2.8.14, 2.9.4, 2.10.6, 3.6.3, 3.10.4, 3.12.3, 3.13.4, 3.16.4, 3.21.2, 4.4.6,
4.4.7, 4.4.9, 4.7.3 and 4.8.7 ( ibid)
TOTAL : recommendations - 15.
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, does not
want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III : The Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry:
Paras: 2.5.4, 2.7.3, 2.8.6, 2.8.13, 3.4.9, 3.4.10, 3.7.3, 3.8.5, 3.13.5, 3.14.6, 3.18.5,
3.19.3, 4.5.2, 4.6.3, 4.8.4 and 4.9.2 ( ibid)
TOTAL : recommendations - 16.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of sixteen of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should take further necessary action and furnish
convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of three months after presentation
of the Report.
Chapter-IV : The Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received:
Para: 2.6.7, 2.8.4, 3.4.5, 3.4.6, 3.12.6, 3.12.9 and 3.18.7 ( ibid)
TOTAL : recommendations - 07.
In respect of the seven recommendations placed in Chapter IV , the Committee feels that the Ministry
has either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized
in Chapter-IV as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee within three months.
The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated above, in
the succeeding Chapters .

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
1.1 Promotional avenues
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee takes note of the severe stagnation at several ranks of Group B&C such as Constable/
Fire, Head Constable/Fire, SI/Steno, ASI/Clerk, Constable/GD and feels that requisite measures need to be
taken to address the issue of stagnation at these ranks. The Committee observes that a constable gets
promoted to the post of Head-Constable (GD) in 22 years in contrast to the eligibility period of 5 years.
Similarly, a Head-Constable (GD) gets promoted to the post of ASI (Exe) in 16 years in contrast to the
eligibility period of 5 years.
 The Committee is anguished to note such severe stagnation in the lower ranks
of CISF. The Committee feels that lack of promotional avenues is a huge demoralizing factor for the CISF
personnel. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the cadre review of Group B & C ranks must
be expedited and it must be ensured that the CISF personnel, especially at the lower ranks, are able to get
their first promotion within ten years of recruitment.
(Para 2.4.4 of 215
th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 CISF is a need based Force. Deployment of CISF in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) is based on
the joint survey of CISF and the concerned Management. Assessment of strength is based on the norms
approved by the Govt.
1.1.3 To redress the stagnation of promotion in lower rank, CISF has undertaken cadre review for the post
of  Group B & C, which has been approved by creating 7675 Group B & C posts in various ranks as
mentioned below vide MHA letter dated 05
th February, 2018, which will open the promotional prospects and
reduce the time taken in  the lower ranks:-
Rank No. of posts created
Insp./Exe 429
ASI/Exe 5307
SI/MT(New Post) 86
ASI/MT  (-do-) 257
Insp./Min 41
Insp./Steno 13
Insp./Fire 17
ASI/Fire &Lab 167
HC/Tradesmen 1358
Total 7,675
2

3
1.1.4 Further, as per Rule-5 of CISF Rules-2001, local rank up to the rank of Commandant shall be conferred
by the DG whenever considered necessary by him in the interest of better functioning of the Force. The
officers of the Force, who have been granted a local rank, shall exercise the command and be vested with
the powers of an officer holding that rank, shall not be entitled to any extra pay and allowances for holding
such rank and shall not be entitled to claim any seniority over other officers of the Force by virtue of having
held such rank.
1.1.5 Local Ranks are given to fill up the vacant posts for operational requirements and smooth functioning
of the Force without any financial implication. In CISF, such requirements arise only when vacancies in a
particular rank exists but the eligible personnel are not available to fill those vacancies due to non-fulfilling of
eligibility criteria of required length of service. As on date, such situation does not exist in Group ‘B’ and ‘C’
posts. The personnel are also granted financial up-gradation under Modified Assured Career Progression
(MACP) Scheme in accordance with Government guidelines.
Further Recommendation
1.1.6 The Committee appreciates that the CISF has undertaken the cadre review and approval has
been obtained for creating 7675 posts in various ranks of Group B and C to redress the problem of
stagnation.
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
1.2 Raising Battalion 241 for fighting Naxal Menace
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee appreciates the effort of the Ministry to recruit locals from the Naxalite affected areas
which would prove beneficial for the Force to connect with the locals. The Committee also appreciates the
effort of the Ministry to include women in the formation of the Bastariya battalion. The Committee feels
that by this effort of the Government the problems related to local language, cultural gap and knowledge of
terrain would be minimized. The Committee recommends that special focus be given on every aspect of
training of these recruits, both male and female, such that their induction into the CRPF is smooth. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should make provisions for ensuring safety of the families
of the Bastariya battalion personnel. (Para 3.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 On the issue regarding ensuring safety of the families of the Bastariya Bn personnel, following actions
has been taken:-
(i) DIsG of Jagdalpur, Dantewada, Sukma, Konta, Bijapur and Commandants of 241, 85, 168,
195, 231, 226, 217, 74, 1111, 229 & 201 Bn are working to assess the threat level faced by the
family members with the assistance of the state police and other agencies to take suitable
measures.
(ii) All personnel have been directed to sensitize their family members to take necessary precautions.
(iii) All personnel have been directed to relocate their families to safer areas, if required in case of
extreme level of threat, subject to the condition that same is accepted by them and necessary
infrastructure for this purpose is available.

4
(iv) Providing physical security to the family members, in general, is not advisable as it will increase
the threat level.
(v) Based on the evolving situations, further necessary actions, as deemed fit, shall continue to be
taken to ensure security of the family members of local posted in this area.
Further Recommendation
1.2.3 The Committee notes that adequate steps are being taken by the Government for ensuring
the safety of the family members of the Bastariya battalion personnel.
1.3 Basic amenities - Food and drinking water
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee feels that it is essential that the jawans are provided with good quality food. But the
Committee is disappointed to note that the CRPF personnel posted in Chhattisgarh, who are serving under
extremely hard conditions with enhanced threat to life, have to go through difficulties in even getting their
daily meal requirements fulfilled. They have to depend on local haats and contractors for supply of raw
material for their food. The Committee recommends that a full proof mechanism should be developed for
ensuring regular supply of nutritious food, including dishes/raw materials of different cuisines to all CRPF
camps particularly those which have no access or difficult access to local market like Bastar in Chhattisgarh.
The Ministry may explore the feasibility of using refrigerator vans to supply food articles periodically and
the less accessible places of deployment like Bastar. (Para 3.9.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 It is true that places of deployment of CRPF are remotely located wherein procuring nutritious food
or food as per the taste is a difficult proposition. However, regular supply of food items to remote camps is
being ensured through helicopters. All units/ coys of CRPF deployed in less accessible places are also being
provided the following facilities:-
(i) Feasibility of using refrigerators vans for the above purpose is also being explored. However, all
CRPF Unit/ coys have already been provided a sufficient number of Deep Freezers to keep their
food items fresh. Atta kneading machines have been provided for better food processing. Potato
peeling machines have also been provided. RO water purifiers have been provided for potable
water for force personnel even in remote areas.
(ii) Food warmers and hot cases have been provided up to section level for serving hot food.
(iii) Regular monitoring mechanism through Mess Committees and reviews of quality of food and
hygiene inspections during visits by senior officers are in place for ensuring purchase of standard/
good quality ration items for the mess.
(iv) Refresher courses and training for cooks/ mess staff are being imparted at regular intervals.
(v) A balanced mess menu prepared by an expert dietician has been circulated to all formations of
CRPF for the needful.
Recommendation
1.3.3 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should form a Food Inspection

5
Committee comprising dieticians, experienced food inspectors, and officials of the Ministry, tasked with the
duty of performing surprise checks of food quality and hygiene, especially at the remote and inaccessible
locations. (Para 3.9.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.4 There is an inbuilt provision of routine inspection of the food at senior level and as and when there is
a visiting officer who visits the Coys ensures that food quality is as per the menu vetted by Administrative
Directorate, CRPF.  So far as engagement of dietician is concerned, Medical Directorate in consultation
with Administration Directorate provides guidelines about what all is to be an essential element in the menu
of the personnel. MHA has directed all subordinate offices/messes to obtain FSSAI registration/License
under FSS, Act-2006.
Further Recommendation
1.3.5 The Committee notes the provision made for ensuring regular supply of nutritious food for
CRPF personnel posted in extremely hard conditions and remote areas.
1.4 Housing and accommodation
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee is dismayed to observe that the housing satisfaction level in the CRPF is just 11.83
per cent which is the lowest amongst the CAPFs. Even after completion of 12,014 quarters that are under
construction, the housing satisfaction level will rise only to 15.77 per cent which unfortunately would
continue to remain the lowest in all the CAPFs. The Committee feels that such a poor level of housing
satisfaction level could be one of the major reasons for high attrition rate in the Force. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the construction of the 12,014 houses that are under construction must be expedited
and completed as per schedule without time and cost overrun. The Committee further recommends that the
Government should chalk out an ‘Action Plan’  to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining
38,353 quarters within the stipulated timeframe. (Para 3.11.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 Present Housing Satisfaction level in CRPF 49.20 percent against authorised dwelling units. With the
completion of 7,551 houses under construction the housing satisfaction level will be enhanced to 57.86
percent. All out efforts are being made to complete the houses within stipulated time. Further, MHA on 29
th
March, 2019 has accorded sanction for purchase of 578 ready built flats from DDA.   
Further Observation
1.4.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
1.5 Stress management
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee notes the high levels of stress to which the CRPF personnel are subjected because of
continuous deployment in high intensity conflict areas, where they are compelled to live in pathetic living
conditions. This is forcing personnel of the country’s largest CAPF to suffer from mental and emotional
stress. The Committee feels that the happiness and wellness quotient of the Force personnel is under heavy

6
stress and strain. The Committee recommends that some mechanism like weekly video conferencing with
their families etc. may be considered by the Ministry. Furthermore, recreational facilities such as indoor
and outdoor games, DTH connections, etc. may also be provided at the camps.
(Para 3.15.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 Medical Directorate has taken various steps to counsel the troops through counsellors and early detection
of mental illness through Global Mental Health Assessment Tool (GMHA T) App. Sufficient medicines and
laboratory investigations have been provided at unit level for timely health care of the troops.
1.5.3 CRPF is working regularly for providing better accommodation to its men in the areas of posting
with recreational activities and indoor and outdoor games facility. CRPF is endeavouring to implement
Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Application and Geo-informatics (BISAG) programme for providing
video conferencing of troops with their families in non networked areas.
1.5.4 Proper counseling of personnel at Training Institutions is being done by the method of Roll call
meetings, Sainik sammelans, Welfare meetings, regular interaction/interviews. Instructors also counsel the
trainees for redressing their grievances.
1.5.5 Y oga, physical exercises, sports activities and adequate entertainment measures are being adopted at
Force level to reduce stress amongst all Force personnel. Moreover, personnel while going on leave/reporting
from leave are being interviewed and grievances if any, are being resolved immediately.
1.5.6 At present 5250 Master Yoga Trainers are available in CRPF who have undergone 3-4 month course
at Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDINY), New Delhi and Sector level. Services of these Master
Yoga Trainers are being utilized to conduct yoga session on daily basis to reduce the stress level of Force
personnel. Besides, yoga classes have been included in the syllabus of Basic training and all in-service
courses in CRPF.
1.5.7 Besides, Stress Management and Meditation programme is also being organized from time to time
with the help of other organizations i.e. Brahmakumari, Shri Rameysh Sharma, Shri Ramchandra Mission
etc. to reduce the stress level among the Force personnel.
Further Observation
1.5.8 The Committee hopes that the plethora of measures undertaken by CRPF for improving
living condition would alleviate the mental and emotional  stress of CRPF personnel and their
‘Wellness and happiness quotient’ would improve.
Recommendation
1.5.9 The Committee notes the point that counseling sessions of stressed CRPF personnel instead of being
conducted by professionals and psychiatrists are done by senior officers.
 The Committee fails to understand
how a jawan, who is stressed due to his living conditions in the Force, could confide in his superior with his
problems some of which might possibly be related to his superiors themselves. The Committee feels that this
could be a major factor contributing to the high attrition rate in the Force. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that professional counselors and psychiatrists should be recruited in CRPF and regular counseling
sessions of jawans must be conducted by these professionals only. (Para 3.15.6 ibid)

7
Action Taken
1.5.10  CRPF is trying to have maximum number of counsellors by imparting training to the CT/GD to
Inspector/GD so that they could counsel the troops at Platoon levels. The following studies have already
been done regarding mental health of troops:-
(i) Epidemiological study to assess the psychiatric morbidity in CRPF by the Psychiatrists of
CRPF with the help of AIIMS and ICMR during the year 2010-11.
(ii) NIMHANS (Neurological Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences)–Study on  development,
implementation & Evaluation of a training program in mental health care is in process w.e.f.
2016 to study the mental health of CRPF personnel and to train counselors upto the rank of
Commandant for counseling of the troops. 
(iii) Publication of Handbook on Human Behaviour and Mental Health composed by board of Medical
Officers including Psychiatrists of CRPF has been completed during 2018 and being circulated
to all Institutions as a guideline for counselling of the troops to reduce stress, suicide and
fratricide among the troops.
1.5.11  Instructions on all above studies have been circulated to all the Institutions including Battalions of
CRPF for proper counselling of the troops to address their stress. Proper counseling of personnel at Training
Institutions is being done by the method of Roll call meetings, Sainik sammelans, Welfare meetings, regular
interaction/ interviews. Instructors also counsel the trainees for redressing their grievances.
1.5.12  Yoga, physical exercises, sports activities and adequate entertainment measures are being adopted at
Force level to reduce stress amongst all Force personnel. Moreover, personnel while going on leave/reporting
from leave are being interviewed and grievances if any, are being resolved immediately.
1.5.13  At present 5250 Master Yoga Trainers are available in CRPF who have undergone 3-4 month course
at Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDINY), New Delhi and Sector level. Services of these Master
Yoga Trainers are being utilized to conduct Yoga session on daily basis to reduce the stress level of Force
personnel. Besides, Yoga classes have been included in the syllabus of Basic training and all in-service
courses in CRPF.
1.5.14  Besides, stress management and Meditation programme is also being organized from time to time
with the help of other organizations i.e. Brahmakumari, Shri Rameysh Sharma, Shri Ramchandra Mission
etc., to reduce the stress level among the Force personnel.
Further Observation
1.5.15  The Committee hopes that elaborate institutional arrangement for stress management, yoga
classes and regular counseling of jawans by professional and psychiatrists  would reduce stress,
cases of suicide and fratricide in CRPF and would also have positive impact on attrition rate amongst
CRPF personnel.
1.6 Operational issues - Modernization
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee feels that usage of drones is a very important component to help the CRPF personnel
during surveillance and reconnaissance in day and night operations in the dense forests of naxal affected

8
areas as well as in Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee, in this connection, wishes to draw the attention of
the Ministry towards the recommendation made in para 5.17.3 of its 214threport on “Working Conditions in
Border Guarding Forces” and reiterate the said recommendation that an early decision should be taken by
the Government on increasing the usage of drones for surveillance and reconnaissance by the CRPF.
(Para 3.17.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 MHA has authorized 55 Nos. Mini UA V (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) under MOD Plan-II for the period
2012-17 on 03
rd May, 2013 and further 30 Nos. Micro UA V was authorized under MOD Plan-II on 21 st
March, 2014 and this authorization subsumed within the overall authorization of UA Vs under MOD Plan-II.
Out of which 30 Micro UA V was procured.
1.6.3 Further, MHA has authorized 300 Nos. Micro and 150 Numbers Mini UAV vide letter No. R.XV.11/
2017-18-C (UA V) MHA-Prov-I-2004 dated 18
th July, 2017 out of which 28 Nos. Micro UA Vs have been
procured and procurement of 20 Nos. Mini UA Vs is under process. Remaining UA Vs will be procured in
phased manner.
1.6.4 At present, 58 Numbers of Micro UAVs are available with CRPF and deployed in LWE theatre/J&K
Zone for surveillance/ reconnaissance purpose and utilized by concerned units on regular basis.
1.6.5 After completion of procurement against authorization UAVs will be deployed in LWE theatres /J&K
zone for surveillance /reconnaissance purpose.
1.6.6 MHA have authorized 150 Mini and 300 Micro UA V for LWE affected area. Procurement process for
the same is on. CRPF is effectively using UAVs available with CRPF.
Further Observation
1.6.7 The Committee believes that authorized number of Mini and Micro UA V will be procured at
the earliest and deployed for effective usage in LWE affected areas and violence affected J&K Zone
for surveillance and reconnaissance purposes.
1.7 Infrastructural issues - Mobile connectivity
Recommendation
1.7.1 The Committee notes that the problem of poor mobile connectivity persists in areas of deployment of
CRPF personnel. The Committee recommends that the Government should make efforts to strengthen mobile
and internet connectivity, if not by the State owned service providers, then by providing for the presence of
private mobile service providers in such difficult areas so that regular mobile and internet services can be
availed by each and every jawan on their own mobile phone devices.
(Para 3.20.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.2 Mobile connectivity is available in most of the CRPF locations except interiors of LWE areas. In those
locations other sources of Communication like DSPT, Satellite phones are made available.
1.7.3 Further, 199 towers out of 226 sites proposed by CRPF have been installed in various CRPF locations
in the first phase. BSNL has finalized installation of 1657 towers in the LWE areas. Out of 1657 proposed
sites, CRPF has deployed at 77 locations in Chhatisgarh, 81 in Jharkhand & 02 locations in Maharashtra.

9
Further Observation
1.7.4 The Committee hopes that all BSNL approved towers would be installed for facilitating CRPF
to have the mobile connectivity and internet service to enable CRPF personnel to have
communication with family members.
1.8 Grievance Redressal
Recommendation
1.8.1 The Committee notes that a majority of grievances reported in CRPF are related to pension. The
Committee recommends that the issue of pensioners must be given due attention by the authorities. These
grievances must be redressed speedily and timely. The Ministry should reach a situation where no personnel
retires without a PPO (Pension Payment Order) and any case of retirement without at least a provisional
PPO must be reported to the Force HQ. The case must be resolved by the Force HQ within 30 days of receipt
of the r eference. The Committee also recommends that the CRPF must maintain a fair and transparent
transfer policy by allowing transfer requests to be made only through on line mode.
(Para 3.22.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 In order to redress the grievances speedily and timely, Grievances Management System (GMS) portal
has been launched on 12
th November, 2017. All pending grievances are monitored by Welfare Directorate
One Nodal Officer at all Sectors level has been detailed for close monitoring of grievances. Besides, for
speedy clearance of pension cases, Government has introduced “BHA VISHY A” portal wherein online pension
cases are processed. Further, all DDOs have been directed to ensure that pension of each personnel is
passed before proceeding on superannuation. Moreover, provisional pension is determined and sanctioned
within timelines by the concerned Head of Office to the retiring personnel against whom disciplinary
proceedings are pending.
Further Observation
1.8.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD
1.9 Training Issues
Recommendation
1.9.1 The Committee notes the training apparatus in NSG and feels that there are several improvements
that can be brought to enhance the operational capabilities of the Force. The Committee is of the view that
NSG needs to adopt the best global practices by conducting regular joint-training and mock-drills with its
counterparts from countries that have superior capabilities and vast experience in dealing with counter-
terrorist operations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation
with the Ministry of External Affairs, should evolve a mechanism for conducting joint training programmes
and mock drills with the Special Forces of friendly foreign countries to enhance the capabilities of NSG . The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should identify certain foreign training programmes that can
help improve the capabilities of NSG personnel and regularly nominate them for such programmes.
(Para 4.7.2 ibid)

10
Action Taken
1.9.2 Agenda points for Counter Terrorism and Road Map for future exchanges (18-24 months) have been
prepared for the friendly foreign countries especially the countries which have superior capabilities and vast
experience in dealing with Counter Terrorism Operations. The details are shared with MHA for inclusion in
Joint Working Group on Counter Terrorism with friendly foreign countries.
1.9.3 During last one year 41 personnel of NSG visited 11 countries in connection with the training/courses
for NSG. Also, 28 foreign delegates of 03 countries visited NSG in connection with visit/training at NSG .
Further Observation
1.9.4 The Committee appreciates that MHA acted upon the recommendation of the Committee for
enhancing the operational capabilities of NSG through appropriate training with foreign delegation.
The Committee is of the considered view that adoption of the ‘best global practices’ pertaining to
training modules of NSG would certainly improve the capabilities of NSG personnel in performing
its entrusted duties and responsibilities.
1.10 Dedicated Air Wing
Recommendation
1.10.1  The Committee observes that NSG has yet not tested its power to commandeer any aircraft in real-
time circumstances and feels that, unless this power is used, the Force would remain unaware of the response
time and logistical challenges that it may face in operational situations. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the NSG should be advised to plan a real-time scenario for testing its power to commandeer any aircraft
in real-time circumstances for the sake of enhancing operational preparedness and pre-empt any surprises
that it may face during actual operations. (Para 4.8.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.10.2  NSG in a meeting on 20
th December, 2018, with Dy. Dir DGCA, Jt. GM AAI and representatives of
commercial airlines conveyed its requirement in terms of type of aircraft and timings and the same was
agreed upon by DGCA and representatives of commercial airlines. Further, NSG conducted an exercise on
01st February, 2019 at IGI Airport by involving DGCA, AAI, CISF and Air India. The conduct of this
exercise was smooth and NSG has been assured that the requirement of NSG in terms of type of aircraft
will be made available within shortest possible time.
Further Observation
1.10.3  The Committee takes note of the reply.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
2.1 Modernization of the Force
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee appreciates that the BISAG is a very useful and cost effective programme used by
BSF for the purpose of monitoring and redressing grievances at the highest level. The Committee takes note
of the submission of DG , CISF that BISAG can also be used by CISF. The Committee feels that this programme
can be used by CISF for two-way communication with the various units and personnel deployed in several
important installations across the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that further modalities
may be worked out and necessary infrastructure may be arranged in consultation with various stakeholders
for adoption of BISAG programme by CISF . (Para 2.8.8 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.2 In place of Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-informatics (BISAG), CISF has
developed its own webcast system which is economical compared with BISAG.  DG/CISF interacts with all
CISF Units/Formations through this application.
Further Observation
2.1.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
2.1.4 The Committee observes that the canines deployed along with the Force play a very crucial role. The
dog squad, therefore, forms an essential part of the Force. The Committee is of the considered view that
proper rearing of the dog squads and adequate training of the handlers appointed in the Force is very
important for effective and efficient use of the canine. The Committee, in this connection, recommends that
sufficient number of dog squads including the Mudhol Hound breed of Karnataka and the Belgian Malinois
breed may be considered by the CISF to meet its requirement of providing security cover to various buildings
and vital installations. (Para 2.8.14 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.5 As recommended by the Committee, further action is being taken for considering the Mudhol Hound
breed of Karnataka and the Belgian Malino breed and their suitability in performance of duties pertaining to
CISF. Necessary action in this regard is being taken accordingly.
Further Observation
2.1.6 The Committee takes note of the reply.
2.2 Attrition
11

12
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that the jawans leaving the Force for better opportunities in the
private sector is a major reason for attrition in the CISF . The Committee feels that once a jawan gets
training in the Force, he/she becomes an asset to the Force; therefore, they should be given enough incentives
so that they are motivated to remain in the Force. The Committee understands that other factors like high
level of stress and strain could also be causes of attrition. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
measures should be taken to improve the working conditions significantly to motivate the personnel to stay,
even when they are offered better opportunities elsewhere. The Committee further recommends that the
Ministry should conduct exit interviews or survey among the personnel opting for voluntary retirement and
resignation to assess the factors leading to attrition and undertake appropriate measures to address the
concerns of the personnel so that attrition in the Force can be curbed. (Para 2.9.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The following steps have been taken in CISF for improving the working conditions, reduce stress/
attrition:-
(i) There is a robust grievance redressal system existing in CISF.
(ii) In all the field formations, requisite infrastructure at the work place has been provided by the
concerned Management of PSUs where CISF personnel are deployed.
(iii) Leave planning is being carried out and granted to personnel as and when required.
(iv) Proper and professional Counseling to CISF personnel is being given at all levels during briefing/
debriefing, roll call, Sanik Sammelan, etc.
(v) Imparting proper training to senior force personnel for showing sensitivity and humaneness in
dealing with their subordinates.
(vi) The system of interaction of senior officers with personnel is institutionalized by means of
Sainik Sammelan, Request Room etc. The jawans are also encouraged to meet the senior
officers for discussing their problems.
(vii) Fair and transparent policies are being adopted.
(viii) Sufficient recreation facilities are provided according to requirement.
(ix) All the basic amenities/facilities are provided to the Force personnel by the management of
concerned PSUs where the Force has been deployed.
(x) Electricity is available at duty posts as well as dwelling places of CISF personnel.
(xi) Sufficient vehicles are available in all the Units/Formations for picking and dropping of personnel
to duty locations as per requirement.
(xii) The field duty points are well connected with the Unit HQ `, Control Rooms with dedicated
telephone facility or local wireless communication system.
(xiii) Loans to Force personnel for HBA, Education and Computer etc. is provided as per Rule.

13
(xiv) Sanrakshika (CISF Wives Welfare Association) helps CISF personnel to discharge their duties
without stress as the wellbeing of their families are being taken care by the support system
provided by Sanrakshika.   
2.2.3 With regard to conducting exit interviews or survey among the personnel opting for voluntary
retirement, it is submitted that Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions had launched “Anubhav”
portal in March 2015 at the behest of the Hon’ble Prime Minister for retiring (including VRS) government
officials to leave a record of their experiences while in Government Service. CISF is using this platform for
creating useful database with respect to its employees.
2.2.4 Accordingly, the retiring personnel share their experiences on the portal which creates a useful database.
Further Recommendation
2.2.5 The Committee takes note of the steps undertaken by CISF for improving the working
conditions of the force by reducing stress, strain and the attrition in CISF.
2.3 Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry to facilitate the CISF personnel to raise their
grievances through various media of grievance redressal available for them. The Committee desires that the
Grievance Redressal Mechanism of CISF must be efficient in resolving grievances of the personnel. It must
be robust and should reflect a system of speedy and fair adjudication of grievances without delay.
(Para 2.10.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 For speedy and systematic redressal of grievances of CISF personnel, an online system “E-grievance
Portal” has been introduced in CISF w.e.f. 01
st September, 2016. The online application is being monitored
centrally at CISF HQrs and DIG/Welfare has been nominated as the Nodal officer. Pendency of grievances
is being reviewed on a weekly basis.
2.3.3 Further, on 11
th May 2017, Hon’ble Union Home Minister has launched a mobile application namely
“Grievance and Feedback Management System” for grievance redressal of CAPFs personnel. The mobile
App is centrally maintained by Border Security Force. Personnel can also submit their grievances directly to
DG/CISF and other Senior Officers through e-mail, by post and by hand.
Further Recommendation
2.3.4 The Committee takes note of the action taken by the Ministry for speedy and systematic
redressal of grievances of CISF personnel.
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
2.4 Promotional Avenues
Recommendation
2.4.1 The Committee notes that uniformed forces are highly structured organizations with well defined
roles and responsibilities. Therefore, it may not be possible to remove stagnation only by creating additional

14
posts. However, the Committee feels that not being given adequate career progression opportunities acts
as a highly de-motivating factor for the personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government may consider the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations under the Modified Assured
Career Progression (MACP) scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32 years of service instead of the
existing scheme that provides only three financial up-gradations at intervals of 10, 20 and 30 years of
service at par with other civilian employees. The Committee is of the considered view that the CRPF
personnel, who are facing excessive stagnation in their career growth, must be provided certain special
incentives to keep their morale high. (Para 3.6.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 As per DoP&T guidelines applicable uniformly to all Government Departments, MACP are to be
given on completion of 10, 20 & 30 years of service which is in vogue in CRPF as well.
Further Recommendation
2.4.3 The Committee notes that Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) applicable to all
Government Departments is being extended to CRPF too.
2.5 Attrition
Recommendation
2.5.1 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Ministry to curb the attrition rate in the
CRPF . However, the Committee notes that attrition rate is high in all the CAPFs owing to the implementation
of Seventh Central Pay Commission due to which there were considerably large number of voluntary retirement
cases in the year 2017. However, the Committee also observes that there is no visible decrease in the number
of resignations since the year 2014 as well. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
conduct a survey among the personnel to assess the factors leading to such large number of VRS and
resignations and undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns of the personnel so that this trend
can be curbed. (Para 3.10.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.2 The reasons for voluntary retirement are mainly due to various personal and domestic reasons, including
children/family issues, health/illness of self or family, social/family obligations and commitment etc. Some
personnel also sought voluntary retirement to enjoy a static life as well as pensioner benefits after completing
20 years of service.
2.5.3 The other factors for providing good living facilities, sanction of leave sympathetically, providing of
housing facility for families are also important issues and continuous efforts are being made towards these
measures.
Further Recommendation
2.5.4 The Committee notes the steps being taken to avert the incidences of attrition in CRPF.
2.6 Medical facilities
Recommendation
2.6.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that the CRPF personnel are posted in areas where there is a

15
continuous threat to life and that may lead to stress among the personnel. However, high numbers of cases
of heart attacks indicate that the medical facilities provided to the personnel are neither adequate nor up to
the mark. The Committee feels that the reasons such as continuous deployment in stressful situations and
hard areas and irregular eating/sleeping cycles could be brought under control through efficient personnel
management. The Committee, therefore, recommends that annual medical checkups of all the personnel be
conducted regularly, especially of those who are deployed in hard area postings and preventive measures like
yoga/regular counseling etc. may be proactively implemented to keep their health issues in check. Preventive
health care must be introduced as part of the health check up of personnel. The Committee further recommends
that the personnel going through the stress of extremely prolonged separation from their families should be
granted leave liberally to the extent they are eligible in a year.
(Para 3.12.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.6.2 Annual  medical checkups of all personnel of the force are being conducted as and when it is required.
The personnel found suffering from chronic diseases are being placed in Low Medical Category and are
being posted at low stressed static locations so that they could be treated properly.
2.6.3 Preventive  measures like Yoga/regular counselling etc. have been implemented proactively at sub unit
level in the units which are specially deployed in operational/hard areas.
2.6.4 All  the hospitals in CRPF are well equipped to diagnose and treat the patients. Laboratory facilities are
extended up to unit levels. Malaria diagnostic kits and anti snake measures are also available at unit level.
Since annual medical examination of troops is being done regularly, if any patient found suffering from
Psychiatric ailment or heart disease, they are being treated in Composite Hospitals by posting them at static
locations.
2.6.5 On 25
th April, 2019, Government has approved establishment of a 50 bedded Composite Hospital at
Jagdalpur (Chhattisgarh) by upgrading existing 02 Nos of 20-bedded hospitals of 201 CoBRA and 204
CoBRA Battalions of CRPF involving creations of 60 posts and abolitions of 14 posts.
Further Observation
2.6.6 The Committee takes note of the reply.
2.7 Working hours
Recommendation
2.7.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that the CRPF personnel work for 12-14 hours a day and more
than 80 per cent of CRPF personnel cannot avail of holidays and Sundays. The Committee understands that
the job of armed force personnel is such that he/she has to be alert 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and 365
days a year. However, working 12 to 14 hours daily with no scope for holidays and Sundays would bring in
the psychological and physical consequences on the personnel and would affect their work. It is important
to acknowledge that the working hours regulation under Indian Labour Law stipulates a maximum of 48
hours per week. While of course, the armed forces are exempted from this directive, it does indicate that their
working hours are neither healthy nor sustainable in the long term. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that some mechanism should be worked out by the Ministry to provide the much needed rest and optimal duty
hours for the personnel. (Para 3.13.4 ibid)

16
Action Taken
2.7.2 Generally the working hours in the Central Armed Police Forces are 8 hourly shifts. However, troops
are also required to remain alert and sensitive to any emergency situation due to operational reasons. Necessary
leave/training reserve is built in the structure of Battalions so that the personnel get rest and leave. Measures
have been taken to implement a transparent, rational and fair leave policy and to regulate duty hours to
ensure adequate rest and leave.
Further Observation
2.7.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
2.8 Operational issues- Deployment
Recommendation
2.8.1 The Committee notes the fact that only 2.27 per cent of the Force personnel are given the opportunity
to go on deputation. The Committee feels that the CRPF personnel, with vast and rich experience and
expertise in internal security operations, should be sent on deputation to the state police, especially in
dealing with grave issues of militancy and extremism. There is a need to institutionalize such deputations at
different levels, including higher formations. This will ensure that the core competence of the CRPF is
utilized in the best manner and best public interest. Furthermore, the CRPF personnel have vast experience
in different arenas of operation, but most of them are not exposed to professional managerial training
because nearly all in service trainings are technical. Deputation will give them the opportunity to grow and
develop in other areas as well and acquire leadership and management skills. (Para 3.16.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.8.2 Of ficers are deputed to other organizations (viz NSG , SPG, NDRF etc.)  as per the quota fixed by
MHA. Further officers are also being deputed to other CPOs (viz IB/BoI, CBI, SVP NPA.
2.8.3 Of ficers are deputed to R&AW, NCB, NIA, SSB, BPR&D, State Police (Chhattisgarh Police, Odisha
Police, Bihar Police, Jharkhand Police, Punjab Police, Uttarkhand Police, Kerala Police (IR Bn)], Civil Department/
Offices viz NTRO, NDMA, ITPO, BHEL, Maharashtra Sadan, Rajya Sabha Sectt., MHA, MoF, Bureau of
Civil Aviation,) liberally on case to case basis provided vacancy for the particular post/rank in CRPF does not
exceed 10% of the total sanctioned strength as prescribed in deputation policy of MHA.
2.8.4 MHA has fixed quota in various organizations of different posts as NSG- 1377, SPG-1008,
NDRF-3294, IB- 416, MHA-7, SVP-NPA-86. However, demand in various Departments/Ministry/State is
being received in this Directorate, nominations of willing/ eligible personnel are sent as per laid down eligibility
criteria.
Further Observation
2.8.5 The Committee takes note of the reply.
2.9 Protection against Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in Naxalite areas
Recommendation
2.9.1 The Committee observes that the threat of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) is one of the greatest
challenges in the LWE area. The Committee feels that security of the CRPF personnel against IEDs should

17
be a top priority for the Government. The Committee is aware that IEDs have consumed lives of several
personnel and there is a need to employ advanced techniques and technology that allow remote detection
and eradication of buried IEDs. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make an effort towards
development of technology to counter the threats posed by IEDs in the LWE affected area. The Committee
further recommends that adequate and regular training should be provided to the CRPF personnel to enable
them to face the challenges and threat of IEDs. Moreover, the CRPF personnel must be trained in use of
technology (including drones) to increase surveillance around patrols.
(Para 3.21.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.9.2 CRPF will acquire the latest security gadgets like hand held metal detector, vehicle mounted GPR, pre
initiator, cable and wire locater etc. to neutralize the Improvised Explosive Device (IED). More number of
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA V) is being procured for the field units for increased surveillance. The Institute
of IED Management at Pune is engaged in training in IED related matters.
Further Observation
2.9.3 The Committee hopes that CRPF would continue to procure the latest and state of the art
security gadgets to ensure the security of CRPF personnel against the challenges and threats of
IEDs or other improvised devices especially in the naxalite areas.
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD
2.10 Personnel Issues
Recommendation
2.10.1  The Committee notes the high turnover rate in the NSG and the lack of a permanent cadre of its own.
The Committee also notes the extremely short periods of deputation of just two years for the Officers and
three years for the Commandos, who come from the Army. The Committee observes that the effective tenure
for an individual officer/ commando is even lower due to training, leave and other commitments. The
Committee also notes the submission of DG , NSG that the Army Officers feel that the deputation tenure
should be longer of upto five years. However, the Committee is not sure whether the personnel coming from
Indian Army would be able to maintain the demanding physical fitness required in NSG for longer tenures of
up to five years and whether the Army would be willing to spare its Officers for such long duration. The
Committee feels that this issue needs to be thoroughly discussed among the relevant stakeholders before a
decision is taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should attach top priority to this issue and form a working group comprising both past and present NSG
personnel to examine the pros and cons of a longer tenure of deputation and accordingly suggest changes in
the NSG s deputation policy. (Para 4.4.6 ibid)
Action Taken
2.10.2  Permanent Cadre involves either direct recruitment or permanent absorption of deputationists
from various Forces/organizations. NSG is constituted mainly by personnel from Indian Army and Central
Armed Police Forces on deputation basis roughly on a 50:50 ratio. The NSG deputationists in their parent
Forces are governed by different sets of Pension Rules with different service conditions, which cannot
be carried forward uniformly while considering permanent absorption of Army/CAPFs deputationists. As

18
regards to direct recruitment, same is not desirable as the NSG get select/trained manpower from Army
and CAPFs, which is to be continued in view of its specific role. Periodic turnover keeps the organization
profile young and brings new & fresh ideas. As such, creation of a permanent cadre for NSG, in general,
is not recommended for the present. With regard to Army Officers tenure in NSG, reply is covered in
para 4.4.7 below.
Further Observation
2.10.3  The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
2.10.4  The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that a proposal to
increase the tenure of deputation of personnel of CAPFs to NSG from the present duration of five to seven
years is under consideration of NSG . The Committee feels that this proposal needs to be considered
expeditiously. The Committee recommends that it may be decided on priority by the Ministry.
(Para 4.4.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.10.5  The initial tenure of deputation of NSG personnel is 5 years in cases of CAPFs deputationists and 2½
to 3 years in the cases of Army. As per DoP&T OM No.2/6/2016-Estt (P-II) dated 17
th February, 2016, the
tenure of deputation of NSG personnel is extendable to 7 years on case to case basis, which is already being
followed in the cases of CAPFs/ other Central Government deputationists.
Further Observation
2.10.6  The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
2.10.7   The Committee desires that the issue may be studied thoroughly and suitable decision taken in the
matter . (Para 4.4.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.10.8   NSG having regard to the observations of the Committee examined the matter and is of the view
that the existing system with the terms and conditions of appointment in NSG on deputation basis is functioning
effectively, which is recommended to be continued.
2.11 Training Issues
Recommendation
2.11.1  The Committee also takes note of the other measures such as specialised trainings, availability of
military transport aircraft, and construction of Special Operations Training Centre and a Sniper Range that
are essential for strengthening the training system and infrastructure in NSG. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should urgently undertake all these measures in a time-bound manner to enhance the
operational efficiency of NSG . The training and capacity building of the NSG must be dynamically augmented
to remain in tune with the terror threats and other subversive activities that imperil the country’ s security.
(Para 4.7.3 ibid)

19
Action Taken
2.11.2  Adequate training infrastructure is available with NSG for special training except a dedicated Sniper
Range. Adhoc arrangements are in place to undertake Sniper Firing, a Sniper Range is proposed in and
around Manesar to meet its training requirements. The recommendations are noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
2.11.3  The Committee hopes that the proposed Sniper Range in and around Manesar would be
arranged without delay.
2.12 Dedicated Air Wing
Recommendation
2.12.1  The Committee also takes note of the submission of DG , NSG that power to commandeer an aircraft
is sometimes limited to only certain classes of aircraft. The Committee feels that NSG must be empowered to
requisition any type and capacity of aircraft for both operational and training purposes under any circumstances.
The Committee is of the view that NSG is a force that is sparingly used only in situations of extreme threat
and heavily relies on regular training to achieve operational preparedness. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that no restrictions should be placed on the power of NSG to requisition aircraft.
(Para 4.8.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.12.2   There is no restriction on type of Aircraft requisition for meeting operational requirements.
Further Observation
2.12.3   The Committee takes note of the reply.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
3.1 Deployment and transfer policy
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry to resolve the issue of transfers and postings
in the CISF . As the current policy of recruitment in CISF is based on proportionate representation of each
state, there is more recruitment from the densely populated States of the northern region. However, the
Committee notes that the number of CISF units located in the northern region is limited and thus this
policy does not allow the personnel to have sufficient opportunities to live with their families which
results in a large number of requests for transfers and posting to the northern region. The Committee feels
that this policy of recruitment needs some modification by incorporating a need-based component in the
recruitment policy. The Committee, in this connection, recommends that the Ministry may review CISF s
recruitment policy, which is at present primarily based on population of the states, to include demand-
specific recruitment component. The Committee is of the view that this will, to some extent, resolve the
problem of geographical imbalance and allow the personnel to be posted in their home states.
(Para 2.5.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.2 CISF is conducting recruitment as per Recruitment Rules and MHA policy/guidelines.
3.1.3 Recruitment for the post of Constable (GD) in CAPFs/ARs is being done as per the guidelines contained
in Revised Scheme as under:-
i) 60% of vacancies are allotted amongst States/UTs on the basis of population ratio.
ii) 20% of vacancies in the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) (BSF, ITBP, SSB & Assam Rifles) are
allotted to border districts, which fall within the responsibility of the Force.
iii) 20% of vacancies in BGFs are allotted to areas affected by militancy i.e J&K, North Eastern
States and Naxal Affected Areas. The districts/areas affected by militancy are notified by the
Government from time to time.
iv) In Forces, other than Border Guarding Forces, 40% vacancies are allotted to militancy affected
areas i.e J&K, North Eastern States and Naxal Affected Areas.
v) Recruitment for other posts viz. SI/Exe, SI/Fire, ASI/Exe, ASI/Steno, HC/Min, Constable (Driver
& DCPO), Constable/TM is being conducted on all India basis and the vacancies are not
allotted to states on the basis of population.
Further Recommendation
3.1.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that the present rules/regulation
and the recruitment policy have proven to be inadequate in resolving the issue of transfer and
postings in the CISF. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation at para 2.5.4 of the
20

21
215th Report i.e. to review CISF s recruitment policy, which is at present primarily based on population
of the states, to include demand-specific recruitment component. The Committee is of the view that
this will, to some extent, resolve the problem of geographical imbalance and allow the personnel to
be posted in their home states.
3.2 Medical facilities
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry regarding the reasons for vacancies in the
medical staff of CISF . The fact that CISF personnel are posted in far flung areas/remote areas of the country
is all the more reason for ensuring sufficient availability of medical staff at all the CISF units. The Committee
is of the considered view that better pay and allowances/perks and higher hardship allowance would incentivize
the doctors to serve in the CISF . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take immediate
measures to enhance the pay and allowances for the doctors to be appointed as regular medical officers to
fill up these vacancies at the earliest. (Para 2.7.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 As per MHA Order No.27012/33/2003-PF.III dated 2
nd September. 2004, requirement of Medical
Officers in CISF is met exclusively by ITBP being a combined cadre with ITBP. The cadre controlling
authority for this joint cadre is ITBP, which is providing medical officers to CISF as per sanctioned posts of
doctors in CISF. As on date, 32 doctors are posted against the sanctioned strength of 52.
3.2.3 As of now, Non Practice Allowance (NPA) - is being paid at the rate of 20% of the basic pay to
Doctors as per 7
th CPC recommendations vide MoF Dept. of Exp. OM dated 07 th July, 2017.
3.2.4 Other allowances, as per Government of India guidelines and applicable as per pay scale and
location specific allowances viz Hard area allowances etc., are being paid to the doctors depending upon
admissibility.
Further Recommendation
3.2.5 The Committee is surprised to note that cadre controlling authority for Medical Officers
in CISF is ITBP which is a border guarding force whereas the CISF provides security to
Government buildings and other establishment like PSU and at airports. No rationale has been
provided for such an arrangement. The Committee therefore, feels that this arrangement needs
to be revisited. Moreover, CISF personnel are posted all over India whereas ITBP is posted in a
border. The Committee also notes that only 32 doctors are posted against the sanctioned strength
of 52 doctors and thus the joint Controlling Authority i.e. ITBP, has not been able to attract the
sufficient number of doctors for its basic medical requirements despite of providing pay and
allowances/perks as per extant rule. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier
recommendation to provide incentives to the doctors to serve in the CISF. In the meanwhile,
ITBP should complete the process for filling up the existing vacancies of 20 doctors to facilitate
medical requirement of CISF.  The Committee further recommends that CISF should also tie
up with the PSUs for extending the medical facilities to its personnel who are on deputation to
tide over the shortage of doctors.

22
3.3 Modernization of the Force
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) is
crucial for airport security. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the 59 airports guarded by the
CISF in the country must have operational BDDS teams of CISF and the Ministry must ensure that these
teams are provided all the essential bomb diffusing equipment such as explosive vapour detectors and
remote-operated vehicles. (Para 2.8.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 The Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in the meeting held on 18
th April, 2011 had decided that Ministry
of Civil Aviation may provide an estimated ` 300 crore, on loan basis, to the Airport Operators for installing
28 gadgets for Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) at each of the 18 airports (hyper-sensitive &
international) included in the 1 st phase, which may be repaid by the Airport Operators over the next 3-4
years, including by raising the PSF fee.
3.3.3 At present, out of 28 Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) equipments mandated by Bureau
of Civil Aviation Security  (BCAS), the following number of BDDS equipments have been procured by the
Airport Operators at 22 Hyper-sensitive and International airports identified in the 1 st phase, under CISF
security cover:-
Sl. Name of the No. of equipment No. of BDDS No. of BDDS
No. Airport mandated by BCAS equipment procured equipment deficient
by Airport Operator
12 3 4 5
1. IGI Delhi 28 25 3
2. Mumbai 28 26 2
3. Hyderabad 28 20 8
4. Chennai 28 25 3
5. Kolkata 28 25 3
6. Cochin 28 22 6
7. Amritsar 28 24 4
8. Agartala 28 23 5
9. Ahmedabad 28 25 3
10. Bagdogra 28 23 5
11. Calicut 28 23 5
12. Guwahati 28 23 5
13. Imphal 28 23 5

23
14. Jaipur 28 25 3
15. Pune 28 23 5
16. Raipur 28 24 4
17. Trivandrum 28 24 4
18. Varanasi 28 26 2
19. Goa 28 25 3
20. Bangalore 28 26 2
21. Lucknow 28 2 26
22. Jodhpur 28 1 27
3.3.4 The status of operationalization of Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) at other airports
under CISF security cover is as under:-
(i) Presently, BDDS of CISF has been operationalized only at 07 airports (Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai,
Kolkata, Hyderabad, Cochin and Amritsar).
(ii) For 08 airports (Agartala, Imphal, Pune, Raipur, Goa, Varanasi, Jaipur & Bangalore) necessary
directions have been issued by CISF to the concerned Chief Airport Security Officer (CASOs)
to fully operationalize the CISF BDDS by 15
th May, 2019, after revision of Bomb Threat
Contingency Plan (BTCP) and imparting refresher training to BDDS personnel.
(iii) At 05 airports (Bagdogra, Guwahati, Trivandrum, Calicut and Ahmedabad), few of the crucial
BDDS equipments have not yet been provided by AAI and few of the essential BDDS equipments
are either not working or are under repair since long. In the absence of such crucial equipments,
BDDS of the Aviation Security Group  (ASG) cannot be made operational at these airports.
Airports Authority of India has been requested to get these faulty equipments repaired. However,
CISF is presently performing anti-sabotage and Bomb detection duties with the available
equipments at these airports and bomb disposal duties are being performed by the local police
BDDS/ other agency.
(iv) The matter is regularly being pursued with the Airport Operators, Ministry of Civil Aviation
and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security to procure the BDDS equipments for the remaining
airports.
Further Recommendation
3.3.5 The Committee takes a strong objection to the fact that at 05 Airports (Bagdogra, Guwahati,
Trivandrum, Calicut and Ahmedabad), some of the crucial BDDS (Bomb Detection and Disposal
Squad) equipments have not been provided by the Airport Authority of India (AAI) and few of the
essential BDDS equipments are either not working or are under repair since long. The Committee
is at pains to observe that in the absence of such crucial and essential equipments the Aviation
Security Group (ASG) is not operational at these airports, therefore, the CISF faces acute problem
12 3 4 5

24
in performing anti-sabotage and bomb detection duties at these airports. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should appropriately intervene and take up the
matter with Airport Operators, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security to
meet the requirements of CISF at these five airports on priority. The MHA should also take up the
matter urgently for providing adequate number of BDDS equipments required at 22 Hyper-sensitive
and International airports without delay. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
status of operationalisation  of CISF BDDS system at 08 airports, that was scheduled by May, 2019
after revision of Bomb Threats Contingency Plan and completion of refresher training courses to
BDDS personnel.
Recommendation
3.3.6 The Committee feels that the dogs, along with the proper and regular training for their specific roles,
need to be groomed regularly to prevent them from contracting seasonal skin diseases such as external
parasites, ticks and lice. In addition to this, the dog handlers also require special training in order to get
acquainted with the dogs and their training and rearing needs. (Para 2.8.13 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.7 The CISF dogs are groomed/ trained at various training institutions of CAPFs such as BSF Tekanpur,
CISF CTS Ranchi, ITBP Bhanu etc. Every dog training institution is having qualified veterinary doctors who
are taking care of dogs during training. The doctors are also taking classes for dog handlers to teach them
how to take care of dog’s hygiene and health.
3.3.8 Further, while the dogs are undergoing Basic training (Tracker for 24 weeks or Explosive for 36
weeks), during the entire period, each dog has a handler. After completion of dog training, the handlers are
also being posted to the unit along with the deployment of dogs. Since, the handlers always accompany the
dogs; they are well acquainted with the needs of dogs.
Further Observation
3.3.9 The Committee in its meeting held on 9
th December, 2019 raised the concern that the dogs
with the CISF are not taken good care of, to the extent that those on duty are seen to have skin
diseases, look pale and seems to be not fit for duty. Since, the Ministry is providing sufficient funds
for maintenance/training of the dogs, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry must
look into the matter and instruct the CISF to assess the health of all the canines with the force and
take remedial measures, if necessary. The Committee also recommends that the funds meant for
the dog squad should be utilized fully and properly to maintain the canines and to prevent them
from contracting seasonal skin diseases such as external parasites, ticks and lice.
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
3.4 Recruitment and Vacancies
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee is concerned about the huge number of vacant posts at around 54,953 in Constable
(GD) cadre. The Committee feels that this issue could be resolved if vacancies for a recruitment process are
calculated well in advance, taking into account the anticipated vacancies for the next two years.
 The

25
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may conduct recruitments taking into account the
anticipated vacancies for the next two years instead of the current procedure of reporting the vacancies that
exist before the notification of the recruitment process, so that such a large number of posts do not lie vacant
at any given point of time. (Para 3.4.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.2 V acancies are calculated well in advance taking into account the anticipated vacancies for the next 1
and ½ Years. Yearly conduct of recruitment helps in keeping the vacancies in check.
Recommendation
3.4.3 The Committee further observes that the SSC conducts recr uitment exams for a large number of
posts throughout the year for various government services. The recruitment process of CRPF takes
approximately two years to be completed. The Committee believes that this time p eriod can be reduced to
around one year by streamlining the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry may request the recruitment agencies to undertake necessary measures to reduce the timeframe
within which various tiers of recruitment examinations are conducted. (Para 3.4.10 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.4 In CT/GD exam 2018, Computer Based Examination (CBE) is being conducted first, followed by
PST/PET (Physical Standard Test/ Physical Endurance Test). Conduct of written exam in first phase will
result in expediting the completion of recruitment process.
Further Recommendation on paras 3.4.9 & 3.4.10 above
3.4.5 The Committee is not satisfied with the response of MHA on the 54,953 vacant posts that
exist in the constable (GD) cadre. The Committee finds that adequate steps are not being taken by
the Ministry for expediting the process of recruitment to complete the process in a year which is
also critical in regularizing the training cycle. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendations made in para 3.4.9 and 3.4.10 of the 215
th Report.
3.5 Mahila Battalion
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee notes that the strength of women in CRPF is only 7,617. The Committee referred to
written reply by the Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri Kiren Rijiju to question no. 5863 in the Lok
Sabha on 3
rd April, 2018 that the Government, vide order dated 05.01.2016 decided to reserve 33 per cent
posts at Constable level for being filled up by women in CRPF & CISF . The Committee therefore recommends
that the Government should take initiatives to induct more women in the Force. The Committee further
recommends that suitable measures must be taken to ensure their privacy, hygiene and sanitation conditions.
(Para 3.7.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.2 As on date (15
th January, 19) CRPF is having   total   authorized strength of 3,24,093 personnel
including Mahila. Out of these, 8722 post of Mahila strength in various ranks has been sanctioned which is
nearly 2.69 % of total strength. Further, GOI/ MHA vide letter No. II.27012/8/2013-PF-III dated 20
th
December, 2018 has conveyed sanction of 720 posts of Mahila in various ranks as leave reserve @ 10% of

26
the GD staff thereby increasing total strength of Mahila personnel to 9,442 which is around 2.91% of Mahila
personnel in total strength.
3.5.3 It was approved that horizontal reservation for female candidates is to be provided at the rate of 33%
in CISF & CRPF and 14-15% in Border Guarding Forces i.e BSF, ITBP & SSB for recruitment of Constable
(GD).
Further Recommendation
3.5.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that even after issuing of GOI
order dated 05
th January, 2016 to reserve 33 per cent posts at constable level to be filled up by
women in CRPF & CISF only 2.91% of total strength has been filled by Mahila personnel. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the Government must initiate measures or review its
measures already taken. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should implement the
approved policy decision of horizontal reservation for female candidates to the extent of 33% in
CISF and CRPF and 14-15% in Border Guarding Forces i.e. BSF, ITBP & SSB for recruitment of
Constable (GD). The Committee in this regard, also strongly recommends for ‘Special Mahila
Recruitment’ drive to achieve the set target.
3.6 Training
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee is of the considered view that training is an indispensable part of a police force to
maintain the efficiency. Adequate and proper training is a must for continuous development of the personnel,
career wise as well as for boosting their morale. Any sort of compromise on the training front would prove
to be detrimental for the Force in the long run. The Force personnel cannot be deployed for law and order
assignments while they are on training as this would hamper their learning as a Force personnel. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry takes the requisite measures to make sure that the
companies that are under training must not be deployed for any other duties and must be engaged full- time
in training only during that period. (Para 3.8.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.2 Central Police Forces are made available in aid of the State Governments for public order duties. The
deployment of the Forces depends upon the overall security scenario. In order to meet the requirement of
these Forces in various States, CAPFs are fully committed and other Border Guarding Forces have also
been diverted from their primary role. This has resulted in over-stretching of the CAPFs to the extent that all
reserves including the training reserves have been committed for law & order (L&O), election related
duties.
3.6.3 The Standard Operational Procedure (SOP) for the deployment of CAPFs provides that only one coy
in each battalion shall be kept for rotational training and shall not be committed for operational deployment
but these training Coys are also deployed in order to meet the emergent requirements and other exigencies.
Further Recommendation
3.6.4 The Committee expresses its concern over  the submission of the Ministry that even the
training Coys are deployed to meet the emergent requirements and other exigencies for law &
order, election related duties. The Committee wonders as to how the new recruits including training

27
reserves, without adequate/proper training, would be able to properly handle the emergent situation
and other exigencies.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation as made in para
3.8.5 of the 215 th Report.
3.7 Working hours
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee notes that there is a constant increase in demand of CRPF deployment by the States.
The States are over dependent on CRPF for maintaining all kinds of major as well as minor law and order
situations. The Committee also notes that no CRPF battalion is presently designated for the purpose of
providing rest and recuperation. Moreover, almost 98 per cent of training companies remain deployed on
various short term Law & Order assignments across the country. This continuous deployment of training
companies affects the overall operational efficiency of the Force, besides denying troops the much wanted
training and rest & recuperation. The Committee is concerned to observe this over-deployment of CRPF
which is curtailing their training, rest and recuperation. The Committee is of the considered view that one-
sixth of a battalion, should be, at any given time, mandatorily under training or rest or in peace stations.
The Committee recommends that the State Governments may work out their own systems and make arrangements
for appropriate training of their respective State Police Forces such that their over reliance on CRPF for
every law and order situation may be reduced. (Para 3.13.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 The CAPFs are made available in aid of the State Government authorities to maintain public order on
their request. In order to meet the demands of the State Governments on emergent situation, CAPFs including
CRPF Coys are deployed as per availability whether regular or Training Coy. However, training Coys are
used in very exceptional circumstances to meet only short term exigencies.
Further Recommendation
3.7.3 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the response of Ministry of Home Affairs
with regard to the Committee’s recommendation to reduce  overdependence of States on CRPF to
handle emergent law and order situation and keeping mandatorily 1/6
th of a battalion at a given
point of time under training or rest or recuperation. The Ministry has not furnished any details of
the steps taken/directions issued by the Ministry to pursue the state Governments to work out
their own systems and make arrangements for appropriate training of their respective State Police
Forces so that their overdependence on CRPF for every law and order situation is reduced. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation at para 3.13.5 of the 215
th Report.
3.8 Living conditions
Recommendation
3.8.1 The Committee is anguished to note that the Force personnel are compelled to live in sub-human
conditions which affect their dignity, morale and motivation. There is an acute shortage of decent living
conditions for the CRPF personnel as the State Governments fail to provide basic infrastructure to them.
The Committee recommends that an outside agency should be hired to conduct surveys every six months
among the CRPF personnel deployed in the States regarding their living conditions. If the State Governments
are found to be lacking in providing adequate infrastructure and other facilities in accordance with the

28
provisions of the SOP framed by the MHA, the Ministry must bring it to the notice of the respective State
Government and first issue an advisory and if the same is not acted upon within the stipulated time frame,
the Ministry should consider withdrawing the deployed troops for violation of SOP conditions.
(Para 3.14.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.8.2 Summary of funds allotted for the year 2017-18 for works undertaken/being undertaking under SRE
scheme allotted directly to CRPF at Chhattisgarh is as under:-
Amt. allotted 15.36 Cr.
Amt. Utilize 14.39 Cr.
Time limit W ithin one year from allotment
Work under construction 84.29 Lakh
Work not yet started 12.20 Lakh
Saving 0.11 Lakh
3.8.3 The recommendations of the committee to issue advisory to State Governments have been noted.
Further Recommendation
3.8.4 The Committee is anguished to observe that the Committee’s recommendation to issue advisory
to the State Government for providing decent living conditions for the CRPF personnel has just
been noted by MHA and not acted upon by issuing advisory. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the MHA must formulate a SOP on the basic living condition and infrastructure to be given to
CRPF posted in a state and issue advisory to State Government for the same. The Committee
therefore reiterates its recommendation made earlier in this regard.
3.9 Technological Applications
Recommendation
3.9.1 The Committee observes that the CRPF does not have a dedicated research and development wing of
its own. The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) is expected to be the R&D agency for
the modernization of the police forces in the country. The BPR&D undertakes R&D on major and common
issues. There are many micro issues that are unique to the CRPF, because of the peculiarities of the areas of
deployment of the Force and its large size. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may
explore the possibility of establishing a dedicated R&D unit for CRPF to deal with the peculiar issues of the
Force, such as, IEDs, bullet proofing of vehicles, etc. (Para 3.18.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.9.2 CRPF has been entrusted responsibility to handle Internal Security of the country. In the process,
CRPF is taking the insurgency, terrorism & Naxalism in 03 theatres of LWE, J&K & NE. CRPF is the
largest CAPF in the country with 250 Battalions handling very sensitive & important duties. There are
various verticals in the organisation dealing with different macro and micro issues. CAPFs training Institutions
also undertake the job of developing new areas having operational relevance. 

29
Further Recommendation
3.9.3 The Committee notes the reply regarding CAPFs training institutions. However, the need to
have internal R&D unit for CRPF to deal with the entrusted jobs and responsibilities such as IEDs,
bullet proofing of vehicles and many others, requires further upgrading of skills in the force and its
capability to handle such situations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that
existing arrangements are not enough to yield the desired result; CRPF should have its own dedicated
R&D unit to upscale its vital duties and responsibilities.
3.10 Infrastructural issues - Road connectivity
Recommendation
3.10.1  The Committee notes that roads are of great importance to the CRPF . Connectivity of all CRPF
camps is crucial for the Force as it will speed up the movement of the Force personnel and development
works in the regions of deployment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take up
the construction of these non-metalled roads on priority basis to ensure that all CRPF camps are connected
by metalled roads. The Ministry must work in tandem with the State Governments and ensure to fast track
the construction of metalled roads, especially in Chhattisgarh and South Odisha.
(Para 3.19.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.2  Road requirement Plan-I (RRP-I)
State Sanctioned road Completed Expenditure Road lengths
lengths (in KM) road lengths (In ` Cr.) completed 2018-19
(in KM)
Chhatisgarh 1,988.00 1522.80 2,315.80 100.00
Odisha 615.00 578.98 873.51 11.00
3.10.3   Road Connectivity Project in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas (RCPLWE) under RRRP-
II (as on 18 th March, 2019)
State Road lengths Road lengths Sanctioned cost Fund released
Sanctioned by MoRD Completed ( ` in) ( ` In Cr)
(in KM) (in KM)
Chhatisgarh 735.38 55.60 658.02 161.22
Odisha 388.79 39.00 546.97 97.09
3.10.4   Additional road recommended by MHA under RRP-II
State Length (in kms) Estimated cost Remarks
(` in Cr)
Chhatisgarh 1707.00 1806.005 DPR awaited at MoRD
Odisha 3271.00 306.00 DPR awaited at MoRD

30
3.10.5  Besides above, it is also intimated that before establishing any new camp/new post,  it is taken up
with State Government to provide road connectivity atleast for half the distance of camp so that camps/post
can be established.
Further Recommendation
3.10.6  The Committee notes that under the Road Requirement Plan-I (RRP-I) in Chattisgarh 1522.80
Km. out of sanctioned length of 1988 Km. i.e. 77 per cent and in Odisha 578.98 Km. out of sanctioned
length of 615 Km. i.e. 94 percent road length has been completed. The Committee, however, expresses
its concern over the fact that in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas under RRRP-II (Rural
Road Rehabilitation Project) in Chattisgarh 55.60 Km. out of sanctioned length of 735.38 Km.  i.e.
only 8 percent and in Odisha 39 Km. out of sanctioned length of 388.79 Km. i.e. 10 per cent road
length have been completed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should take urgent and effective step to remove the obstacles that have been hampering the
execution of undertaken project i.e. road construction under Road Connectivity Project in Left
Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas (RCPLWE) under RRRP-II. The Committee also recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter with the MoRD (Ministry of Rural
Development) for approval of DPR (Detailed Project Report) for the project on construction of
additional road as recommended by MHA under RRP-II.
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD
3.11 Deployment for routine duties
Recommendation
3.11.1  The Committee takes a serious note of the high attrition cost on the NSG due to frequent deployment
for routine and mundane duties, which are adversely impacting the training and operational preparedness of
the NSG personnel. The Committee is of the view that NSG is a special task force and should be deployed
strictly in accordance with its mandate and for no other purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should make the process for requisition of NSG teams more stringent and the decision to
deploy NSG teams should be taken at the highest level. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs should issue advisory to the State Governments to exhaust all other alternatives before submitting
a requisition for deployment of NSG teams. (Para 4.5.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.11.2  Annual deployment for Immediate Backup Support (IBUS) by NSG in past three years is as under:-
(i) Year 2016 - 34
(ii) Y ear 2017 - 33
(iii) Y ear 2018 - 47
3.11.3  As evident from the above data, the tasking of NSG for IBUS is on a rise. As per policy in vogue,
NSG is being deployed only on the orders of MHA.
Further Recommendation
3.11.4  The Committee notes that apart from the primary duties entrusted to NSG, it is also mandated
to perform as Immediate Back up Support (IBUS) Operations. The Committee also notes that the

31
deployment of NSG for IBUS operations has been increasing ever since 2016 from 34 instances to 47
in 2018. But Action Taken Notes that as per policy in vogue, NSG is being deployed only at the orders
of MHA, is surprising. It seems that the Action Taken Notes have been furnished by the NSG and
not the Ministry. The Ministry of Home Affairs may furnish its comments on the recommendation.
3.12 Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
3.12.1  The Committee fails to understand the reason for the extremely low authorized accommodation level
of just 25 per cent for the personnel in Other Ranks. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry
is considering the proposal to enhance the authorization accommodation level. However, the Committee
feels that by merely increasing the authorized accommodation level, the satisfaction level will not increase,
especially when there is no plan under consideration for the construction of houses. The Committee
recommends that the authorization levels must urgently be increased as per the proposal under consideration
and an action plan may be prepared for achieving the housing satisfaction as per the new authorized
accommodation levels. (Para 4.6.3 ibid)
Action Taken
3.12.2  Higher scale of housing for NSG personnel was discussed during the meeting of Hon’ble Union
Home Secretary on 05
th July, 2016.
(i) The matter has already been taken up with MHA for enhancing housing satisfaction level on 29 th
September 2016, as per the details given below:-
Rank % of accommodation Proposed % of accommodation
authorised by MHA  for Authorisation
Sqn Cdr & above 90 100
Team Cdr, Trg Centre 75 80
Team Cdr other Units 65 80
Asstt Cdr 60 80
Rangers/Tradesmen 25 80
(ii) Certain observations were raised by IFD with reference to estimated cost of enhanced
accommodation which have been clarified by NSG vide letter dated 02 nd May, 2019 and the
proposal has been resubmitted to IFD for their concurrence on 10 th May, 2019. Thus, the
matter is under consideration of this Ministry.
Further Recommendation
3.12.3  The Committee is anguished to observe that a long time has been spent in enhancing housing
satisfaction level of the NSG . The issue was taken up way back on 29th September, 2016 but clarification
on the observations raised by IFD with reference to estimated cost of the enhanced accommodation,
was furnished by the NSG only on 2
nd May, 2019, after two years eight months and the matter now
rests with MHA. The Committee recommends that there should not be further procedural delay

32
and the Ministry must take up the matter of enhancing housing satisfaction level of NSG on priority.
All formalities must be completed expeditiously for implementing/approving the proposal under its
consideration.
3.13 Dedicated Air Wing
Recommendation
3.13.1  The Committee is anguished to note that the premier counter-terrorist and contingency force of
India does not have a dedicated air wing of its own and is dependent on aviation assets of other Forces for
its operational and training requirements. The Committee agrees that this deficiency severely affects the
response time of NSG, which is supposed to provide swift counter-strike response in contingency situations.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make urgent and sincere
efforts to commission a dedicated Air Wing of NSG and provide requisite types and number of air assets to
strengthen the aviation capability of the Force. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry, as an
interim measure, may provide dedicated aircraft and technical support to NSG through an arrangement with
the BSF Air Wing or the Air Force. (Para 4.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.13.2  NSG does not have an integrated air wing. For air effort ex Delhi, ARC & BSF Air wing are the
primary agencies. In case these agencies are unable to provide this support, the same is undertaken by IAF.
Air effort for all NSG Regional Hubs is the responsibility of IAF.
3.13.3  Presently, NSG depends on BSF Air Wing for training of its personnel stationed in Delhi and NCR
region. As BSF Air Wing does not have the requisite night flying capability due to non-availability of trained
Flight Gunners, this Ministry has advised BSF to induct Flight Engineers and Flight Gunners on hiring/
contractual basis on priority to meet the essential operational requirement of NSG.
Further Recommendation
3.13.4  The NSG is mandated to respond swiftly by counter striking terrorists in any part of the
country and therefore they should be well equipped to meet all contingency situations. The Committee
observes that the operational capability of the NSG gets crippled when crucial time is lost in the
process of obtaining air craft from the BSF Air Wing or from Air Force and Aviation Research
Centre (ARC). The Committee therefore, feels that it is imperative for NSG to have sufficient
number of dedicated air craft with the requisite night flying capability at its disposal and for its
exclusive use. The required manpower for these aircraft may be pooled from any of the specialized
sources like Air Force etc., in the same line as has been for other posts on deputation. The Committee
therefore, reiterates its recommendation at Para 4.8.4.
3.14 Welfare Measures
Recommendation
3.14.1  The Committee takes note of the various welfare measures that are being taken for the NSG personnel.
The Committee is of the view that financial assistance being given to the next of Kin of deceased and
seriously injured NSG personnel is quite low and insufficient. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should review the amounts of the financial assistance and enhance it adequately. The

33
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should also identify more welfare measures that can be taken,
as per the need of the personnel and their families, and implement those measures earnestly.
(Para 4.9.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.14.2  Details of Welfare Schemes run under NSG Central Welfare Fund (CWF) are attached as
Appendix - “B”.
Further Recommendation
3.14.3  The Committee observes that the Ministry has furnished only the details of welfare schemes
that run under NSG Central Welfare Fund (CWF). Nothing has been mentioned about the steps
proposed or has already been taken towards enhancement of the financial assistance given to the
next of kin of deceased and seriously injured NSG personnel. The Committee therefore reiterates
its recommendation made at Para 4.9.2 above and desires to be informed about the steps taken by
the Ministry in lines of its recommendation.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
4.1 Housing and Accommodation
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level in CISF at 12.5 per cent is among the
lowest in the CAPFs. The Committee takes note of the fact that there is a deficiency of 7,811 quarters and
only 2,663 quarters are under construction for CISF accommodation. The Committee feels that even after
completion of construction of these 2663 quarters, the Ministry would not be able to provide a good housing
satisfaction level for CISF. The Committee str ongly recommends that the construction of these 2,663
quarters should be expedited and completed within the stipulated time. The Committee also recommends that
the proposal of 1,719 flats that are under consideration in CISF must be considered at the earliest. The
Committee further recommends that the Government should chalk out an ‘Action Plan’ to achieve the
objective of constructing the remaining 5,148 quarters within the stipulated timeframe.
(Para 2.6.7 ibid)
Action Taken
4.1.2 84% of CISF is deployed in PSUs where the accommodation is being provided by the PSUs.
4.1.3 Beside above, some of the strength of CISF is deployed in Non-PSU formations viz. Government
Building Security (GBS), Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), Special Security Group (SSG),
Force HQrs, Sector HQrs, Zonal HQrs, Group HQrs, Recruit Training Centres (RTCs), Reserve Bn.
etc.
4.1.4 The family accommodation in these Non-PSU formations is being catered by the MHA.
(i) Out of 2663 quarters which were under construction/acquisition, before the committee, CISF
has already acquired below mentioned flats.
Flats Authority Location Converted housing units.
650 DSIIDC Narela 586
794 DDA Rohini Sec-34 & Siraspur 397
(ii) Remaining 1219 quarters are still under construction and are being monitored vigorously, for
early completion.
(iii) The 1719 flats (houses) which were under consideration at the time of evaluation by
Committee. CISF has dropped 459 houses (320 at Maidangarhi + 139 at 4 th Reserve Bn
Sivagangai) and in place have bought 933 flats at Rohini, Narela and Ghaziabad with following
details.
34

35
Flats Authority Location Converted housing units
724 DDA Rohini Sec -34 & 35 362
166 DSIIDC Narela 83
43 GDA Ghaziabad 19
TOTAL 464
(iv) Therefore in place of 459 houses which were dropped, 464 nos. of housing units have been
acquired.
(v) Remaining (1719-459) 1260 houses at various locations are part of CISF’s proposal under
umbrella scheme.
(vi) CISF’s current housing satisfaction level is 50.67% against the authorized dwelling units and
19.01% against sanctioned strength (as on 01 st May, 2019).
(vii) Matter regarding shortage of houses in respect of PSUs is being taken up with the concerned
PSUs.
Further Recommendation
4.1.5 The Committee notes that 1219 quarters are still under construction and 1260 houses are
under umbrella scheme and the status of construction in respect of those is yet to be confirmed by
the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee desires to be apprised periodically about the progress status
of construction with respect to 1260 houses at various locations that are part of CISF’s proposal
under umbrella scheme as also on the remaining 1219 quarters that are under construction.
4.2 Modernization of the Force
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry for the modernization of CISF. However,
since the CISF is responsible for the security of country’s airports and major installations, including those in
nuclear and aero space domain, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must ensure that the Force has
modern state-of-the-art arms, ammunition, night vision devices, patrolling equipment, drones, vehicles and
other infrastructural upgrades. (Para 2.8.4 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.2 It is to intimate that w.r.t. modern security gadgets approved by MHA in Mod Plan-III for CISF is
enclosed as per Appendix-”A”.
4.2.3 It is further submitted that the equipment as per operational requirement and recommendation of
Board of officers (BOO) during technical surveys is being procured by the concerned management for
operational utilization of CISF at the place of deployment.
4.2.4 Further, all efforts have been made to modernize the force by equipping with modern and sophisticated
weapons like Glock Pistol, MP5 Carbine, Assault Rifles, Sniper Rifles, and Night Vision Devices etc. to

36
cater to the operational requirement based on the present security scenario. The details of holding of these
modern equipments/weapons are as under:-
Sl. No. Name of Items/Equipment Qty . (Nos.)
1. Assault Rifles 12,252
2. MP5 Carbine    1163
3. Glock Pistol    1690
4. Sniper Rifle        27
5. PNV Goggles      534
6. Passive Night Sight for INSAS Rifle      584
7. Passive Night Sight for INSAS LMG        50
4.2.5 As per MHA directions, indent for procurement of 2000 Nos. of Assault Rifles was submitted vide
letter dated 03 rd June, 2015 to CRPF (nodal agency). Advance payment of amount ` 4.40 cr. and
` 5,10,30,571/- has been made on 26 th September, 2016 & 27 th July, 2018 respectively. Rifles have been
received by CRPF and Joint Receipt Inspection has also been carried out. 500 Nos. of Rifles will be received
by CISF. Collection party has been detailed to collect 500 Nos. Rifles from DIG, CRPF CWS-II Pune on 15
th
March, 2019. Balance 1500 Nos. of Rifles will be supplied under Tolerance Clause and are expected by
June’ 2019.
4.2.6 In addition, following advanced weapons/ equipments are authorised under Mod. Plan-III and present
status of procurement/formulation of these weapons/equipments is appended below:-
Sl. No. Stores/ Equipment Nos. Authorised Remarks
1            2           3                           4
1 . UBGL 487 A s  per availability of Funds, advance
payment for 203 nos was made on 27 th
September, 2018 to Ordnance Factory,
Trichy. Supply of these 203 Nos UBGL has
been received on 26 th February, 2019.
Further, payment towards procurement of
remaining 284 Nos. of UBGL will be made
shortly.
2. UBGL Ammn 9740 Proforma Invoice for procurement of
UBGL ammunition has been received from
AFK Pune and advance payment will be
made on receipt of addl. Fund from MHA.
3. Advance Pistol 1350 QRs are under formulations.
(Glock)

37
4. Advance Machine 260  QRs are under formulations.
Guns (MP-5 A-3)
5. Weapon Based Single 17  QRs are under formulations.
Channel TI  Sight
6. Weapon Based Single 20 Tender for procurement has been floated.
Channel TI  Sight for T echnical/ Physical Evaluation has also
Assault Rifles been completed.
7. Low Recoil 7.62 x 51 100  QRs are under formulations
Assault Rifles
8. AK Protection Helmets 100 QRs are under formulations
9. BR Shield 60 QRs are under formulations
Further Recommendation
4.2.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry with regard to modernisation of CISF and
hopes that the timeline for the procurement and modernization of the CISF under Modernisation
Plan-III would be strictly adhered to. The Committee, however, desires to be apprised of the progress
made so far in the procurements of these weapons/equipments for Modernisation of CISF.
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
4.3 Recruitment and Vacancies
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee is perplexed to find that 17 out of 19 posts, i.e., approximately 90 per cent of the posts
at DIG level are lying vacant in CRPF. This is a serious lacuna in the Force. A robust and experienced
higher level leadership is crucial for efficient working of an organization. The Committee fails to understand
the rationale behind reserving 37 posts for IPS officers under deputation quota in CRPF when IPS officers
are not opting for these posts. These posts are lying vacant or have to be diverted temporarily to the Cadre
Officers of CRPF owing to the paucity of IPS officers opting for them. This leads to not only huge percentage
of vacancies but also lowering the morale of cadre officers of CRPF . The Committee therefore recommends
that appropriate measures be taken by the Ministry to fillup these vacant DIG posts in CRPF . The Committee
also feels that not more than 25 per cent posts should be reserved for deputation Officers in the Force. If IPS
officers are not available, the posts should be filled up through temporary promotions of eligible officers of
the Force. (Para 3.4.5 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 As on date, 206 posts of DIsG are sanctioned in CRPF of which 18% posts (37 posts) of DIsG are
earmarked for IPS officers. At present only 02 IPS officers of DIG rank are posted. A proposal for diversion
of 24 posts of IPS DIsG for the vacancy year 2018 was moved and DoP&T/ MHA agreed to grant diversion
of 18 posts of DIsG from IPS quota to cadre officer’s quota. These posts are to be returned to IPS quota
1            2           3                           4

38
during next 03 years as suggested by DoP&T. All endeavors are made to ensure that higher level post do not
remain vacant.
Further Recommendation
4.3.3 The Committee considers this as cryptic reply and feels that a detailed note regarding total
number of sanctioned DIsG posts vis-à-vis the posts actually filled needs to be furnished by the
Ministry.
Recommendation
4.3.4 The Committee is dismayed to observe that out of total 5 posts of Deputy Financial Advisor, 4 posts
are lying vacant. The Committee fails to understand how such a large Force could function efficiently with
vacancies in such an important post. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate measures be
taken by the Ministry to fill these 4 vacancies of Deputy Financial Advisor in CRPF . (Para 3.4.6 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.5 Proposal for encadrement of 05 posts of Deputy Financial Advisor in CRPF into Indian Civil Accounts
Service is presently under examination.
Further Recommendation
4.3.6 The Committee would like to be apprised about the final outcome of the proposal for
encadrement of 05 posts of Deputy Financial Advisor in CRPF into Indian Civil Accounts Service
that is at present under consideration.
4.4 Medical facilities
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee takes note of the medical facilities available for the personnel. However, the
Committee feels that utilisation of these facilities and their effectiveness in time of need must be tested
for their effectiveness as these may not be sufficient for such a large Force. Medical facilities should
be a priority for the Force personnel given the remote and interior locations of their camps. The
Committee recommends that a team of qualified doctors and paramedics should be available at all
battalion headquarters and, wherever feasible, at all camps. Facilities for blood tests, X-rays, routine
medicines, malaria detection kit, snake bite kit, regular medical checkups and ambulances must be
made available at all CRPF c amps. (Para 3.12.6 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 Presently sanctioned post of Medical officers and paramedical staff are available in the units to
provide medical care to the troops.
4.4.3 Laboratory facilities are extended up to unit levels. Malaria diagnostic kits and anti snake measures
and all routine and life saving emergency medicines is also available at unit level. Well equipped ambulances
are available in the Units level. 
4.4.4 On 01
st March, 2019, Government has approved creation of 1719 posts of Medical Officers and
paramedic staff in the Battalions of CRPF, BSF, CISF and SSB deployed in Jammu & Kashmir, Left Wing

39
Extremism affected areas and North East Region as a Pilot Project, for augmentation/standardization of
staffing strength of 10 and 20 bedded Hospitals of Battalions of CRPF, BSF, CISF and SSB.  
Further Recommendation
4.4.5 The Committee desires to know that out of newly created 1719 Medical Officers and paramedic
staff posts in the Battalions of CRPF, BSF, CISF and SSB deployed in Jammu and Kashmir, Left
Wing Extremism affected areas and North East, how many posts have been actually filled up and
deployed and also desires that assessment be made in remaining Battalions of ITBP, NSG and Assam
Riffles forces.
Recommendation
4.4.6 The Committee is anguished to know that the CRPF personnel who sustained injuries in line of their
duties and lost their limbs are being provided only 30-40 per cent of the total cost of the best quality
prosthetic limbs available in the market under the CGHS Scheme. The Committee also notes that the CRPF
makes payment from their Risk Fund in order to make provisions for the best quality prosthetic limbs for its
personnel. The Force might use this fund for some other important objectives like providing financial
benefits to the families of the members of the Force who die while in service. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the CGHS norms regarding artificial limbs need to be revised with respect to all the
CAPFs. High-end prosthetic limbs must be provided to the amputees belonging to all the CAPFs and the
full cost should be borne by the government. (Para 3.12.9 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.7 Proposal for enhancing the existing limit of reimbursement amount of High and prosthetics/ artificial
cost for Central Armed Police Force personnel has been taken up with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Further Recommendation
4.4.8 The Committee would like to be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare on enhancing the existing limit of reimbursement amount for high cost of prosthetics/
artificial limbs for CAPF personnel.  The Committee in this regard reiterates its recommendation.
4.5 Technological Applications
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee feels that being deployed in difficult areas for prolonged duration, away from their
families; the CRPF could also use the BISAG programme. The Committee is hopeful that this programme
will prove to be effective in boosting the morale of the entire Force. The CRPF jawans would feel motivated
and inspired if they are directly addressed by their leaders on a regular basis. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the CRPF may explore the possibility to implement the BISAG programme on the pattern
of BSF within the next six months. (Para 3.18.7 ibid)
Action Taken
4.5.2 Bha skaracharya Institute for Space Application and Gioinformatics (BISAG) program is a live
interaction of under command troops with the addressing of ficer. CRPF is in process to implement BISAG
programme on the pattern of BSF and is currently consulting BSF and BISAG accordingly.

40
Further Recommendation
4.5.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter after completion of
consultation with BSF and BISAG for implementing the BISAG programme in CRPF.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
Promotional avenues
The Committee appreciates that the CISF has undertaken the cadre review and approval has
been obtained for creating 7675 posts in various ranks of Group B and C to redress the problem of
stagnation. (Para 1.1.6)
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Raising Battalion 241 for fighting Naxal Menace
The Committee notes that adequate steps are being taken by the Government for ensuring
the safety of the family members of the Bastariya battalion personnel. (Para 1.2.3)
Basic amenities - Food and drinking water
The Committee notes the provision made for ensuring regular supply of nutritious food for
CRPF personnel posted in extremely hard conditions and remote areas. (Para 1.3.5)
Housing and accommodation
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 1.4.3)
Stress management
The Committee hopes that the plethora of measures undertaken by CRPF for improving
living condition would alleviate the mental and emotional  stress of CRPF personnel and their
‘Wellness and happiness quotient’ would improve. (Para 1.5.8)
The Committee hopes that elaborate institutional arrangement for stress management, yoga
classes and regular counseling of jawans by professional and psychiatrists  would reduce stress,
cases of suicide and fratricide in CRPF and would also have positive impact on attrition rate amongst
CRPF personnel. (Para 1.5.15)
Operational issues - Modernization
The Committee believes that authorized number of Mini and Micro UA V will be procured at
the earliest and deployed for effective usage in LWE affected areas and violence affected J&K Zone
for surveillance and reconnaissance purposes. (Para 1.6.7)
Infrastructural issues - Mobile connectivity
The Committee hopes that all BSNL approved towers would be installed for facilitating CRPF
to have the mobile connectivity and internet service to enable CRPF personnel to have
communication with family members. (Para 1.7.4)
Grievance Redressal
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 1.8.3)
41

42
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD
Training Issues
The Committee appreciates that MHA acted upon the recommendation of the Committee for
enhancing the operational capabilities of NSG through appropriate training with foreign delegation.
The Committee is of the considered view that adoption of the ‘best global practices’ pertaining to
training modules of NSG would certainly improve the capabilities of NSG personnel in performing
its entrusted duties and responsibilities. (Para 1.9.4)
Dedicated Air Wing
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 1.10.3)
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
Modernization of the Force
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.1.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.1.6)
Attrition
The Committee takes note of the steps undertaken by CISF for improving the working
conditions of the force by reducing stress, strain and the attrition in CISF. (Para 2.2.5)
Grievance Redressal Mechanism
The Committee takes note of the action taken by the Ministry for speedy and systematic
redressal of grievances of CISF personnel. (Para 2.3.4)
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Promotional Avenues
The Committee notes that Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) applicable to all
Government Departments is being extended to CRPF too. (Para 2.4.3)
Attrition
The Committee notes the steps being taken to avert the incidences of attrition in
CRPF. (Para 2.5.4)
Medical facilities
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.6.6)
Working hours
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.7.3)
Operational issues- Deployment
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.8.5)

43
Protection against Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in Naxalite areas
The Committee hopes that CRPF would continue to procure the latest and state of the art
security gadgets to ensure the security of CRPF personnel against the challenges and threats of
IEDs or other improvised devices especially in the naxalite areas. (Para 2.9.3)
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD
Personnel Issues
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.10.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.10.6)
Training Issues
The Committee hopes that the proposed Sniper Range in and around Manesar would be arranged
without delay. (Para 2.11.3)
Dedicated Air Wing
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.12.3)
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
Deployment and transfer policy
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that the present rules/regulation
and the recruitment policy have proven to be inadequate in resolving the issue of transfer and
postings in the CISF. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation at para 2.5.4 of the
215
th Report i.e. to review CISF s recruitment policy, which is at present primarily based on population
of the states, to include demand-specific recruitment component. The Committee is of the view that
this will, to some extent, resolve the problem of geographical imbalance and allow the personnel to
be posted in their home states. (Para 3.1.4)
Medical facilities
The Committee is surprised to note that cadre controlling authority for Medical Officers in
CISF is ITBP which is a border guarding force whereas the CISF provides security to Government
buildings and other establishment like PSU and at airports. No rationale has been provided for such
an arrangement. The Committee therefore, feels that this arrangement needs to be revisited.
Moreover, CISF personnel are posted all over India whereas ITBP is posted in a border. The Committee
also notes that only 32 doctors are posted against the sanctioned strength of 52 doctors and thus the
joint Controlling Authority i.e. ITBP, has not been able to attract the sufficient number of doctors
for its basic medical requirements despite of providing pay and allowances/perks as per extant rule.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation to provide incentives to the doctors
to serve in the CISF. In the meanwhile, ITBP should complete the process for filling up the existing
vacancies of 20 doctors to facilitate medical requirement of CISF.  The Committee further
recommends that CISF should also tie up with the PSUs for extending the medical facilities to its
personnel who are on deputation to tide over the shortage of doctors. (Para 3.2.5)

44
Modernization of the Force
The Committee takes a strong objection to the fact that at 05 Airports (Bagdogra, Guwahati,
Trivandrum, Calicut and Ahmedabad), some of the crucial BDDS (Bomb Detection and Disposal
Squad) equipments have not been provided by the Airport Authority of India (AAI) and few of the
essential BDDS equipments are either not working or are under repair since long. The Committee
is at pains to observe that in the absence of such crucial and essential equipments the Aviation
Security Group (ASG) is not operational at these airports, therefore, the CISF faces acute problem
in performing anti-sabotage and bomb detection duties at these airports. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should appropriately intervene and take up the
matter with Airport Operators, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security to
meet the requirements of CISF at these five airports on priority. The MHA should also take up the
matter urgently for providing adequate number of BDDS equipments required at 22 Hyper-sensitive
and International airports without delay. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
status of operationalisation  of CISF BDDS system at 08 airports, that was scheduled by May, 2019
after revision of Bomb Threats Contingency Plan and completion of refresher training courses to
BDDS personnel. (Para 3.3.5)
The Committee in its meeting held on 9
th December, 2019 raised the concern that the dogs
with the CISF are not taken good care of, to the extent that those on duty are seen to have skin
diseases, look pale and seems to be not fit for duty. Since, the Ministry is providing sufficient
funds for maintenance/training of the dogs, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry
must look into the matter and instruct the CISF to assess the health of all the canines with the
force and take remedial measures, if necessary. The Committee also recommends that the funds
meant for the dog squad should be utilized fully and properly to maintain the canines and to
prevent them from contracting seasonal skin diseases such as external parasites, ticks and lice.
(Para 3.3.9)
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Recruitment and Vacancies
The Committee is not satisfied with the response of MHA on the 54,953 vacant posts that
exist in the constable (GD) cadre. The Committee finds that adequate steps are not being taken by
the Ministry for expediting the process of recruitment to complete the process in a year which is
also critical in regularizing the training cycle. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendations made in para 3.4.9 and 3.4.10 of the 215
th Report. (Para 3.4.5)
Mahila Battalion
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that even after issuing of GOI
order dated 05 th January, 2016 to reserve 33 per cent posts at constable level to be filled up by
women in CRPF and CISF only 2.91% of total strength has been filled by Mahila personnel. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the Government must initiate measures or review its
measures already taken. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should implement the
approved policy decision of horizontal reservation for female candidates to the extent of 33% in

45
CISF and CRPF and 14-15% in Border Guarding Forces i.e BSF, ITBP and SSB for recruitment of
Constable (GD). The Committee in this regard, also strongly recommends for ‘Special Mahila
Recruitment’ drive to achieve the set target. (Para 3.5.4)
Training
The Committee expresses its concern over  the submission of the Ministry that even the
training Coys are deployed to meet the emergent requirements and other exigencies for law and
order, election related duties. The Committee wonders as to how the new recruits including training
reserves, without adequate/proper training, would be able to properly handle the emergent situation
and other exigencies.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation as made in para
3.8.5 of the 215 th Report. (Para 3.6.4
Working hours
The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the response of Ministry of Home Affairs
with regard to the Committee’s recommendation to reduce  overdependence of States on CRPF
to handle emergent law and order situation and keeping mandatorily 1/6 th of a battalion at a
given point of time under training or rest or recuperation. The Ministry has not furnished any
details of the steps taken/directions issued by the Ministry to pursue the state Governments to
work out their own systems and make arrangements for appropriate training of their respective
State Police Forces so that their overdependence on CRPF for every law and order situation is
reduced. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation at para 3.13.5 of the 215 th
Report. (Para 3.7.3)
Living conditions
The Committee is anguished to observe that the Committee’s recommendation to issue
advisory to the State Government for providing decent living conditions for the CRPF personnel
has just been noted by MHA and not acted upon by issuing advisory. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the MHA must formulate a SOP on the basic living condition and infrastructure
to be given to CRPF posted in a state and issue advisory to State Government for the same. The
Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation made earlier in this regard.
(Para 3.8.4)
Technological Applications
The Committee notes the reply regarding CAPFs training institutions. However, the need to
have internal R&D unit for CRPF to deal with the entrusted jobs and responsibilities such as IEDs,
bullet proofing of vehicles and many others, requires further upgrading of skills in the force and its
capability to handle such situations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that
existing arrangements are not enough to yield the desired result; CRPF should have its own dedicated
R&D unit to upscale its vital duties and responsibilities. (Para 3.9.3)
Infrastructural issues - Road connectivity
The Committee notes that under the Road Requirement Plan-I (RRP-I) in Chhattisgarh
1522.80 Km. out of sanctioned length of 1988 Km. i.e. 77 per cent and in Odisha 578.98 Km. out

46
of sanctioned length of 615 Km. i.e. 94 percent road length has been completed. The Committee,
however, expresses its concern over the fact that in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas
under RRRP-II (Rural Road Rehabilitation Project) in Chhattisgarh 55.60 Km. out of sanctioned
length of 735.38 Km.  i.e. only 8 percent and in Odisha 39 Km. out of sanctioned length of 388.79
Km. i.e. 10 per cent road length have been completed. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take urgent and effective step to remove the obstacles
that have been hampering the execution of undertaken project i.e. road construction under Road
Connectivity Project in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas (RCPLWE) under RRRP-II.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter
with the MoRD (Ministry of Rural Development) for approval of DPR (Detailed Project Report)
for the project on construction of additional road as recommended by MHA under RRP-II.
(Para 3.10.6)
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD
Deployment for routine duties
The Committee notes that apart from the primary duties entrusted to NSG , it is also mandated
to perform as Immediate Back up Support (IBUS) Operations. The Committee also notes that the
deployment of NSG for IBUS operations has been increasing ever since 2016 from 34 instances to
47 in 2018. But Action Taken Notes that as per policy in vogue, NSG is being deployed only at the
orders of MHA, is surprising. It seems that the Action Taken Notes have been furnished by the
NSG and not the Ministry. The Ministry of Home Affairs may furnish its comments on the
recommendat ion. (Para 3.11.4)
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee is anguished to observe that a long time has been spent in enhancing housing
satisfaction level of the NSG . The issue was taken up way back on 29
th September, 2016 but clarification
on the observations raised by IFD with reference to estimated cost of the enhanced accommodation,
was furnished by the NSG only on 2
nd May, 2019, after two years eight months and the matter now
rests with MHA. The Committee recommends that there should not be further procedural delay
and the Ministry must take up the matter of enhancing housing satisfaction level of NSG on priority.
All formalities must be completed expeditiously for implementing/approving the proposal under its
consideration. (Para 3.12.3)
Dedicated Air Wing
The NSG is mandated to respond swiftly by counter striking terrorists in any part of the
country and therefore they should be well equipped to meet all contingency situations. The
Committee observes that the operational capability of the NSG gets crippled when crucial time
is lost in the process of obtaining air craft from the BSF Air Wing or from Air Force and
Aviation Research Centre (ARC). The Committee therefore, feels that it is imperative for NSG
to have sufficient number of dedicated air craft with the requisite night flying capability at its
disposal and for its exclusive use. The required manpower for these aircraft may be pooled

47
from any of the specialized sources like Air Force etc., in the same line as has been for other
posts on deputation. The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendation at Para 4.8.4.
(Para 3.13.4)
Welfare Measures
The Committee observes that the Ministry has furnished only the details of welfare schemes
that run under NSG Central Welfare Fund (CWF). Nothing has been mentioned about the steps
proposed or has already been taken towards enhancement of the financial assistance given to the
next of kin of deceased and seriously injured NSG personnel. The Committee therefore reiterates
its recommendation made at Para 4.9.2 above and desires to be informed about the steps taken by
the Ministry in lines of its recommendation. (Para 3.14.3)
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
Housing and Accommodation
The Committee notes that 1219 quarters are still under construction and 1260 houses are
under umbrella scheme and the status of construction in respect of those is yet to be confirmed
by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee desires to be apprised periodically about the progress
status of construction with respect to 1260 houses at various locations that are part of CISF’s
proposal under umbrella scheme as also on the remaining 1219 quarters that are under
construction. (Para 4.1.5)
Modernization of the Force
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry with regard to modernisation of CISF and
hopes that the timeline for the procurement and modernization of the CISF under Modernisation
Plan-III would be strictly adhered to. The Committee, however, desires to be apprised of the
progress made so far in the procurements of these weapons/equipments for Modernisation of
CISF. (Para 4.2.7)
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE
Recruitment and Vacancies
The Committee considers this as cryptic reply and feels that a detailed note regarding total
number of sanctioned DIsG posts vis-à-vis the posts actually filled needs to be furnished by the
Ministry. (Para 4.3.3)
The Committee would like to be apprised about the final outcome of the proposal for
encadrement of 05 posts of Deputy Financial Advisor in CRPF into Indian Civil Accounts Service
that is at present under consideration. (Para 4.3.6)
Medical facilities
The Committee desires to know that out of newly created 1719 Medical Officers and paramedic
staff posts in the Battalions of CRPF, BSF, CISF and SSB deployed in Jammu and Kashmir, Left
Wing Extremism affected areas and North East, how many posts have been actually filled up and

48
deployed and also desires that assessment be made in remaining Battalions of ITBP, NSG and Assam
Riffles forces. (Para 4.4.5)
The Com mittee would like to be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare on enhancing the existing limit of reimbursement amount for high cost of
prosthetics/artificial limbs for CAPF personnel. The Committee in this regard reiterates its
recommend ation. (Para 4.4.8)
Technological Applications
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter after completion of
consultation with BSF and BISAG for implementing the BISAG programme in CRPF.
(Para 4.5.3)

MINUTES

51
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 04.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9th December, 2019 in G-074, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Manish Gupta
4. Dr.  Anil Jain
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
9. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
10. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shrimati Kirron Kher
13. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
14. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
19. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
20. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
21. Dr. Satyapal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Additional secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary

52
*** Relate to other matters.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following three draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) Draft 220 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Two Hundred Fifteenth Report on ‘Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding
Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force and National Security
Guard)’.
(ii) Draft 221 st Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on the ‘Working Conditions in Border Guarding
Forces (Assam Rifles, Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border Police and Border Security
Force)’.
(iii) Draft 222nd Report on ‘Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft 220 st Report for consideration and adoption. A suggestion
was made regarding inclusion of a recommendation on the poor condition of sniffer dogs particularly in
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF). The Report was adopted with above mentioned suggestion.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee authorised the chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation/laying of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 11th  December,
2019.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.

APPENDIX

55
APPENDIX-‘A ’
List of Items approved under Mod Plan-III
Sl. Name of items
No.
Technical Branch
l. Digital HF man pack (5-25 watt) set with inbuilt data modem with all accessories
2. Foldable Solar Charcer- 30 Watt
3. Digital Radio Repeater
4. Radio Frequency scanner
5. Hand Held Laser Beased Explosive Detector
6. Ground Penetrating RADAR (Hand Held)
7. Mini UA V
8. Hand Held Thermal Imager with LRF
9. Micro UA V
10. IFATS/ISATS
11. Nano UA V
12. Heavy Lift ROV
13. Smart Classroom solutions
14. Large Hi definition Outdoor Display unit
15. Data Centre/Disaster Recovery
Ordnance Branch
1. Under Barrel Grande Launcher (UBGL)
2. Ammns of UBGL
3. Advance Pistol (Glock)
4. Advance Sub Machine Guns (MP-5 A-3)
5. Weapon Based Single Channel TI Sight
6. Weapon Based Single Channel TI Sight
7. Low Recoil 7.62x51 Assault Rifle
8. BR Shields
9. AK Protection Helmet

56
Fire Branch
1. Crash Water/foam Tender
2. Emergency Rescue Tender
3. Water Tanker with Fire fighting Pump (l2KL)
4. Water Mist & CAFS (Back Pack), ASKA
5. Water Mist Motor Bike engine
6. Hydraulic Platform 32 Mtr
Medical Branch
1. Hematology Analyser
2. Inter Ferential Therapy (IFT)
3. HbA1C Analvser
4. Short wave Diathermy - SWD (8+4)
5. Ultrasound machine
6. ALS Ambulance
Provisioning Branch
1. Light Armoured Troop Carrier
2. BP Light V ehicles
3. Mine Protected Vehicle
4. Multipurpose tactical belts
Sl. Name of items
No.

APPENDIX-B
Welfare Schemes Under Taken from NSG Central Welfare Fund (CWF)
(A) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO NOK-FOLLOWING FINANCIAL BENEFI1S ARE GIVEN TO
NOK OF DECEASED AND SERIOUSLY INJURED NSG PERSONNEL
Sl. Particulars Previous Revised and existing Sanction
No. Sanction
1. On death during operation 05 Lacs 10 Lacs (from Dec., 2014)
against terrorists
2. 100% disabled in action - 05 Lacs (introduced) (from Dec.,
against terrorist 2014)
3. On serious injury during 01 Lac 02 Lacs (from Dec., 2014)
action against terrorists
4. On death on duty/illness 02 Lacs 05 Lacs (from June, 2017)
5. Immediate Financial Relief - ` 10,000/- (from May, 2015
from Unit Welfare Fund in onwards)
death case
(B) INTRODUCTION OF EDUCATIONAL SCHOLARSHIP FOR ACS & RANGERS
Under this scheme. scholarship is granted out of NSG CWF as per following details:-
10th and 12th Board
Passed Percentage of Previous Revised and existing Sanction
Board marks obtained Sanction
Exam
10th 65% to 90% 5,000/- 10000/- from Sept., 2017
More than 90% 10,000/- 15,000/- from Sept., 2017
12th 85% to 90% 5,000/- 15,000/- from Sept., 2017
More than 90% 10.000/- 20,000/- from Sept., 2017
Professional Courses
Professional Courses Percentage of Previous Revised and existing
marks required Sanction Sanction
Engg., Medical, BDS, At least 70%. 25,000/- 50,000/- from Sept., 2017
MCA, MBA, B.Pharms.
BSC-Nursing etc.
57

58
BBA. BCA. BEd, Law etc At least 70%. 25,000/- 50,000/- from Sept., 2017
Note: Providing more Financial Assistance to the wards of ACs and Rangers who are studying Professional
courses and securing high percentage in 10th and 12th Board Examination has been proposed as
Agenda for the next General Governing Body Meeting which will be held during the month of
April, 2019.
(C) NSG MARTYRS MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR GIRL CHILD
This Scholarship Scheme is only for best/top three girls child who have secured  more than 80%
marks in 12th Board exam:-
Passed Board Best three girl Scholarship Revised and existing Sanction
Exam child Amount
12th First Position 24,000/- 35,000/- from Dec., 2017
Second Position 18,000/- 30,000/- from Dec., 2017
Third Position 12,000/- 25,000/- from Dec., 2017
Note: Providing more Financial Assistance to the wards of ACs and Rangers under NSG Martyrs Memorial
Scholarship Scheme ‘has been proposed as Agenda for next General Governing Body Meeting
which will be held during the month of April, 2019.
(D) SPECIAL SCHOLARSHIP FOR GIRL CHILD UP TO THE STANDARD OF 12TH CLASS FOR
ACS AND RANGERS ONLY ONCE DURING THE TENURE IN NSG FOR PARTICULAR EVENT
S. No. Name of Events One time Scholarship amount introduced from
March, 2017 onwards
Scholarship for Participation in Sports Activities
1. International level 1,00,000/-
2. National Level 50,000/-
3. State Level 25,000/-
For Participation in Dance, Music, Quiz, Beauty Contest, Science/Maths Olympiad
1. International Level 1,00,000/-
2. National Level 50,000/-
3. State Level 25,000/-
4. Qualifying Entrance test of 25,000/-
IIT/AIIMS/AFMC/UPSC (SCRA)
Professional Courses Percentage of Previous Revised and existing
marks required Sanction Sanction

59
(E) SCHEME OF CYCLE TO THE FAMILIES OF RANGERS AND TRADESMEN
In order to boost the morale of the lowest functionary in NSG the scheme of providing one cycle to
the families of Rangers and Tradesmen having children in the age group of 10 to 15 years as a means of
sport and recreation has been introduced.
Purchase of Cycle Previous Revised and
Sanction existing Sanction
All the Rangers/Tradesmen serving in NSG 2,000/- 5,000/-  from Jan., 2019
having children in the age group of 10-15
years will be given financial assistance out
of NSG CWF for purchase of cycle
(F) SCHEME FOR PRAM FOR NEWLY BORN GIRL CHILD OF RANGERS
Under this scheme reimbursement of cost of Pram (Perambulator) with maximum ceiling of
` 6,000/- is given to the Rangers/Tradesmen serving in NSG and having girl child up to the age of 02 years.
Purchase of Pram (Perambulator) Previous Revised and exiting
Sanction Sanction
All the Rangers/Tradesmen serving in 2,500/- 6,000/- from Jan., 2019
NSG having born girl child upto the age
of  2 years will be given financial assistance
out of NSG CWF for purchase of Pram
(Perambulator)
(G) TRAINING  IN  YOGA
Yoga classes is being carried out by professional experts in all NSG establishments on a regular basis
and Yoga has been made a part of day to day life and physical training programme of CDOs and families.
(H) WASTE  WATER  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM
Waste Water Management System is being adopted in NSG.
(J) IGL  PROJECT
Proposal for laying of PNG connections (infrastructure) by IGL in 2162 staff quarters, messes and
canteens at NSG Campus Manesar, Gurgaon is in progress. PNG connections to the Regional Hubs are also
in pipe line.
(K) DISTRIBUTION  OF  SWEETS
Sweets to the troops are being distributed @ ` 60/- per head on the occasions of Independence Day,
NSG Raising Day i.e. on 16th October and Republic Day Functions every year.
(L) CELEBRATION  OF  RAISING  DAY  FUNCTIONS  AND  BARAKHANA
For Organizing NSG Raising Day Function and Barakhana as welt as Units Raising Day Function and
Barakhana a sum of ` 30,000/- to the Major Units and ` 25,000/- and ` 20,000/- to the minor Units

60
according to their strength being sanctioned from NSG Central Welfare Fund every year. Besides, ` 120/-
per head being sanctioned from NSG Central Welfare Fund those who are physically attending the Barakhana
from NSG Central Welfare Fund every year.
(M) PRERNA  REHABILITATION  CENTRE
A Facilitation Centre for Children with Special Needs named “PRERNA” was established at NSG
Campus with the aim of providing various therapies to the children with Special Needs so as to enhance their
mental and physical skills. Various counselling sessions are also being conducted from item to time to
acquaint the parents with an understanding for special needs of their children and improving their skins. The
Centre has been equipped with modern equipments and specialists including occupational, speech and physio
therapists have been engaged on honorarium basis. Psychologist also engaged to access the children with
Special Needs, Commandos and families.
(N) NSG  WIVES  WELFARE  ASSOCIATION  (NWYA)
NWYA got registered under Registrar of Societies Act, 1860 on 18th July, 2013. The aim and objective
of the association is to undertake welfare related activities for NSG personnel and their families.
(O) FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  AND  GIFTS  TO  THE  NOKs  OF  NSG  MARTYRS
Financial assistance @ ` 50,000/- each and gifts are being given to the NOKs of the NSG Martyrs
during the Raising Day function of NSG being celebrated every year on 16th October.