Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
175
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2013)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained
in the One Hundred Seventieth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry 
of Development of North Eastern Region
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT

53
C.S.(H.A.)-342
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained
in the One Hundred Seventieth Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  13 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  13 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—36
Chapter-I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government.... 2—23
Chapter-II
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not  desire to purse
the matter in view of the Government’s reply .......................................................... 24—27
Chapter-III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee ................................................................. 28—36
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE .................... 37—39
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 41—44
7. A NNEXURE
List of the Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs .......................................... 45—52

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
♣25. Vacant
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
♣ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 30 th September, 2013 in terms
of the provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act , 1951,
he ceases to be a Member of the Committee.
(i)
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventieth Report on Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region.
2. The One Hundred and Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25
th April and laid on the Table
of the Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2013.
3. The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region furnished the Action Taken Notes on
the One Hundred Seventieth Report. The Minister of Development of North Eastern Region laid the
statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the said Report of
the Committee on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 10
th December, 2013, pursuant to the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha’s Direction dated 24 th September, 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred and Seventy-fifth Report and adopted the
same at its meeting held on 11 th December, 2013.
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI Department-related Parliamentary
11th December,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs

ACRONYMS
NEC North Eastern Council
BADP Border Areas Development Programme
BRO Border Roads Organisation
DoNER Development of North Eastern Region
NEDFI North Eastern Development Finance Corporation
NERLP North Eastern Region Livelihood Project
NERAMAC North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation
NEHHDC North Eastern Handlooms and Handicrafts
NER North Eastern Region
NLCPR Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
BTC Bodoland Territorial Council
SIDF Social and Infrastructure Development Fund
GBS Gross Budgetary Support
BE Budget Estimate
RE Revised Estimate
NHAI National Highway Authority of India
SARDP-NE Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for North East
PGCIL Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
NETC North East Transmission Corporation
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India
SIDF Social and Infrastructure Development Fund
MOUS Memoranda of Understating
CCEA Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs
NMFP National Mission on Food Processing
MOFPI Ministry of Food Processing Industries
NMNEH Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States
NHM National Horticulture Mission
RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
NEIIPP North Eastern Industrial and Investment Promotion Policy
(iv)

MSE Micro and Small Enterprises
NOSSE Nedfi Opportunity Scheme for Small Enterprise
NEEDS North East Entrepreneurs Development Scheme
WEDS Women Enterprise Development Scheme
SNEHH Scheme For Northeast Handloom and Handicrafts
JEDS Jute Enterprise Development Scheme
IDEA Initiative for Development of Entrepreneurs in Agriculture
EDPS Entrepreneurship Development Programmes
MOS Memorandum of Settlement
ICC Indian Chamber of Commerce
CDG Community Development Groups
PIP Project Implementation Plan
SHGS Self Help Groups
CSP Community Service Providers
ADP Asian Development Bank
IMG Inter-Ministerial Group
PMO Prime Minister’s Office
SMG Special Monitoring Group
MORTH Minister of Road Transport and Highways
PMGSY Prime Miniter Gram Sadak Yojana
FLS Final Location Survey (FLS)
IRCON Ircon International Limited
TDC Target Date for Completion
AAI Airport Authority of India
LAD Least Available Depth
RITES Railway Infrastructure Technical and Economic Services
CPWD Central Public Work Department
SWOT S trengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats
MSMES Micro, Small And Medium Enterprise (MSMES)
HRD Human Resource Development
NESRIP North East States Road Investment Programme
PMA Project Monitoring Agency
(v)

CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
OBC Other Backward Class
NGO Non Governmental Organisation
BLT Bodo Liberation Tigers
CEA Central Electricity Authority
IAF Indian Air Force
KSU Khasi Students Union
RO-RO Roll On-Roll Off
CPWD Central Public Work Department
L&T Larson and Turbo
IWA T Inland Waterways Authority of India
(vi)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and
Seventieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry. The One
Hundred Seventieth Report was presented to Rajya Sabha/laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on the
25
th/26th April, 2013.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventieth Report have been categorized as
follows:
Chapter–I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Para Nos. 2.3.4, 2.3.7, 2.4.8, 2.4.9, 2.5.3, 2.6.6, 2.7.15, 2.7.16, 2.8.14,
2.8.15, 2.9.8, 2.9.17, 2.9.18, 2.10.6, 2.10.7, 2.11.6, 2.13.6, 2.13.9, 2.14.5, 3.2.4, 3.3.9,
3.3.14, 3.6.4, 3.6.5, 3.7.6, 3.8.3, 3.9.6, 3.9.7, 3.10.5, 3.10.7, 3.10.9 and 3.11.1 (of One
Hundred and Seventieth Report) Total recommendations – 32
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its thirty one
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter–II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.3.11, 2.12.5, 2.15.4, 3.1.2, 3.3.11
and 3.7.5 ( ibid) Total recommendations – 6
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and,
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter–III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.3.6, 2.4.4, 3.3.7, 3.3.8, 3.4.9, 3.4.10,
3.6.7, 3.8.4, 3.9.8 and 3.10.6 (ibid) Total recommendations – 10
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish
convincing action taken steps in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter IV : Nil
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 PROJECTED DEMAND IN THE BUDGET 2013-14
Recomendation
1.1.1 The Committee notes with concern that against the projected Demand of Ministry of DoNER
for the year 2013-14 of R 3614.91 crore only R 2006.00 crore has been approved. The Committee
wonders as to also how the Ministry will make up for such a huge deficit of
R 1608.91 crore and recommends the Ministry to take up the matter with the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance to enhance allocation at the RE Stage so that originally envisaged course
of actions are undertaken with enhanced allocation. This will, however, depend on the expenditure
pattern.
(Para 2.3.4 of 170th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The matter regarding
enhancement of allocation, depending on the expenditure pattern, will be taken up with the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance at the RE Stage.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.1.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of efforts made by Ministry
of DoNER regarding enhancement of allocation at RE stage of 2013-14.
1.2 NORTH EASTERN CLIMATE CHANGE ADOPTION-PROJECT
Recomendation
1.2.1 The Committee feels that the Ministry should have presented its case before the Planning
Commission more strongly to get its proposed 12th Plan outlays approved. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should improve its absorption capacities so that it can demand more
funds for various projects. The Committee finds that adverse effects of climate change in NE
Region can be seen from decreasing rain fall in the region and increasing melting of glaciers. In
view of the Committee, the NE Region has become highly vulnerable to the consequences of
climate change and the adaptation as well as mitigation projects are the need of the hour. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Planning Commission should also consider allocating funds
for North East Climate Change Adaptation Project.
(Para 2.3.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 It is submitted that North Eastern Climate Change Adaptation Project (Financial Co-operation)
is being considered by Government of India under Indo-German Co-operation in five North Eastern
2

3
States, namely, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Mizoram and Sikkim. The overall project cost is
Euro 99.7 million and the project duration is 7 years. The financing mechanism requires
reimbursement method of payment, i.e., the upfront payment for the project activities have to be
made by Government of India through Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region securing
about 6% contribution from the States and 5% contribution from the State communities, both
purely in kinds. At the time of budget estimate proposals, the project was not ready for
implementation. Certain critical issues like creation of Regional Society and its location and funding
mechanisms were not finalised. Therefore, it was decided to present the budget requirement to the
Planning Commission after Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) approves the proposal. It is
noteworthy that ‘No objection’ from all concerned line Ministries has been obtained including from
Planning Commission. At this stage, Planning Commission has been requested for ‘in principle’
approval and budget allocation for the project following which steps shall be taken to obtain final
approval of Government of India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.2.3 The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Planning Commission should
give ‘in principle’ approval at the earliest.
1.3 NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL
Recomendation
1.3.1 The Committee, while noting that the success of NEC efforts depends heavily on the
cooperation from the State Governments, feels that the Council should evolve an incentive structure
for better performance so that performing States could be motivated to do better and non-
performing States may be made to feel that they may loose on account of non-performance.
(Para 2.4.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and steps would be taken to evolve an
incentive structure for better performance of States.
Recomendation
1.3.3 The Committee desires that the Council must also evolve mechanisms to complete the
projects on time despite very short working season in the North East Region as one cannot alter
the geographical cycles. The Committee recommends that NEC may conduct a comparative study
on how projects are completed in other countries of similar climatic conditions suffering from
similar handicaps. The Committee also notes unavailability of raw material as well as limited
capacity of contractors and executing agencies. The Committee feels that the Government should
come forward to address those deficiencies affecting execution of the projects in NER by
augmenting supply of raw material and assistance to the executing agencies by providing soft loans
to them.
(Para 2.4.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.4 The suggestion of the Committee have been noted and steps would be taken on the
direction of the Committee to address the deficiencies affecting execution of projects in NER.

4
1.4 CONSTRUCTION/IMPROVEMENT OF ROADS OF ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
Recomendation
1.4.1 The Committee is dismayed over the fact that the Mahadev-Tolloi-Pfutsero road still
remains incomplete even after close to a decade. The Committee is aware that the State
Government of Manipur had earlier refused to implement the project and the same was handed over
to BRO for completion last year itself. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
construction of road be completed this year without any excuses. The Committee further
recommends that more projects should be identified to be taken up under the scheme.
(Para 2.5.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 The comments of the Committee have been noted. The Standing Finance Committee (SFC)
chaired by Secretary, DoNER, in its meeting held on 3
rd October, 2013, inter alia , considered the
Revised Estimates submitted for this project by BRO. The SFC has recommended revised project
cost of 
R 98.02 crore (original cost: R 74.12 crore) and projected date of completion as
March, 2015. During the SFC meeting it was reiterated that the revised cost and date of completion
should be adhered by the BRO and further request for the revision of cost/extension of date for
completion in respect of this project shall not be considered by the NEC.
FURTHER OBSERV ATIONS
1.4.3 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the work relating to Mahadev-Tolloi-
Pfutsero road will be completed by March 2015.
1.5 NON PLAN LOANS TO NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NEHHDC)
Recomendation
1.5.1 The Committee understands the crucial role of NEHHDC in promotion and development of
handicrafts and handloom in the NER and therefore, feels that its revival need to be done. The
Committee notes with concern that the earmarked allocation is not sufficient as it falls short of
R6.50 crore to implement Revival Plan of the Corporation, which stands cleared by Cabinet
Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA). The Committee urges upon the Finance Ministry to allocate
the required amount so that NEHHDC may make turn around in the year 2013-14 as per its
projections.
(Para 2.6.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 Ministry of Finance has already been approached to release additionality of 
R 6.00 crore during
the current fiscal. Ministry of Finance has advised Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
to pose the additionality in the Supplementary Demand for Grants. This Ministry will be asking for the
additionality of R 6 crore in the ensuing supplementaries, as advised by Ministry of Finance.
1.6 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETING
CORPORATION (NERAMAC)
Recomendation
1.6.1 Given its mandate of encouraging food processing units in NER and providing basic
infrastructure for marketing of agricultural and allied products, the allocation of 
R 2.00 crore for

5
BE 2013-14 to NERAMAC is too low for carrying out its activities. The Committee notes that the
allocation has remained the same for the years 2011-12 RE and 2012-13 BE. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Working Capital of the organization may be increased as per its
additional requirement of Rs.6.00 crore keeping in mind that the corporation is a profit making
organization with huge potential for growth.
(Para 2.7.15 ibid)
Recomendation
1.6.2 The Committee notes that Fruit Juice Concentration Plant at Nalkata, Tripura, which was
able to absorb the entire production of pineapple grown in the area and was able to provide better
price to farmers, has outlived its life and requires renovation and restructuring. The Committee is
disappointed to note that despite its recommendation made in 145th Report (Demands for Grants
2010-11) for early implementation of modernizing and restructuring of the plant, the same has still
not been done. Similarly, a Cashew Processing Unit at Agartala in Tripura , which was able to
absorb a major portion of the cashew nut grown in Tripura, has also been closed due to strictures
from Pollution Control Board. The Committee has been informed that a proposal to relocate the
plant is pending with Government of Tripura. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
the requirement of working capital may be provided immediately for increasing its activities
manifold thereby making huge impact on the farmers and producers of the region.
(Para 2.7.16 ibid)
Action taken [Para Nos. 2.7.15 and 2.7.16]
1.6.3 W ith the issue of Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum No. 7(2)/E. Coord./2013 dated
18
th September, 2013, a cut of 10% has been imposed on Non-Plan expenditure during the current
fiscal. Notwithstanding this, the Ministry will take up the issue of enhanced allocation with Ministry
of Finance for BE 2014-15.
1.7 NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORPORATION LIMITED (NEDFi)
Recomendation
1.7.1 North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Limited (NEDFi) is an extremely
important Institution of the NER which provides term finance to industry, agro-horticulture based
industries and infrastructure along with services to the small entrepreneurs of the region. The
Committee has been informed that the Corporation is projecting internal generation of around
R 300 Crore, market borrowing of R 90 Crore and soft loan of R 60 Crore from the Ministry
of DoNER during the financial year 2013-14. The Committee notes that though the Corporation
has a target of 25-30 per cent growth on year-on-year basis but it has scaled down its
disbursement target from 
R 485.00 crore during the financial year 2012-13 to R 450 Crore during
the financial year 2013-14 due to resource constraints. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that adequate fund may be provided to NEDFi at RE stage to carry out its activities as
projected.
(Para 2.8.14 ibid)
1.7.2 The Committee is given to understand that the corporation has fund requirement of
R5184 crore during the Twelfth Five Year Plan to meet the projected sanctions of R 6410.00 crore
and disbursement of  R 4690.00 crore. The corporation has further requested for interest-free loan
to the tune of R 1000.00 crore from the Government during Twelfth Five Year Plan. Keeping in
view the pivotal role of NEDFi, the Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its
162nd Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry that the Government should

6
consider interest-free loan to the tune of R 1000.00 crore for ensuring NEDFi to meet its financial
and physical targets during the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
(Para 2.8.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.3 Financial assistance is provided by the Government of India to North Eastern Development
Finance Corporation Limited (NEDFi) in the form of interest-free loan. Against proposed Twelfth
Plan outlay of 
R 350 crore for loan to NEDFi, this Ministry have been informed allocation of R
300 crore only. Also against Central Plan outlay of R 6506.60 crore proposed by Ministry for
Twelfth Plan, Planning Commission have informed allocation of R 955 crore only. Hence, Ministry
is unable to increase amount of interest free loan being provided to NEDFi. As advised by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee matter is being taken up for enhancing interest free loans to
NEDFi during 2013-14 to R 200.00 crore at RE Stage and twelfth Plan allocation to R 1000.00
crore.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.7.4 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of DoNER and desires to be
apprised of the result in this regard.
1.8 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recomendation
1.8.1 The Committee is highly dismayed and extremely dissatisfied with the abysmal rate of
completion of projects under the scheme. The Committee was given similar excuses for non-
performance during the consideration of Demands for Grants (2012-13) wherein it noted in its
recommendation given in 162nd Report. The same set of excuses are again being given this year
like delay in tendering process, delay in transfer of funds to implementing agencies, delay in
utilization of funds and timely non-submission of correct and proper documents by State
Governments etc. The Committee feels that nothing has changed on ground except for tall promises
to rectify the situation. The Committee strongly recommends that the various steps mooted by the
Ministry should be implemented immediately so that marked improvement gets visible in real terms
by next financial year.
(Para 2.9.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 The observations of the DR-PSC have been noted. Projects under NLCPR Scheme are
implemented by State Governments. To expedite the completion of projects various review meetings
have been held at the level of Secretary, DoNER and Chief Secretaries of the States have been
asked to review the progress of projects on quarterly basis. Progress of implementation of projects
under the scheme shall be monitored vigorously further with the State Governments. During
2013-14 upto September, 2013, State Governments reported completion of 54 projects at a cost
of 
R. 514.29 crore.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.8.3 The Committee views that intensive monitoring of progress of implementation of
projects under NLCPR scheme would definitely result in achievement of set targets.

7
1.9 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recomendation
1.9.1 The Committee notes the gap between grants released during 2009-2012 and Utilisation
Certificates submitted for the period by the States. While grants to the tune R 2376.58 crore were
released during the period, utilization certificates for only R 1838.78 crore have been submitted by
the States. This kind of non-submission of UCs creates hurdles in the way of fresh allocation from
the Pool for projects which, in turn, delays the completion of projects causing time and cost
overruns. The Committee urges upon the State Governments concerned to submit Utilization
Certificates on time so that funds could be released on time and delays could be avoided.
(Para 2.9.17 of 170th Report)
Action Taken
1.9.2 During 2012-13 State Governments submitted utilization certificates of R 753.22 crore and
during 2013-14 upto 30.09.2013 State Governments submitted utilization certificates of another
R 413.15 crore. A letter has been issued to the State Governments of North Eastern Region conveying the
concerns of Parliamentary Standing Committee and requesting to expedite the utilization certificates
for timely completion of projects. Matter was also reviewed during review meetings with the State
Governments
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.9.3 The Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of DoNER and desires that the
efforts may continue in the right earnest.
1.10 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recomendation
1.10.1 The Committee notes that despite achieving budgetary targets and quarterly expenditure
targets, Grants from Central Pool of Resources for North Eastern Region were significantly reduced
at the RE stage 2012-13 by the Finance Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Grants
should be appropriately restored so that physical targets could be met.
(Para 2.9.18 ibid)
Action Taken
1.10.2 Recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee have been
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission with a request to restore the grants.
1.11 BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (BTC)
Recomendation
1.11.1 The Committee notes that under the BTC Package of 
R. 500 crore, 42 projects at approved
cost of R. 476.27 crore have been sanctioned against which R. 453.34 crore have been released by
the Ministry. The Committee also notes that the Government of Assam has submitted Utilization
Certificates for only R. 398.07 crore. The Committee recommends that the balance Utilization
Certificates may be submitted at the earliest by the State Government concerned. It also urges upon
the Ministry to finish the remaining projects at the earliest. The Committee also expresses concern

8
over the under utilization of funds in 2012-13 even though it was reduced at RE stage. This needs
to be looked into.
(Para 2.10.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.2 As regards obtaining remaining UCs under R. 500 crore BTC Package from Government of
Assam, Principal Secretary, BTC during his visit to this Ministry on 06.05.2012 informed that the
UCs along with CCs under BTC Package of 
R. 500 crore will be submitted to this Ministry within
current financial year.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.11.3 The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Principal Secretary, BTC should
fulfil his assurance with regard to submission of UCs
Recomendation
1.11.4 It has come to the notice of the Committee that the money from the Central fund meant
for BTC package has been lying with the State Government of Assam which has not been released.
The Committee takes a serious view of this and feels that in federal set up like India when the
Central Government sanctions the fund the State Government has no business to retain the fund
without releasing for a longer period. It goes against the federal principal. The Committee desires
that the Central Government may review the entire package and take up the matter with the State
Government to ensure that such thing does not recur in future. In case the State Government does
not release the fund for the purpose for which they are sanctioned, future release of the fund to
the State Government may be held up until the State Government takes necessary action.
(Para 2.10.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.5 Government of Assam have been apprised of, vide letter dated 09.05.2013, about the
serious concern of the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding delay in transfer of funds of
BTC and requested to devise a mechanism so as to assure uninterrupted flow of funds to BTC.
1.12 ADVERTISING AND PUBLICITY
Recomendation
1.12.1 The Committee hopes that Plan allocation of 
R 7.00 crore would not be reduced at RE
stage as was done (allocation of R 7.00 crore reduced to R 4.50 crore at RE Stage during
2012-13) so that Advertisement and Publicity is given due impetus this year. More efforts are
required to be taken in this regard to attract more investment in the region.
(Para 2.11.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.12.2 All possible initiatives have been taken by this Ministry to fully utilize the plan allocation of
R 7.00 crore under Advertising and Publicity Scheme during the financial year 2013-14. There is
no indication of any possibility of under utilization of allocated funds till now.
1.12.3 As regards, attracting more investment in the region, this Ministry has successfully
organized a 2-Day Conclave on North East States in Bangalore in association with Federation of

9
Indian Export Organisation during 24-25 September, 2013 in which eminent speakers presented
comments and opinion on issues involving Government policies, programmes and problems of their
implementation, Development dynamics in North East India, Livelihood issues and role of crafts in
economic development of NER, Natural Resource Management in North East India etc. Further, 9th
North East Business Summit will be held in Dibrugarh, Assam during 22-24 November, 2013 in
association with Indian Chamber of Commerce in which close interaction between industry and
Government authorities will take place for facilitating inflow of more productive resources to the
North Eastern States.
1.13 NORTH EASTERN REGION LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP)-EAP
Recomendation
1.13.1 The Committee notes that the NERLP-EAP is suffering due to non-filling of key posts. This
is causing unwelcome delays in execution of schemes which, in turn, is affecting absorption
capacities. The result is that funds sanctioned have not been utilized and had to be surrendered.
This is a very sorry state of affairs. The Committee recommends that all the vacant positions may
be filled as soon as possible without any further delay. The project is all the more important as
it relates to livelihood of common people of the North East and must be given the due priority
and seriousness it deserves.
(Para 2.13.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.13.2 The main reason for not utilizing the allocated budget was absence of regular Project
Director of the NERLP during 2012-13. A regular Project Director has since taken charge with
effect from 1
st July, 2013. During 2013-14, with full staff in position, except for Tripura, the
project is expected to take off and activities as laid down in Project Implementation plan (PIP) will
be carried out.
1.13.3 During 2012-13, being the first year of effective implementation, most activities undertaken
did not involve substantial expenditure as it was mostly to do with setting up of establishment like
recruitment of staff, setting up of offices, induction training, exposure visits, village immersion,
PRA exercise etc.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.13.4 The Committee hopes that with the regular Project Director in charge of NELRP the
implementation of project will now get momentum and allocated budget will be utilised fully
and judicially.
1.14 NORTH EASTERN REGION LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP)-EAP
Recomendation
1.14.1 The Committee appreciates the role of NERLP in preparing the community institutions for
self governance, bottom up planning, democratic functioning with transparency and accountability.
The Committee desires that community based institutions under the project must be encouraged in
larger numbers for sustainable agricultural and natural resource management. The Committee
believes that participation of Self Help Groups (SHGs) as Community Service Providers (CSPs)
would go a long way in achieving the set objective of the NERLP . The Committee therefore,
recommends that concerted efforts must be made in this direction.
(Para 2.13.9 ibid)

10
Action Taken
1.14.2 The following initiatives are being taken in NERLP:
(a) The Project proposes to create strong community institutions. It will give emphasis on
formation of sustainable and vibrant primary institutions of the poor based on the
principle of thrift and credit as women Self Help Groups (SHGs), Youth Groups and
Producers Groups. The villages will be covered to saturation level.
(b) Several SHGs will form Village Federation to promote self-reliant and financial
independence which will be sustainable. Federations would partner with variety of
organizations for linkages to market institutions and provide delivery mechanisms for
various Government programs.
(c) Youth Groups with primary level educations would be formed and given special sector
skills for employability.
(d) Community Development Groups would try to address livelihood gaps of the poor and
vulnerable section of community. They will aggregate the needs and demands and
provide a platform to effectively engage in decision making process for economic
empowerment for self-reliant, self-managed and sustainable livelihood improvement for
community.
(e) Producer’s Organizations would be formed at village level by drawing members from
SHGs, YGs and SDSs. They would have their own internal working arrangements with
distribution of work tasks, responsibilities for hiring outside professionsl, various
technical and specialist tasks. Capacity building inputs would be provided to Board
members for running commercial organization.
(f) Market linkages would be established so that producer’s organizations and individual
producers are able to get good return for their produce. Project will tie up with ICAR
Research Labs, CSIR research stations to provide technical knowledge and expertise
to organizations. This sector support organization will provide assistance for value
chain which will help producers to aligne their produce to market requirements.
(g) Livelihood activities taken up by NERLP would be complimented by MGREGA which
has much needed support for farmers with upfront capital for management of natural
resources in the form of water conservation and forest protection.
(h) The process of community mobilization has been initiated and concerted efforts are
being taken to bring transformational changes in the project states.
1.15 SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADATION IN
NORTH EASTERN REGION
Recomendation
1.15.1 The Committee recommends that sincere efforts be made to complete the SIDF projects
under the scheme on time. It also desires that these projects should be well monitored for achieving
the physical and financial targets. As allocation has been significantly increased in current year,
there needs to be effective monitoring on the implementation of the projects.
(Para 2.14.5 ibid)

11
Action Taken
1.15.2 An exercise is already underway in the Ministry to monitor the SIDF projects more
intensively so that optimum utilisation of allocated funds could be achieved and ongoing projects
get completed without any cost and time overruns.
1.16 INFRASTRUCTURAL PROJECTS
Recomendation
1.16.1 The Committee is extremely concerned about abnormally long delays taking place in execution
of infrastructure projects in the Region. The Committee observes that the Ministry comes up with similar
alibis every time whenever they are asked about the delays. The Committee, while acknowledging the
fact that the region suffers from peculiar problems, feels that a way out has to be found out, because
neither the climate of the region is going to change nor the region can be allowed to lag behind on
the pretext of adverse circumstances. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should look for
various technological interventions such as pre-fabricated structures, other innovative methods and
digitization of land records among others to speed up the process of project execution.
(Para 3.2.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.16.2 Accelerating pace of completion of infrastructure projects in NER was reviewed by the
Prime Minister on 18.07.2013 and some of the decisions taken to fast track completion of projects
are as under:–
(i) In order to improve road connectivity, the focus is to be on improving the speed of
implementation of existing projects by strengthening project execution capabilities on
the ground, stationing NHAI staff close to the field and regular review by the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways.
(ii) In order to ensure progress, an Empowered Committee be set up to monitor progress
on infrastructure projects in the North-East Region and report progress every 3
months.
(iii) The Planning Commission to call a meeting of all Chief Ministers of the North Eastern
States to improve inter-state coordination for speedy completion of the projects.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.16.3 The Committee, in view of the initiatives/decisions undertaken in a review meeting
by the Prime Minister for accelerating pace of completion of infrastructure projects in NER,
hopes that the follow up steps undertaken in pursuance of the decision taken in the
meeting would yield results in completion of infrastructure projects in NER without time
and cost overrun.
1.17 POTENTIAL OF HYDRO-ELECTRIC (HE) PRODUCTION IN NE REGION
Recomendation
1.17.1 The Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER must play pro-active coordinating role and
act in tandem with Ministry of Water Resources, Power, Forest and Environment and concerned
State Governments in NER to harness Hydro power potential optimally.
(Para 3.3.9 ibid)

12
Action Taken
1.17.2 Process of internalizing the above recommendations of Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs on Demand for Grants (2013-14) in the working of Ministry
of DoNER has already started.
1.18 POTENTIAL OF HYDRO-ELECTRIC (HE) PRODUCTION IN NE REGION
Recomendation
1.18.1 The Committee is astonished to find that on Lower Subansiri Project the estimated
completion cost has gone upto 
R 11,000 crore and Government is losing R 60 crore for every month
of delay due to the concerns of the people over the Dam Safety. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry after receiving the recommendations on Dam Safety should attempt to win the
confidence of the affected people by proper counseling so that the project takes off at the earliest.
The Committee also hopes that once the project gets started, the Ministry would ensure that the
project is completed without further delay and cost escalation.
(Para 3.3.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.18.2 Lower Subansiri HEP is presently under construction by NHPC. The estimated completion
cost of the project is 
R 10667.09 crores at December, 2010 price level. The project has been
delayed mainly due to agitation launched by Anti-Dam activists against the construction of the
project on account of its likely downstream impact in Assam. The matter is being constantly
pursued with State Government of Assam. Ministry of Power is making all out efforts to resolve
difficult situation and bring normalcy to the project. To resolve the issue, following Groups/
Committees were constituted:
● Technical Experts Committee (TEC) comprising of two former Chairmen of CWC
constituted by the Planning Commission. The TEC submitted its report to the Planning
Commission on 24
th July, 2012.
● Joint Steering Committee (JSC) consisting of members from CWC; Water Resource
Department (WRD), Government of Assam; Brahmaputra Board; IIT (Roorkee);
Government of Arunachal Pradesh and NHPC. JSC submitted its report in
August, 2012 to NHPC. The comments of NHPC on the recommendations of the JSC
have been received in the Ministry in October, 2012.
● Dam Design Review Panel (DDRP) under the chairmanship of Chairman, the CWC
was constituted by MOP on 10.12.2012, pursuant to recommendations of TEC. The
Report of DDRP was submitted to Ministry of Power. The recommendations of the
DDRP have been accepted by NHPC.
1.18.3 In addition, NHPC Management held meetings with AASU and other groups of Assam to
resolve the deadlock. The Project is continuously making efforts to reach out to the local
population through various measures such as visits of local people and students to the project area,
continuous liaison with local administration and CSR activities. Various mass awakening programs
to disseminate likely benefits of the project have been initiated. Ministry of Power/NHPC are also
pursing with the Government
R of Assam to hold tripartite talks to resolve the issue and enable early
resumption of works on the project.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.18.4 The Committee hopes that the efforts made by NHPC management would yield positive
impact on the mindset of anti-dam activists and the project would get steamed off, soon.

13
1.19 FOREST CLEARANCE FOR LAND
Recomendation
1.19.1 The Committee understands that militant activity and prevailing security scenario is, of
course, a larger problem which requires a national level brain-storming exercise and towards that
direction, the Union Ministry of Home Affairs and concerned State Government should take
appropriate steps together in a coordinated way.
(Para 3.6.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.19.2 The Planning Commission has been directed by the Prime Minister to call a meeting of all
the Chief Ministers of the North Eastern States to improve inter-state coordination.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.19.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the meeting of all the
Chief Minister of NER States called for improving inter-state-Coordination to ward off
militant activity and improve security scenario.
Recomendation
1.19.4 The Committee observes that several railway projects in NER suffer due to various
peculiarities viz., paucity of funds, limited working season, Militant activity and prevailing security
scenario in North East Region, delay in land transfer to the project from State Government and
Forest clearance for Land. The Committee believes that such limiting factors should not discourage
the concerned line Ministry from extending its concerted attention towards development of the
region. The Committee, has, therefore, recommends on several occasions that the best way to adhere
is to properly plan and make strategy for development keeping in view the limiting factors so that
any development project is not held up halfway. The Committee is of the view that the stumbling
bloc such as limited working season can be tackled by customized technological solutions while
administrative problems like forest clearances and land acquisition on time could be resolved by
better coordination and persuasion at highest level.
(Para 3.6.5 ibid)
Action Taken:
1.19.5 Railway is taking necessary action including planning of works in such manner that
wherever possible work can continue in monsoon and non-working seasons such as tunnels, major
bridges etc, and forestry and land issues are regularly followed up at highest level. Main constraint
is availability of resources. Against throw forward of 
R 27686 crore. for National Projects, outlay
of R 3000 crore has been provided during 2013-14.
1.20 AIR CONNECTIVITY
Recomendation
1.20.1 The Committee notes that night landing facilities are proposed to be extended to the region
besides the expansion of the runway, terminal buildings. The Committee believes that steps being
undertaken would improve air connectivity and related facilities. The Committee urges upon the
Ministry to complete Greenfield airport in Sikkim on schedule and commence work for the
construction of airports in Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland. Keeping in view the long pending

14
public demand, the Committee also feels that Guwahati airport must be provided with a second
runway by converting the taxiway into a second runway so that it can serve as an emergency
runway. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibility of making
non-functional airstrips and airports operational for better air-connectivity of the region in
consultation with defence Ministry wherever possible.
(Para 3.7.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.20.2
1. Night Landing Facility
In North East Region, there are Twelve operational airports including Bagdogra (West
Bengal). Out of this seven airports are owned by AAI (Agartala, Barapani/Shillong, Dibrugarh,
Dimapur, Imphal, Guwahati and Lilabari), Four are Civil Enclaves (Bagdogra, Jorhat, Silchar and
Tezpur) and one State Government Airport (Lengpui).
Among the AAI Airports, Agartala, Guwahati and Imphal have night landing facilities and
scheduled night operations. For Dibrugarh and Lilabari, AAI has already applied to DGCA for
permission to allow night operations. In the case of Dimapur, the application is being processed
for DGCA clearance. For Barapani Airport, there is proposal for extension of runway and alongwith
this the Night Landing Facility will also be provided.
In the case of four civil enclaves requests were already made to IAF for providing the night
landing facilities and for allowing the night operations. The issue is being taken in the periodical
joint meeting with IAF.
State Government of Mizoram is planning to hand over Lengpui Airport to AAI. After taking
over the airport, steps will be taken to provide night landing facilities.
However, it can be seen that even in the three airports where the night landing facilities are
allowed and operations are permitted, there are not much takers to make use of the facilities. AAI
have to incur huge expenditure for operating and maintaining the night landing facilities. Unless the
airlines make use of the facilities, it will result in the wastage of resources including expert
manpower.
2. Greenfield Airport at Pakyong, Sikkim
● Airports Authority of India is constructing a Greenfield airport at Pakyong near
Gangtok. Cost of the project is R 310 crore. Funding 90% by Government Grant and
10% by AAI.
● Runway 02/20 will have dimensions of 1700M x 30M and will be suitable for the
operation of ATR type of aircraft in fair weather conditions. Apron will be able to
accommodate two ATR types of aircrafts.
● Terminal Building for 100 passengers and Control Tower cum Fire Station are part of
this Project. In addition to this, Communication and Navigation aids such as VHF, HF,
NDB, DVOR, PAPI (at both ends), etc. are also planned.
● The land development works including Geo Grid reinforced retaining wall, drainage
system, aerodrome pavements, etc. is being executed by M/s. Punj Llyod at a cost of
R 264.29 crore and 74% of the work completed.
● Terminal Building and other ancillary buildings are in progress.
● The overall PDC of the project is December, 2014.

15
3. Construction of Airports in Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland
A. Greenfield Airports
(i) Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh)
➢ AAI had carried out feasibility study of the site at Banderdeva, which is forest land
for Greenfield Airport during March, 2006 and the process for taking various
clearances was initiated. The PIB Meeting held on 25.03.2009 had not cleared the
proposal indicating huge cutting and filling of earth and had suggested to explore
possibility of locating an alternate site which involves less cutting and filling and has
a lower environmental impact.
➢ State Government had identified another site at Holongi and AAI had carried out the
feasibility study. After this, it was found that the site at Holongi is superior to
Banderdeva on operational safety and economy point of view. Accordingly, Ministry of
Civil Aviation and State Government had decided to go-ahead with construction of the
Greenfield Airport at Holongi.
➢ AAI had finalised the Master Plan and submitted applications for getting clearance from
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Environment and Forests and for formal approval of
the Steering Committee on Greenfield Airports. Ministry of Civil Aviation has sought
comments on the proposal from Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence.
➢ AAI submitted Master Plan to State Government on 24.08.2012 indicating land
requirement of 320 Hectares. State Government has started the land acquisition process
and Gazette Notification dated 13.2.2013 has been issued for acquisition. Public Notice
has also been issued by State Government in local dailies on 20
th February, 2013
inviting claims and objections from the affected land owners for the above land
acquisition.
➢ NOC from Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home Affairs is awaited. Reminders
sent on 12.2.2013 and 17.5.2013.
➢ Meantime, a PIL challenging the proposal to shift Greenfield Airport from Banderdeva
to Holongi was filed in Guwahati High Court against Ministry of Civil Aviation /State
Government/AAI. Guwahati High Court, vide  order dated 25.4.13 directed the
Respondents to maintain status quo as to the location of the project and directed to
submit response with documents by 17.6.2013.
➢ Tender action has been taken by AAI for pre-qualification of applications for
appointment of consultants for preparation of DPR and for obtaining environmental
clearance. The financial bid has been opened on 25.4.2013 and scrutiny and evaluation
of tenders is in process.
➢ In case, if Hon’ble Court gives the go-ahead for the Holongi Site in June, 2013 and
if all the clearances (Steering Committee, MoD, MoEF, DGCA) as well as approval of
PIB and fund sanction by Ministry of DoNER is available by June, 2014 then the
project can be completed by September, 2017.
(ii) Cheithu Airport (Nagaland)
● A proposal regarding development of a Greenfield airport at Cheithu near Kohima,
Nagaland at an approximate cost of R 1139.64 crore through 100% Government
Budgetary support was considered in this Ministry. It was jointly examined by all the
concerned including the representatives of the State Government of Nagaland, Airports

16
Authority of India and Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region from the
point of view of location, logistics, strategic concerns, economics and aspirations of
the people of the State. A meeting was also held in the Prime Minister’s Office on
15.6.2012 to discuss the construction of Greenfield airport at Cheithu, Kohima among
other issues and it was concluded that the location of Chiethu suffers from various
disadvantages and is not suitable for airport. This position was also intimated to the
Chief Secretary, Government of Nagaland by letter dated 17.8.2012.
➢ Due to presence of gorges around the proposed site the operation of aircraft larger
than ATR 72 type of aircraft, is not viable. Therefore, the proposed Greenfield Airport
at Cheithu may not fully serve the purpose of capital city airport. The construction of
Greenfield Airport for ATR 72 aircraft with a huge investment is economically unviable
even on long term period. It is, therefore, advised to explore the possibility of any
other site for construction near the capital city, which may be suitable for operations
of at least A 320 type of aircraft or State Government may make available additional
land for expansion and upgradation of the Dimapur Airport to AAI free of cost and free
from all encumbrances. The Minister for Civil Aviation had also written to the Chief
Minister by letter dated 06.2.2013 in this regard.
B. Upgrading and Operationalising of non-operational airports.
(i) Operationalisation of Tezu Airport.
● Airport handed over to AAI by State Govrnment in Sept. 2010 is being developed for
operationalisation of ATR-72 type of aircraft at an estimated cost of R 79 crore.
● Construction of Boundary Wall completed.
● Runway extension, new apron alongwith link taxiway, Strengthening of existing runway
and existing apron (to be used as isolation bay)alongwith link taxiway and construction
of new car park are in progress.
● Terminal Building, Technical Buildings and other ancillary buildings are also in progress.
● Overall physical progress is 13.5% and the Probable date of completion – December, 2014.
(ii) Operationalisation of Daparizo Airport
Airport belongs to State Government and will be developed and operationalised by AAI
for ATR-42 operations for which additional land of 34.3 acres is required from State
Government After land is handed over by State Government, works can be completed in
three years approx. at an estimated cost of 
R 160 crore approx (DPR for R 158.68
crore submitted to NEC in November, 2011).
(iii) Operationalisation of Ziro Airport
Airport belongs to State Government and will be developed by IAF for ATR-42 operations and
AAI will construct a Civil Enclave for which 10 acres land requisitioned to State Government After
land is handed over, works can be completed in three years at an estimated cost of 
R 79 crore
approx. (for Civil Enclave-DPR submitted to NEC in November, 2011).
(iv) Operationalisation of Along Airport
Airport belongs to State Government and will be developed by IAF for ATR-42
operations and AAI will construct a Civil Enclave for which additional land of 7 acres would

17
be required from State Government After land is handed over by State Government, works
can be completed in three years at an estimated cost of R 77.5 crore approx. (for Civil
Enclave-DPR submitted to NEC in November, 2011).
(v) Operationalisation of Passighat Airport
Airport belongs to AAI and is being transferred to IAF on Lease Agreement for its
development and operationalisation for ATR-72 type of aircraft operations and AAI will
construct a civil enclave for which 05 acres of land will be retained. After lease agreement
with IAF, additional land from State Government and fund sanction from NEC, the time
taken for construction will be 3 years with an estimated cost of R 91.51 crore (for Civil
Enclave-DPR submitted to NEC in November, 2011).
4. Secondary Runway for Guwahati Airport – At present Guwahati Airport has only one
runway of 3103 meters length suitable for handling ‘D’ category aircrafts. At one side of the
runway the Terminal Building, Control Tower etc. are positioned and other side it is Air Force base.
The width of land between the Air Force base and the terminal building – control tower is not
sufficient enough for making a parallel runway. If we have to make parallel runway then the Air
Force base has to be shifted.
There is no parallel taxiway of the airport in AAI land.
It is not out of place to mention that Tezpur Airport is only at an aerial distance of
140 km. from Guwahati and it can handle upto A-321 type of aircraft. It means in case of any
emergency at Guwahati Airport, Tezpur can act as alternate airport. In addition to this, Barapani,
Bagdogra, Dimapur and Jorhat are with various capacities. Accordingly, the need of secondary
runway at Guwahati may be reviewed/examined.
5. Operationalisation of non-operational airports – In addition to the non-operational airports at
Arunachal Pradesh as mentioned above, there are some other non-operational airports in other
States viz. Rupsi in Assam, Tura in Meghalaya, Kamalpur in Tripura, which are planned to be
upgraded subject to land availability from the State Government for making it operational in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan. All these airports are either with AAI or with the State Government.
1.21 INLAND WATER CONNECTIVITY
Recomendation
1.21.1 The Committee understands the importance of Inland Waterways as an alternative to other
modes of transport which are found lacking in many parts of the region. Inland waterways has
huge potential which can also be used to supplement the existing routes on land. Waterways are
the cheapest mode of transport anywhere in the world. In Western European countries, about 40
per cent of the cargo movement is by waterways. The world’ s average is about 8 per cent, whereas
in India it is less than 1 per cent. The Committee is surprised to find that in the National Water
Policy, navigation comes almost towards the end on the list of priority. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that navigation in NER should find priority as it is not only an economical mode of
transport but also eco-friendly and there is immense scope for improvement in the field of Inland
Waterways in NER. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
along with Ministry of Water Resources should pursue all the projects vigorously in close
coordination with the Ministry of DoNER. The Committee also recommends that fund constraints
should not come in the way of the implementation of projects. The Committee also recommends that
Inland Water Transport projects in Tripura, Meghalaya and Mizoram which are at various stages
of planning may be expedited and finalised.
(Para 3.8.3 ibid)

18
Action Taken
1.21.2 The National Water Policy, 2012 has emphasized that rivers and other water bodies should
be considered for development for navigation as far as possible, and all multipurpose projects over
water bodies should keep navigation in mind right from the planning stage.
The status of IWT projects in Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Assam is as under:–
IWT Projects in Tripura
● Ministry of Shipping has sanctioned and released R 82.725 lakhs in 2012-13 for
engagement of consultants for preparation of DPR for development of Howrah (from
Joy Nagar to Jirania-28 km.) and Gomati River (from Sunmara to Maharani Barrage
stretch-54 km.) for making the rivers navigable with a view to setting linkage with
Meghna river system of Bangladesh. Government of Tripura has already awarded the
work to M/s RITES Ltd. The projected dates of completion of the work are as under.
(i) Preparation of draft report by June, 2013.
(ii) Submission of final report by July, 2013.
IWT Projects in Meghalaya
● A proposal for engagement of consultant for preparation of DPR for development of
IWT infrastructure on Simsang, Kynshi and Jinjiram River at a cost of R 150 lakh was
received from the Government of Meghalaya. The estimate was based on the single
offer from M/s. RITES.
● The proposal was examined and the cost was found to be on higher side. Accordingly,
it was recommended to call for tender. IWAI has prepared ToR/NIT for calling tender
on the request of Meghalaya Government.
IWT Projects in Mizoram
● A project for development of IWT in Tlawng river under Central Sector Scheme for
NE Region was sanctioned by the Government at a cost of R 5.28 crore during
December, 2009. The project has been completed in December, 2012.
● Another proposal for development of river Tuichawng/Karnaphuli at an estimated cost
of 
R 26.97 crore was submitted by Government of Mizoram during February, 2013.
The proposal was examined by IWAI and the State Government was requested to
furnish revised proposal after taking into account of the observations made by IWAI.
It was also pointed out that for the development of the river from navigation point of
view proper hydrographic survey was essential. State Government has again submitted
a proposal on 13.5.2013, which is under examination by IWAI.
IWT Project of Assam
● A project for construction of 20 nos. of floating terminal pontoons on river
Brahmaputra at a cost of R 4.50 crore was sanctioned by the Central Government in
March, 2007.
● Overall progress of the work 62% till March end 2013.
● As per the bar chart furnished by Government of Assam, the project is likely to be
completed by December, 2013.

19
TOURISM
1.22 Recomendation
1.22.1 The Committee understands that there cannot be two opinions about the huge potential for
tourism that exists in the North East but this potential has not been well tapped so far. The
Committee desires that the Ministry of Tourism should continue with its concerted efforts by
supporting projects for development of infrastructural facilities aiming at promotion of tourism in
the region. The Committee also recommends that projects of the Master plan for Tourism be
executed timely for promotion of tourism for the purpose.
(Para 3.9.6 ibid)
Recomendation
1.22.2 The Committee welcomes the idea of dividing the whole region into several tourist circuits
relating to religious and cultural tourism, wild life tourism, adventure tourism, eco-tourism, tea
tourism etc. which would cater to a large number of tourists, both national and international.
(Para 3.9.7 ibid)
Action Taken [Para Nos. 3.9.6 and 3.9.7]
1.22.3 The Integrated Tourism Master Plan for NER prepared by Tata Consultancy Services (TCS)
at NEC’s initiative has been accepted by the Ministry of Tourism for implementation. As a first
step, the State Level Project Management Agencies (SLPMAs) for the eight States of NER will be
engaged by the Ministry of Tourism for preparation of DPR’s for the identified circuits. These
projects will be taken up for funding by the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.22.4 The Committee desires to know about the time frame for implementation of the
integrated tourism Master Plan for NER by the Minister of tourism.
1.23 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
Recomendation
1.23.1 The Committee takes into account the SWOT analysis of the industrial situation in NER and
views that the Ministry of DoNER should make a detailed analysis of the same to take up the issue
of the industrial development in NER with the concerned line Ministries/Departments. The
Committee recommends that the following prospects of industrial development in NER must be
harnessed for ensuring balanced regional development:–
● The crude oil production and its refining as well as tea plantation and bamboo/cane
industries are the few resource-based industries in the region.
(Para 3.10.5 of 170 th Report)
Action Taken
1.23.2 The benefits under North East Industrial and Investment Promotion Policy (NEIIPP), 2007,
are given to manufacturing units and to select Service Sector units. Units engaged in oil exploration
do not manufacture products since processing is done in petroleum gas and oil refineries which
are already in the negative list. A decision has already been taken not to expand the Service Sector
under NEIIPP since subsidies offered by DIPP need to be aligned with the National Manufacturing

20
Policy to incentivize manufacturing activities. Accordingly, the State Governments of NER have
been advised to take up the matter with Administrative Ministries/Departments concerned to
consider formulation of such schemes for Service Sector and fund the same out of their budgetary
allocation for NER.
1.23.3 In view of the above, the proposal to bring the upstream oil companies under the ambit of
NEIIPP, 2007 by amending the Negative List of the Policy was not agreed to and the view of the
Department was communicated to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  vide letter dated 6th
March, 2013. It was also suggested to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that production
sharing contract drawn up by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should factor to the
extent considered appropriate, the risks involved in prospective activities.
1.23.4 For industrial development of bamboo industry in the North Eastern Region, this Department
has sanctioned a project under Recast Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme at Bamboo
based cluster, Guwahati, Assam, with a total project cost of 
R 62.28 crore including central grant
of 52.63 crore. However, units engaged in Plantation, as such, are not eligible for benefits under
NEIIPP, 2007.
● Exploitation of the large hydro potential in the NER could be used for exporting to
the power deficit northern and western regions of the country.
Action Taken
1.23.5 Power generating units up to 10 megawatts, based on conventional and non-conventional
sources are eligible for Capital Investment Subsidy, Interest Subsidy and Comprehensive Insurance
Subsidy as applicable under NEIIPP, 2007. A notification to this effect has already been issued by
this Department on 27
th July, 2007.
● The Region’ s comparative advantages in producing fruits, vegetables and other
horticulture products like spices can be tapped by setting up small-scale processing
units for the local market which would also boost rural employment.
Action Taken
1.23.6 Benefits under the NEIIPP, 2007 are available to units engaged in manufacturing activities
and to select service sector units. Units undertaking peripheral activities such as preservation during
storage, cleaning operations, packing, re-packing, labeling or re-labeling, sorting, alteration of retail
sale price etc. are not eligible for benefits under this Scheme.
1.23.7 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has launched a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme – National Processing Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) during 2012-13 of Twelfth
Five Year Plan to promote food processing sector including processing of fruits and vegetables and
horticulture products in the country including North-Eastern States. The basic objective of NMFP
is decentralization of implementation of the schemes, leading to substantial participation of State
Governments/UTs. NMFP provides flexibility to State/UT Governments in the selection of
beneficiaries, locations/region of the projects etc. for the development of food processing sector
in their States. Higher level of financial assistance is available under various schemes of NMFP for
North-Eastern States.
1.23.8 The other schemes of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries like Integrated Cold
Chain, Mega Food Parks, Setting up/Modernization of Abattoirs, Food Testing Laboratories, R&D
etc. are also being implemented in the North Eastern-Region with higher level of financial
assistance. In addition, Ministry in coordination with SFAC, implementation of Mini Mission-IV of
Horticulture Mission for North-East and Himalayan States (HMNES) of D/o Agriculture and

21
Cooperation under which higher level of financial assistance is provided for setting up/upgradation
of fruits and vegetables processing units in North-Eastern States.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.23.9 The Committee notes the reply and observes that the activities like preservation
during storage, cleaning operations, packing, re-packing, labeling or re-labeling, sorting, etc.
also play an important role in industrial development of NER and therefore deserve benefits
under the NEIIPP 2007.
 The North East is an ideal destination for adventure, leisure and eco tourism. The
mineral-rich north-eastern States can also explore and promote geo-tourism.
Action Taken
1.23.10 Units engaged in adventure and leisure sports including ropeways are eligible for benefits
under NEIIPP, 2007. Notification to this effect has already been issued by this Department on 27th
July, 2007. The entire cost of items/components (excluding land) essential for commencing the
project will be taken into account for determining eligible amount of Central Capital Investment
Subsidy under NEIIPP, 2007. In addition, such units also become eligible for Interest Subsidy to
the extent of 3 percent of the working capital loan availed by them for a period of 10 years from
the date of commencement of operations. Such units also become eligible for Comprehensive
Insurance Subsidy for a period of 10 years from the date of commencement of operations.
● The education sector in the North East has emerged as a major destination for
private firms. To explore the opportunities available, several private players are now
targeting the region to set up educational institutions which would serve the cross-
country market and cater to the needs of neighbouring countries.
Action Taken
1.23.11 Benefits under the NEIIPP, 2007 are available to select service sector units. Vide
notification dated 21
st September, 2007, service sector units like vocational training institutes for
hotel management, catering and food crafts, entrepreneurship development, nursing and para-
medical, civil aviation related training, fashion design and industrial training have been declared
eligible for benefits under this Scheme.
● The North Eastern Region is an ideal destination for Information Technology,
specifically for ITES sector. IT enabled service coupled with BPO business are other
areas which have enormous scope to flourish in the North–Eastern Region because
it has an advantage in its English speaking population and proficiency/ efficiency
acknowledged by captains of IT industries outside the NER. This should be explored
to the full potential.
Action Taken
1.23.12 Though, a number of references have been received in the past to include numerous
activities in the service sector (including ITES sector), however, it was felt that subsidies should
be aligned with the National Manufacturing Policy to incentivize manufacturing activities. It has
been, therefore, decided not to expand further the list of activities of service sector, what has
already been specified under NEIIPP, 2007. State Governments have been advised to take up the
matter of extension of proposals for benefit under service sector, which are not specified under
NEIIPP, 2007, with the concerned Administrative Ministry.

22
● Prospects for investors from outside the Region for setting up of industrial units
taking advantage of the incentives provided under NEIIPP–2007 by the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry.
Action Taken
1.23.13 M/s Mott McDonald, which conducted a study to assess the impact of NEIIPP, 2007,
have pointed out in its Report submitted in 2010 that industrialization that started due to North East
Industrial Policy (NEIP), 1997 has gained momentum after the announcement of a fiscal package
of incentives under NEIIPP, 2007. As a result, large investments have poured into the industrial
sector in the States of NER, including those from outside the region.
● Since North East is located at a crossroads between three major economies – East
Asia, South Asia and Southeast Asia, with the implementation of the ‘Look East
policy’ and opening up of trade routes, processing industries manufacturing quality
products, can be offered in international markets at competitive prices.
Action Taken
1.23.14 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, along with other Central Ministries/
Departments such as Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Department of Commerce,
Ministry of External Affairs etc. are implementing initiatives/components of Look East Policy.
1.23.15 W ith a view to promote exports from NER, Department of Commerce has set up an
Export Development Fund, which funds projects for promoting exports such as food testing labs,
processing centres etc. Department of Commerce has notified 12 Land Custom Stations (LCS)
along Bangladesh and Myanmar Border. These LCSs have been identified for development of
infrastructure on a priority basis.
1.24 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
Recomendation
1.24.1 Since the region is expected to be declared as SEZ, there is every reason for the Committee
to conclude that once the region is declared a SEZ by the Government of India, there would
automatically come about a wide range of infrastructural development and a rapid change in the
industrial sector, opening scope for a rapid change in the socio-economic scenario in the NE States.
The Committee believes that industrial development can be made in the NE States at par with the
development in other regions of the country if all the steps are taken in right earnest. The
Committee recommends that the Government should make concerted efforts in this direction.
(Para 3.10.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.2 The observations of the Committee have been conveyed to Department of Commerce for
appropriate action.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.24.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the appropriate action taken by the
Ministry of Commerce in the furtherance of industrial prospective in NER.

23
Recomendation
1.24.4 The Committee is of the firm opinion that simultaneous growth of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs) along with big Business Enterprises can create an overall growth story.
Unfortunately the development pattern of the MSMEs of the Region is far from encouraging. The
Committee is of the firm view that the growth of MSMEs touches more directly, the lives of
common people and can raise their income levels much more drastically. The Committee therefore,
strongly recommends that Government must address the problems being faced by the Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprise (MSMEs).
(Para 3.10.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.24.5 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) is making continued efforts for
promotion of MSME in NER. The budget for NER has been increasing consecutively. M/o MSME
has made financial provision in budget during financial year 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13 and
2013-14 as 
R 240.00 crores, R 270.00 crores, R 286.62 crores and R 297.70 crores respectively.
The major schemes/ programmes of the Ministry are being implemented in NER which include
Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP), Credit Guarantee Scheme, Credit
Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS), National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme,
Cluster Development Programme, Marketing Development Assistance and International Cooperation
Scheme etc. These schemes also facilitate in generation of employment in the country including
NER region. For NER, special dispensations are being provided in various schemes viz. Marketing
Development Assistance, Rajiv Gandhi Mitra Yojana, MSE-Cluster Development Programme, and
Credit Guarantee Scheme etc.
1.24.6 M inistry of MSME has various field offices and autonomous institutions viz. MSME-DIs,
Tool Room, EDI, Field offices of NSIC, KVIC etc. which provide training for skill development
and handholding support in NER for prospective and existing entrepreneurs.
1.25 EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES IN THE REGION
Recomendation
1.25.1 The Committee notes that in the absence of availability of adequate educational
opportunities in the region, students belonging to the region have to go to far flung areas of the
country. The Committee urges the Ministry of HRD to explore ways and means to provide such
opportunities in the NE Region establishing more institutes and provide adequate number of faculty
positions.
(Para 3.11.1 ibid)
Action Taken
1.25.2 Observations of the Committee have been conveyed to Ministry of Human Resource
Development for appropriate action.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.25.3 The Committee wants that the Ministry of DoNER should persuade the Ministry of
HRD for taking necessary action in the matter.

24
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OFF WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
 IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 TWELFTH PLAN (2012-13) PROJECTED DEMAND AND APPROVED PLAN
Recomendation
2.1.1 The Committee notes the detailed reply of the Ministry on bottlenecks in implementation of
the projects, intensive monitoring thereof and scrupulous release of funds for completion of
projects. The Committee is not satisfied and convinced with the detailed explanation and feels that
all these steps appear to be a mere paper work in view of the dismal financial achievements of
the Ministry. The Committee also notes the Ministry’ s confession about its weakness in advocacy
and coordination role, inadequate technical support, inadequate over all staff support, inadequate
space and absence of field office. The Committee is of the strong view that the purpose for which
the Ministry was set up, has not been fulfilled and it seems that the implementing ministries do
not pay heed to the requests or suggestions of the Ministry of DoNER. The Committee, therefore,
strongly, recommends that Government should consider the handicaps of the Ministry of DoNER in
a very serious manner and devise way out either by placing the Ministry of DoNER under PMO
directly or evolve some other mechanism so that the DoNER could get implemented its decisions
from the line ministries/departments/agencies.
(Para 2.3.11 of 170th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.2 One Hundred Seventy Third Report of the Department–related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Strengthening of the working of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
for effective implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and projects for North Eastern
Region inter alia  subsumes views of Secretaries of major line Ministries, Chief Secretaries/
representatives of all the North Eastern States alongwith Secretaries of Ministry of DoNER and
North Eastern Council and the Cabinet Secretary besides inputs from 27 Central Ministries/
Departments. An EGoM has also been constituted to resolve all pending issues pertaining to the
NER.
2.2 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CAPACITY BUILDING
Recomendation
2.2.1 The Committee observes that in pursuance of the mandate of National Council on Skill
development, an amount of 
R 60.00 crore had been projected for 2013-14 so as to undertake large
number of fresh courses of training for unemployed youth of North Eastern Region. It has also
been brought to the attention of the Committee that with the proposed allocation of 
R 20.00 crore
it would not be possible to take up large number of fresh courses. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Planning Commission should take favorable view on the matter and enhance
the grants at RE stage so that fresh courses of training for unemployed youth of North Eastern
24

25
Region can be taken up. Though the Committee endorses for higher allocation, but it is also
concerned to note that the expenditure during 2012-13 was only 12.21 which means even the
reduced allocation at RE could not be spent. This does not go well with the Ministry’s request for
higher allocation as capacity to utilize should be assessed first.
(Para 2.12.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 During 2012-13, the allocated budget for Capacity Building and Technical Assistance was
R 20 crore. This could not be fully utilized due to several reasons. After issue of sanction, the
agencies are to furnish utilization certificates for demand of the next instalments. There are several
prerequisites that have to be complied with before next sanction is issued. Hence, it sometimes
becomes time consuming and the same cannot be completed within the same financial year. In
some instances, the proposals submitted were not as per the acceptable norms, hence, it cannot
be processed.
2.2.3 The allocation for the current financial year 2013-14 is 
R 20 crore. Out of these,
R 10 crore will be utilized to clear the outstanding payments from the previous sanctioned projects.
The balance of R 10 crore will not be sufficient to cover all fresh proposals that have been
received. Hence, we propose to seek additional funds at RE stage.
2.3 NORTH EASTERN STATES ROADS INVESTMENT PROGRAMME
Recomendation
2.3.1 The Committee notes with displeasure that the allocation to the NESRI Programme has been
reduced owing to the inability of agencies to spend the allocations. It is also disappointed to note
that State Governments of Assam and Meghalaya have not been able to claim mobilisation advance
as their civil works contracts are yet to be approved. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
all these procedural hurdles should be addressed so that the Ministry could successfully plead with
Planning Commission for enhanced allocation for the programme. When they cannot spend even
the 25% of the allocation made at RE, not to mention BE, seeking additional funds is a distant
dream only. The system needs to be completely overhauled and capacity to absorb funds and utilize
and implement schemes needs to be enhanced.
(Para 2.15.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 To resolve the issue of cost escalation which delayed approval of contracts in respect of
Assam and Meghalaya and shortfall in utilization of budget allocation in 2012-13 under NESRIP, the
Ministry had asked the State Governments to undertake to bear the cost overruns as prescribed
by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs while proving the Scheme. Once the State
Governments submit undertaking funds will be released and project execution commenced. In
current financial year (2013-14) the Ministry will be utilizing the entire budgetary allocation under
the Programme and achieve significant progress in its implementation.
2.4 WORKING/MANDATE OF THE MINISTRY OF DoNER
Recomendation
2.4.1 The Committee fails to understand that a Ministry, which was carved out to focus and
expedite development in the North east region, after more than a decade of its existence has

26
realized that it lacks sufficient power and necessary infrastructure to carry out its mandate, and
is completely dependent on various Line Ministries/Departments for execution of projects. The
Committee takes a serious view of the situation and feels that a holistic view at the functioning
and powers of the Ministry should be taken at this stage. The Committee is not at all impressed
with the functioning of the Ministry and gets an impression that the line ministries are not
supporting or paying heed to the suggestions/requests of the ministry. The Committee intends to
discuss this issue separately at a later stage with all stakeholders and authorities. The Committee
therefore recommends that the Ministry should furnish a detailed note, based on the last 12-13
years of experience indicating about the bottlenecks and shortcomings and the desired solutions.
The Committee also proposes to discuss the matter with the Cabinet Secretary and Secretaries of
all the line Ministries and the Chief Secretaries of the State Governments so as to enable the
Ministry to effectively tackle the issues faced it. The Committee also intends to discuss with the
Planning Commission about the need for reviewing all the schemes being implemented in the North
East to have a holistic view in the matter and also to find solutions to the problems faced by the
Ministry.
(Para 3.1.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 The Hon’ble Department–related Parliamentary Standing Committee has discussed these
issues, in detail, with the Cabinet Secretary, Secretaries of various line Ministries/Departments and
Chief Secretaries/representatives of the NE State Governments as well as Secretary, DoNER and
Secretary, North Eastern Council and have given their observations/recommendations in its One
Hundred Seventy Third Report. ATNs contained in the 173
rd Report Are being prepared separately
and will be submitted to the Committee shortly.
2.5 POTENTIAL OF HYDRO-ELECTRIC (HE) PRODUCTION IN NE REGION
Recomendation
2.5.1 The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that Dimapur Power Project has been
abandoned after spending an amount of R. 90 crore. The Committee observes that money spent on
the project and subsequently abandoned, reflects lack of proper planning and is a criminal wastage
of fund. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the project should have been more
carefully planned and executed avoiding huge waste of precious resources.
(Para 3.3.11 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.2 The Dimapur HFO based Thermal Power Project was a part of announcement made by the
Hon’ble Prime Minister in October, 2003 at Kohima. The total approved cost of the project was
R 105.57 crore. Out of this, R 32 crore was to be funded by Ministry of Development of North
Eastern Region and balance funds was to be provided by Ministry of Power. Since the DPR of
the project was techno-economically cleared/vetted by Ministry of Power, Ministry of DoNER
sanctioned the project under NLCPR Scheme and released 
R 32 crore. Then in September, 2011,
Ministry of Power informed that the project is not viable and needs to be closed. Hence, the project
stands foreclosed on recommendations of Committee of Secretaries. The lessons learnt from the
abandonment of the project are being internalized in the review and monitoring mechanism of the
Ministry.

27
2.6 AIR CONNECTIVITY
Recomendation
2.6.1 Good air connectivity to the North East, like rest of the country, is a national obligation
and responsibility of the Government keeping in mind the difficult terrain and strategic importance
of the region. The Committee welcomes changes in the Route Dispersal Guidelines of the Ministry
of Civil Aviation that have made the public and private airlines to fly in the North East and thus
facilitating not only people of the region to other parts of the country but also people of other
parts of the country travelling to NER.
(Para 3.7.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.6.2 Observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee stand noted.

28
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT
OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 PROJECTED DEMAND IN THE BUDGET 2013-14
Recomendation
3.1.1 The Committee expresses its disappointment over the dismal achievement rate of certain
Plan schemes of the Ministry viz. capacity building and technical assistance NERLP, NESRP and
others where financial performance is below 50%. This situation calls for drastic measure to
improve the efficiency levels in order to justify proposed estimates which are, more often than not,
cut down because of lack of absorption capacity. The Committee would like to highlight that the
under utilization below 50% of allocated budget, would have affected the achievement of physical
targets and such situation would further negate the fulfillment of projected demand for higher
allocation in forthcoming financial year. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry of DoNER must prevail upon line departments/Ministries/Agencies to enhance their
capacity to utilize allocated amount scrupulously on the undertaken plans/projects/programs for
their timely completion and make a strong case with all supportive factors for higher allocation
from the next financial year onwards.
(Para 2.3.6 of 170
th Report)
Action Taken :
3.1.2
Twelfth Plan (2012-13) Projected Description Twel fth Plan Outlay, as
demand and approved plan SL. No. (2012-2017) approved
12 3 4
A. Central Sector Schemes
1. Advertising and 40.00 955.00
Publicity
2. CB&TA 141.00
3. NERLP- EAP 670.00
4. NESRIP- EAP 1400.00
5. NEFT PMU 28.00
6. NEDFi 350.00
7. NLCPR-CENTRAL 3419.70
Central Sector Schemes : T OTAL 6048.70
28

29
12 3 4
B. State Sector Schemes
1. NLCPR 5300.00 6218.00
2. NEC Schemes 13027.38 6108.00
3. BTC 245.00 340.00
State Sector Schemes : T
OTAL 18572.38 1717.00
North Eastern Climate Change 457.90 –
Adaptation Project
TOTAL= A+B 25078.98 13621.00
3.1.3 North Eastern State Roads Investment Programme (NESRIP) and North East Rural
Livelihoods Project (NERLP) are externally aided projects. While, NESRIP is ADB funded, the
NERLP is funded by the World Bank. Generally in multi-lateral funded projects, there are many
structured milestones, achievement of which gets delayed because of multiplicity of responsible
centres and strict norms insisted by these lending agencies. Non-fructification of these two projects
in financial year 2012-13 led to poor financial performance. In as much as financial year
2013-14 is concerned, all the budgetary allocations for these projects are expected to be utilised.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.1.4 The Committee is not in agreement to the reasons put forth by the Ministry of
DoNER for delay in achievement of structured milestones of externally aided projects like
NESRIP and NERLP due to multiplicity of centres and strict norms and therefore, non-
fructification of project during 2012-13. The Committee is of the strong view that objectives
and strategy for implementation of projects are to be analyzed and monitored under pre-
determined sets of norms and guidelines and outcome, thereof, has to be assessed and
ensured ultimately. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER
should put all out efforts and not leave any stone unturned for ensuring achievement of
targets under NESRIP and NERLP during the Financial Year 2013-14.
3.2 NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL
Recomendation
3.2.1 The Committee notes the huge difference between the projected demand and actual grant
given to the North Eastern Council. The allocation made is not even half of the projected demand.
The Committee fails to understand how the fund requirements would be met for various projects.
The Committee hopes that the NEC will find a way out to fill the gap so that the projects do not
suffer for want of funds. The Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should also
understand this problem and pave the way for providing sufficient funds.
(Para 2.4.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 The North Eastern Council in session on 27
th June, 2012, took a decision that the projected
outlay of the Twelfth Five Year Plan of NEC should be raised to R 20,000 crore. As a follow-up
of this decision, the NEC Secretariat took a meeting with the NE States on 16 th July, 2012 in the
NEC Secretariat and revised the Twelfth Five Year Plan of the NEC to R 21507.41 crore to meet

30
the overwhelming development requirements of the region. This was conveyed by NEC to all
concerned on 13 th September, 2012. This issue was taken up with the Planning Commission by this
Ministry. However, the Planning Commission has expressed its inability to revise the Twelfth Plan
Outlay for the NEC scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.2.3 The Committee is of the considered view that balanced socio-economic development
of NER is concomitant to overall national growth and development. Since economic
development of NER is lagging behind the national level intensive economic growth planning
and timely execution of developmental projects are but natural requirement. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Government should address the problem
of huge gap between the projected demands and actual grant given to the North Eastern
Council, otherwise, developmental projects are bound to suffer for want of fund; which in
turn would not only lengthen the period of economic growth of NER, but also the very
holistic approach of the Government for speedy development of NER.
3.3 POTENTIAL OF HYDRO-ELECTRIC (HE) PRODUCTION IN NE REGION
Recomendation
3.3.1 The Committee is at a loss to understand that despite such elaborate planning and huge
administrative mechanism, the realization of the potential remains abysmally low. The Committee
finds that even though Inter-Ministerial Groups (IMG), Task Force, Advisory Groups and Special
Monitoring Groups (SMG) were set up by the Government at one point of time or other to sort
out the problems afflicting the projects, yet perceptible outcome is still a distant dream.
(Para 3.3.7 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 A number of steps and Policy measures have been taken by the Government in order to give
a thrust to the development of hydro electric potential in the country especially in the NE Region.
The basic objective of constitution of various Committees and Groups at different levels is to
formulate policies/guidelines for accelerated development of hydro-power and to examine, discuss
and resolve the issues impeding the development of hydro-power in the country. It may be
appreciated that development of hydro-electric projects is an intricate and long drawn process
spanning over 3-5 years. Long time is required for survey and investigation, preparation of DPR,
obtaining of statutory and non statutory clearances including environment and forest clearances,
concurrence by CEA, investment decision and financial closure. Once the projects achieve financial
closure, implementation takes another 5-8 years. Thus, hydro projects usually have long gestation
period and require larger capital investment. This inherent long gestation period of a hydel project
coupled with unforeseeable reasons such as land acquisition problems, environment and forest
issues, extent of Resettlement and Rehabilitation problems, Law and Order problem and geological
surprises further slows down the development of hydro-power.
3.3.3 It may also be mentioned that hydro projects are site specific and located in difficult/
inaccessible sites. The reasons for slow pace of growth in the region, besides the inapproachability,
is attributed to the fact that as the demand of power in the region is low, the development of hydro
power potential was not taken up on a large scale. Now, with the interconnection of regional grids,
the power from N.E. Region could be transported to other energy deficit regions of the country.
The development of infrastructure like road etc. is also getting priority in N.E. Region which would
help in expeditious harnessing of hydro potential.

31
3.3.4 In the Eleventh plan, 163 MW of generation capacity addition was achieved in the NER and
510 MW in Sikkim as against a target of 663 MW in NER and 699 MW in the state of Sikkim.
3.3.5 In the Twelfth Plan, a capacity addition target of 3530 MW has been planned in the NER
(3348 in the central sector and 182MW in the state sector) and 2066 MW for Sikkim (all in the
private sector). So far, 663 MW capacity addition has been achieved (407 MW in Central, 87 MW
in State and 169 MW in Private Sectors).
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
3.3.6 The Committee strongly recommends that serious efforts are required for
furtherance of execution of hydro-power projects and achievement of set objectives. The
Committee reiterates its observations that accelerated development of hydro-power projects
in NER would not only ensure balanced regional economic growth but would also facilitate
transmission of power to other energy deficit part of the country. The Committee, in this
regard, recommends that the delay in execution of hydro-power projects is to be tackled
through resilient strategy with strong administrative will.
3.4 POTENTIAL OF HYDRO-ELECTRIC (HE) PRODUCTION IN NE REGION
3.4.1 The Committee finds that while the identified potential in NE Region constitutes about
40.1% of the total identified hydro power potential (145320 MW) in the country, but only 1200
MW has so far been harnessed in NE region which is 2.06% of the identified capacity and only
6 HE projects with aggregate capacity of 2852 MW (4.89%) are under construction in NER. Even
if the under construction projects in the region are completed on time, the potential likely to be
realized will only be close to 7%. This leaves a huge gap between potential capacity and potential
realized. In an energy deficit country like ours, this is totally unacceptable. The Committee feels
that the huge bureaucratic mechanism put in place for the purpose and the policy guidelines
adopted by themselves are not enough and a spirited effort is required to make things happen on
the ground. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a very practical approach with quantifiable
progress indicators should be adopted for progress on ground.
(Para 3.3.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.2 The hydro potential of North Eastern Region, including Sikkim is 62604 MW (above
25 MW). At present, 13 H.E. Projects (above 25 MW Capacity) with an installed capacity of 1911
MW (3.05 %) are in operation and 14 H.E. Projects (above 25 MW Capacity) with an installed
capacity of 5132 MW (8.19%) are under construction in NER, including Sikkim.
3.4.3 In addition, a total of 124 H.E. Schemes (above 25 MW) with an aggregate capacity of
48932 MW including HE Projects Cleared (21 Nos., 18672 MW) and under Examination in CEA
(11 Nos., 4692 MW) have been allotted to Central, State and Private Sector for implementation
during Twelfth Plan and beyond in the NER including Sikkim.
3.4.4 As regard the recommendations of the Committee that a very practical approach with
quantifiable progress indicators should be adopted for progress on ground, it is stated that most
of the yet to be developed hydro power potential sites are situated in remote and inaccessible
locations, having the most inclement weather conditions full of challenges on all fronts – logistics,
climatic, technological leading to long gestation period of 5-10 years and as such are subject to
more or less similar challenges in terms of risk of occurrence of hydrological, geological, socio-
economical uncertainties, R&R issues besides delay in statutory clearances especially MOEF
clearance, law and order problems, etc.

32
3.4.5 However, some of the issues like geological surprises, local agitation and other law and
order related problems can not be foreseen in advance, leading to delay in commissioning of some
of the affected projects. Whenever, such unforeseen problems are reported by the project
authorities in the Central, State or Private Sector, immediate remedial steps are taken as per the
requirement of each project on a case to case basis e.g. for sorting out law and order problem,
the issue is immediately brought to the notice of the State law enforcing agencies.
3.4.6 Government of India has been taking proactive initiatives like the new Hydro policy,
coordination and follow up with the concerned Ministries/departments for expediting clearances,
greater monitoring etc. The projects which are under development are likely to come up during the
Thirteenth Plan and beyond. It is evident that the new Hydro Policy, 2008 has started showing its
impact, however, due to the long gestation period of hydro projects, its full impact would get
reflected on the ground from Thirteenth Plan onwards.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.4.7 The Committee understands the geographical and geological constraints. Since energy
is the basic input for economic development projects, concerted and co-ordinated approach
and resilient strategy is required for maximum harnessing of identified hydro power
potential. More pro active efforts are the need of the hour to achieve the targets.
3.5 ROAD CONNECTIVITY
Recomendation
3.5.1 As regards maintenance of roads, the Committee notes that neither the State governments
have sufficient revenue nor the Central Government has any plan for the purpose. Once the roads
get deteriorated, the entire exercise has to be undertaken again. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Central Government may provide funds to the States for maintenance of roads
until the economy of the NE States as a whole to improves.
(Para 3.4.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.2 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is primarily responsible for the development and
maintenance of National Highways in the Country. The development and maintenance of National
Highways (NHs) is a continuous process. Apart from above, State roads and other category of
roads are the responsibility of the State Governments. The issue of providing funds to the State
Governments for maintenance of road is the subject matter pertaining to Planning Commission.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.5.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the routine reply of the Ministry of DoNER over
the issue of maintenance of roads in NER which reflects very casual approach. The need of
the hour is to evolve a policy guideline to ensure that all roads be under the jurisdiction
of MORTH or the State Governments, need to be repaired in time and maintained with all
care, otherwise, deterioration in the condition of roads would generate the need for fresh
heavy investment for re-construction of roads. The Committee, recommends that the
planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance must consider the financial crunch of
State Governments in NER positively and frame policy and guidelines and provide funds to
ensure better maintenance of roads in NER.

33
3.6 ROAD CONNECTIVITY
Recomendation
3.6.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the evasive replies of the Ministry for delay in
completion of the North East component of the East-West corridor. The Committee is also not
satisfied with status of connectivity to all district headquarters of the NER as regards connectivity
by two-lane roads, as only 23 out of 88 district headquarters have been connected by two-lane
roads. The achievements are therefore extremely disappointing. Despite its recommendations in
several Reports for improving the pace of completion of pending projects, the Committee has not
witnessed any marked improvement on ground. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that
concerted efforts on the part of the concerned line Ministries are required for completing the
undertaken projects within stipulated time.
(Para 3.4.10 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.2 Out of 670 kms. of East West Corridor in North Eastern Region, 472 kms. has already been
completed. For early completion of balance stretches, all efforts are being made by reviewing the
progress at various levels. State Level Coordination Committee is also making all efforts to sort out
the land issues. Contractors have been instructed to complete the remaining works as per the
revised target. East West Corridor in Assam is targeted for completion by December, 2014.
3.6.3 Out of 88 districts headquarters, 23 are already connected by 2 lane road. Further
connectivity to 50 are to be sanctioned under different schemes like SARDP-NE Phase-A,
Arunachal Pradesh Package and NH(O) and out of which connectivity to 30 districts has already
been sanctioned. Balance connectivity to 15 districts are proposed to be sanctioned under SARDP-
NE Phase-B. Execution of roads under SARDP-Phase ‘B’ is not yet approved due to paucity of
funds.
3.6.4 Notwithstan ding above, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have made following
efforts in the direction of completing the undertaken projects within the stipulated timeframe:–
(a) Conducting on the spot inspection by the senior officers of the Ministry.
(b) Instructing the ROs to Monitor the progress of the work and furnish the report at
regular interval.
(c) State Governments have been requested to expedite Raring over of Land awarded.
(d) One ADG for NER has already been posted at HQ and one CE posted at Kolkata to
look after the work of the States of Tripura, Manipur and Mizoram.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.6.5 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure to oversee the progress of
projects relating to road connectivity in NER. Out of 670 km. east West Corrider in NER
only 472 km. has been completed so far and out of 88 district headquarter only 23 are
connected by 2 lane road. It is very sorry state of affairs that even after more than six
decades of getting independence, a large number of district headquarters in NER are yet to
be connected by 2 lane roads. The Committee, therefore, desires that Road projects under
SARDP-NE and Arunachal Pradesh package and NH (O) must be executed in time to avoid
cost over-runs and Government must provide adequate funds and sanction more road
projects relating to connectivity to district Headquarters and SARDP-NE phase-B.

34
3.7 TIMELY AUGMENTATION OF RAILWAY NETWORK
Recomendation
3.7.1 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Railway should leave
no stone unturned for timely augmentation of railway network i.e. 13 new lines, 4 gauge
conversion and 1 doubling projects which have been taken up presently. Completion of the projects
as per schedule will go a long way in fulfilling the needs and aspirations of local population and
necessary funds may be provided for the purpose. The Ministry should ensure that all the projects
are completed as per the schedule and the targets fixed. One of the Railway Board Members should
be made in-charge of the Railway Projects in the North East. That Member should regularly review
the implementations of the Railway projects on a quarterly basis.
(Para 3.6.7 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 Railway plans to complete all 13 new lines, 4 gauge conversion and 1 doubling projects as
per schedule provided adequate funds are made available. On National Projects alone, there is a
throwforward of 
R 27686 crore and outlay of R 3000 crore has been provided during
2013-14. Overall, Railway Projects have throwforward of R 1.78 lakh crore and outlay during
2013-14 is R 9750 crore, which is 5.5% of throwforward. Member Engineering in the Railway
Board is the Member who is incharge of all Railway Projects including projects in the North East.
He is regularly reviewing implementation of all Railway Projects including those in North East on
regular basis by way of scrutiny/monthly progress reports of all projects, holding quarterly
meetings with construction officials of concerned Railway. In addition, review meetings are also
held.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.7.3 The Committee would like to highlight that the then Chairman, Railway Board
mentioned about the inadequacy of the funds before the Committee on 10
th June, 2013.
When the matter was taken up with the then Expenditure Secretary who appeared before
the Committee on 4
th July, 2013, he submitted that there was no paucity of funds for
sustainable infrastructural projects provided the line Ministries enhanced capability
absorption for better execution of undertaken projects. Thereon, the Committee had in its
173
rd Report (para 5.22) recommended that a meeting of concerned senior officers of the
Railways Board, Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance may be called to sort out the
issue of constrains of resources to fund National projects. The Committee reiterates that
recommendation. Ministry of Railways may take up the matter with Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance on the resources and resolve the issue at the earliest.
3.8 INLAND WATER CONNECTIVITY
Recomendation
3.8.1 The Committee notes with disappointment that Inland Waterway Terminal of Pandu which
is being developed as multi modal transit system is still hanging fire for want of handing over of
land. The Committee directs that the matter should be taken up with the NF Railway and resolved
as soon as possible. The Committee further recommends that work on proposed roll-on-roll-off
terminals at Dhubri and Hatsingimari be started immediately without further delay. CPWD may
take up the work on priority.
(Para 3.8.4 ibid)

35
Action Taken
3.8.2
● With regard to the approach road to Pandu terminal through NF railway land (6210 sq.
m.), IWAI has already paid the entire lease amount of R 3.45 crore to NF railway. NF
railway could not hand over the land due to unauthorized encroachment. IWAI and
District Administration had suggested an alternative alignment. However, Railway
Authorities declined the proposal.
● With regard to construction of Roll on Roll off (Ro-Ro) terminal at Dhubri and
Hatsingimari the work has already been awarded to CPWD in January, 2013. The cost
of construction of Dhubri terminal would be 
R 28.98 crore, where as for the
Hatsingimari Terminal it would be R 33.31 core. CPWD has initiated action for
construction of Dhubri terminal. However, due to severe bank erosion in and around
the terminal location at Hatsingimari, Water Resource Department of Assam and
Brahmaputra Board has been requested to consider bank protection work before
commencement of construction at Hatsingimari.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.8.3 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Railway should either accept the
request of IWAI and district administration for alternative alignment to provide the
approach road to Pandu terminal or hand over the land without unauthorized encroachment
to IWAI for development of ‘Inland Waterway Terminal of Pandu’ as ‘multi-modal transit
system’. The Committee further recommends that CPWD must take all steps for early
completion of construction of Roll on Roll off (Ro-Ro) terminal at Dhubri and Hatsingimari.
3.9 TOURISM
Recomendation
3.9.1 The Committee understands that the continuation with special LTC scheme for govt.
employees and creation of necessary human and physical capacities to absorb such demand would
further expand the number of tourists in NER. The Committee would also like to suggest that
government may consider running of tourist trains on viable tourist circuits in the NER, on the
lines of tourist trains already running in other parts of the country.
(Para 3.9.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.9.2 The matter pertaining to LTC comes under the purview of the Department of Personnel and
Training. In so far as Tourist Trains are concerned, the same comes under the purview of Ministry
of Railways. Both the respective ministries may therefore be addressed in the matter. It may be
noted that under the scheme of Assistance for Large Revenue Generating Projects being
implemented by Ministry of Tourism, tourist trains are eligible for being provided financial
assistance. Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for such projects is considered as and when
proposals are received from State Governments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.9.3 The Committee keeping in view the tourism prospects in NER, recommends that the
Ministry of DoNER should take up the matter of running of tourist trains in NER, with the

36
Ministry of Railway/Ministry of tourism, which in turn may formulate projects and seek
central Financial Assistance for such projects. State Government should also be sensitised
in this regard.
3.10 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
Recomendation
3.10.1 The Committee believes that the spill-over benefits of industrial development for the region
would be the development of infrastructure such as roads, communications, and electricity supply
to remote hilly areas, resulting in better quality of life. Natural gas based industries are also
feasible. The Committee also believes that NER could be an excellent centre for horticulture,
spices, and hub for educational and IT sector.
(Para 3.10.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.10.2 To further incentivize the benefits to natural gas based industries, Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas may formulate its schemes to cover such units. Similar schemes can also be
formulated by Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Food Processing Industries and Ministry of
Communication and Information Technology for incentivizing units in the field of horticulture,
spices and IT sector.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
3.10.3 The Committee gets an impression that the ‘Action Taken’ does not give any action
taken by the Government in response to the Committee’s recommendations. The
Committee is not aware whether its recommendation was communicated to the concerned
Ministries or not. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry of DoNER in this regard.

37
37
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMETTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of efforts made by Ministry
of DoNER regarding enhancement of allocation at RE stage of 2013-14. (Para 1.1.3)
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Planning Commission should
give ‘in principle’ approval at the earliest. (Para 1.2.3)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the work relating to Mahadev-Tolloi-
Pfutsero road will be completed by March, 2015. (Para 1.4.3)
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of DoNER and desires to be
apprised of the result in this regard. (Para 1.7.4)
The Committee views that intensive monitoring of progress of implementation
of projects under NLCPR scheme would definitely result in achievement of set targets.
(Para 1.8.3)
The Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of DoNER and desires that
the efforts may continue in the right earnest. (Para 1.9.3)
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Principal Secretary, BTC should
fulfil his assurance with regard to submission of UCs. (Para 1.11.3)
The Committee hopes that with the regular Project Director in charge of NELRP the
implementation of project will now get momentum and allocated budget will be utilised fully
and judicially. (Para 1.13.4)
The Committee, in view of the initiatives/decisions undertaken in a review meeting
by the Prime Minister for accelerating pace of completion of infrastructure projects in NER,
hopes that the follow up steps undertaken in pursuance of the decision taken in the
meeting would yield results in completion of infrastructure projects in NER without time
and cost overrun. (Para 1.16.3)
The Committee hopes that the efforts made by NHPC management would yield
positive impact on the mindset of anti-dam activists and the project would get steamed off,
soon. (Para 1.18.4)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the meeting of all the
Chief Minister of NER States called for improving inter-state-Coordination to ward off
militant activity and improve security scenario. (Para 1.19.3)
The Committee desires to know about the time frame for implementation of the
integrated tourism Master Plan for NER by the Minister of tourism. (Para 1.22.4)
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the activities like preservation
during storage, cleaning operations, packing, re-packing, labeling or re-labeling, sorting, etc.
also play an important role in industrial development of NER and therefore deserve benefits
under the NEIIPP 2007. (Para 1.23.9)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the appropriate action taken by the
Ministry of Commerce in the furtherance of industrial prospective in NER. (Para 1.24.3)

38
The Committee wants that the Ministry of DoNER should persuade the Ministry of
HRD for taking necessary action in the matter. (Para 1.25.3)
The Committee is not in agreement to the reasons put forth by the Ministry of
DoNER for delay in achievement of structured milestones of externally aided projects like
NESRIP and NERLP due to multiplicity of centres and strict norms and therefore, non-
fructification of project during 2012-13. The Committee is of the strong view that objectives
and strategy for implementation of projects are to be analyzed and monitored under pre-
determined sets of norms and guidelines and outcome, thereof, has to be assessed and
ensured ultimately. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER
should put all out efforts and not leave any stone unturned for ensuring achievement of
targets under NESRIP and NERLP during the Financial Year 2013-14. (Para 3.1.4)
The Committee is of the considered view that balanced socio-economic development
of NER is concomitant to overall national growth and development. Since economic
development of NER is lagging behind the national level intensive economic growth planning
and timely execution of developmental projects are but natural requirement. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Government should address the problem
of huge gap between the projected demands and actual grant given to the North Eastern
Council, otherwise, developmental projects are bound to suffer for want of fund; which in
turn would not only lengthen the period of economic growth of NER, but also the very
holistic approach of the Government for speedy development of NER. (Para 3.2.3)
The Committee strongly recommends that serious efforts are required for
furtherance of execution of hydro-power projects and achievement of set objectives. The
Committee reiterates its observations that accelerated development of hydro-power projects
in NER would not only ensure balanced regional economic growth but would also facilitate
transmission of power to other energy deficit part of the country. The Committee, in this
regard, recommends that the delay in execution of hydro-power projects is to be tackled
through resilient strategy with strong administrative will. (Para 3.3.6)
The Committee understands the geographical and geological constraints. Since energy
is the basic input for economic development projects, concerted & co-ordinated approach and
resilient strategy is required for maximum harnessing of identified hydro power potential.
More pro active efforts are the need of the hour to achieve the targets. (Para 3.4.7)
The Committee is not satisfied with the routine reply of the Ministry of DoNER over
the issue of maintenance of roads in NER which reflects very casual approach. The need of
the hour is to evolve a policy guideline to ensure that all roads be under the jurisdiction
of MORTH or the State Governments, need to be repaired in time and maintained with all
care, otherwise, deterioration in the condition of roads would generate the need for fresh
heavy investment for re-construction of roads. The Committee, recommends that the
planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance must consider the financial crunch of
State Governments in NER positively and frame policy and guidelines and provide funds to
ensure better maintenance of roads in NER. (Para 3.5.3)
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure to oversee the progress of
projects relating to road connectivity in NER. Out of 670 km. east West Corrider in NER
only 472 km. has been completed so far and out of 88 district headquarter only 23 are
connected by 2 lane road. It is very sorry state of affairs that even after more than six
decades of getting independence, a large number of district headquarters in NER are yet to
be connected by 2 lane roads. The Committee, therefore, desires that Road projects under

39
SARDP-NE and Arunachal Pradesh package and NH (O) must be executed in time to
avoid cost over-runs and Government must provide adequate funds and sanction more
road projects relating to connectivity to district Headquarters and SARDP-NE phase-B.
(Para 3.6.5)
The Committee would like to highlight that the then Chairman, Railway Board
mentioned about the inadequacy of the funds before the Committee on 10
th June, 2013.
When the matter was taken up with the then Expenditure Secretary who appeared before
the Committee on 4
th July, 2013, he submitted that there was no paucity of funds for
sustainable infrastructural projects provided the line Ministries enhanced capability
absorption for better execution of undertaken projects. Thereon, the Committee had in its
173
rd Report (para 5.22) recommended that a meeting of concerned senior officers of the
Railways Board, Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance may be called to sort out the
issue of constrains of resources to fund National projects. The Committee reiterates that
recommendation. Ministry of railways may take up the matter with Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance on the resources and resolve the issue at the earliest.
(Para 3.7.5)
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Railway should either accept the
request of IWAI and district administration for alternative alignment to provide the
approach road to Pandu terminal or hand over the land without unauthorized encroachment
to IWAI for development of ‘Inland Waterway Terminal of Pandu’ as ‘multi-modal transit
system’. The Committee further recommends that CPWD must take all steps for early
completion of construction of Roll on Roll off (Ro-Ro) terminal at Dhubri and Hatsingimari.
(Para 3.8.3)
The Committee keeping in view the tourism prospects in NER, recommends that the
Ministry of DoNER should take up the matter of running of tourist trains in NER, with the
Ministry of Railway/Ministry of tourism, which in turn may formulate projects and seek
central Financial Assistance for such projects. State Government should also be sensitised
in this regard. (Para 3.9.3)
The Committee gets an impression that the ‘Action Taken’ does not give any action
taken by the Government in response to the Committee’s recommendations. The
Committee is not aware whether its recommendation was communicated to the concerned
Ministries or not. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry of DoNER in this regard. (Para 3.10.3)

MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th December, 2013 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
3. Shrimati Kanimozhi
4. Shri Santiuse Kujur
5. Dr. V Maitreyan
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
9. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee He,
thereafter, apprised Members of the following agenda of the meeting:–
(i) Consideration and adoption of 174
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(ii) Consideration and adoption of 175
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its One Hundred Seventieth Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern
Region.
43

44
3.0 The Committee, then, took up draft 174 th Action Taken Report for consideration. After a
brief discussion, the Report was adopted.
3.1 The Committee, then took up the draft 175 th Action Taken Report for consideraton. After
a brief discussion, the Report was adopted.
4.0 The Committee then decided to present/lay the 174 th and 175 th Action Taken Reports  to the
Parliament on 13 th December, 2013. For the purpose, the Committee authorized its Chairman, and
in his absence, Dr. V . Maitrayan, MP, Rajya Sabha and in their absence Shri Santiuse Kujur, MP,
Rajya Sabha to present the Reports to Rajya Sabha. The Committee also nominated Shri Pawan
Kumar Bansal, MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel, MP, Lok Sabha
to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
5.0 * * *
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 3.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

45
45
ANNEXURE
List of Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs
Report Title of the Report
No.
12
1
st On Demand Nos. 42 and 44 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs
for the year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
12th The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment Bill, 1995

46
12
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill, 1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
29th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
30
th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
31
st The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32
nd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill,
1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company
Affairs

47
12
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill, 1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company
Affairs
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi
High Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
68
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixtieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
69
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs

48
12
70th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Personnel, .Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
and Kashmir
92
nd The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme
97th The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002

49
12
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Home Affairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth and Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi
Bill, 2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003
109th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
111th Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third
Report of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of ‘Administration’ of Union Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs

50
12
125th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
126
th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in One
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Home Affairs
133rd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects ofIndo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J & K Migrants
138th The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in One
Hundred Thirty-second Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-third Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration
143rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Home Affairs
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010

51
12
149th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the
country
153
rd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects along Indo-
Pak Borders
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-second Report on Implementations of Central Scheme of Modernisation of
Prison Administration
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North-eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Home Affairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o  DoNER
163rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth Amendment) Bill, 2012
165th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Sixty-first Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Home Affairs
166
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its One
Hundred and Sixty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
167
th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013

52
12
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Sixty-third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy, Hyderabad
173
rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
175
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176
th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
l77th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union Territories (Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Chandigarh)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.