Action Taken□by□Government□on□the□Recommendations/Observations
Contained□in□the Two□Hundred Thirteenth□Report□on□Security
Situation□in□the□North□Eastern□States□of□India
(Presented□to□the□Rajya□Sabha□on th February, )
(Laid□on□the□Table□of□Lok□Sabha□on th February, )
7 2019
7 2019

Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 430
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING
COMMITTEE ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Two Hundred Thirteenth Report on Security
Situation in the North Eastern States of India
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-15
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government.................................................................................. 2-6
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government's reply........ 7-12
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee................... 13-14
Chapter IV: Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the
Government have not been received............................................... 15
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................... 16-17
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................... 19-22

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Shri Pratap Keshari Deb
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
8. Shri R.K. Sinha
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
@10. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
12. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
19. Shri Ashwini Kumar
$20. Vacant
21. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
(i)
@ Shri Rakesh Sinha, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 14th December, 2018
$ Vacant consequent upon resignation of Shri Harish Chandra Meena from Lok Sabha Seat ( i.e., Dausa Parliamentary
Constituency of Rajasthan) w.e.f.  24th December, 2018.

(ii)
23. Shri Nagarajan P.
24. Shri Jagdambika Pal
25. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
26. Shri Dilip M. Patel
27. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
29. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
30. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
31. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Vijay Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authoried by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the
Two Hundred Thirteenth Report on 'Security Situation in the North Eastern States of India'.
2. The Two Hundred Thirteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 19th
July, 2018. After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home
Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the
Committee on 22nd October, 2018.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
on 19th and 18th December, 2018 respectively in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha
dated 24th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Nineteenth Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 5th February, 2019.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
   N
EW D ELHI; P . CHIDAMBARAM
5th February, 2019 Chairman,
Magha 16, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AFSPA : Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act
ATTF : All Tripura Tiger Force
ADCs : Autonomous District Councils
CAPFs : Central Armed Police Forces
GNLA : Garo National Liberation Army
J&K : Jammu and Kashmir
KNO : Kuki National Organisation
MBDPF : Mizoram Bru Displaced People's Forum
MoPF : Modernization of State Police Forces
NER : North Eastern Region
NCRB : National Crime Records Bureau
NGO : Non Governmental Organization
NSCN/IM : Nationalist Socialist Council of Nagaland/Isak-Muivah
NDFB : National Democratic Front of Bodoland
NDFB(S) : National Democratic Front of Bodoland (Saoraigwra)
NDFB (RD) : National Democratic Front of Bodoland (Ranjan Daimary)
NDFB(P) : National Democratic Front of Bodoland (Progressive)
NLFT : National Liberation Front of Tripura
NLFT(B) : National Liberation Front of Tripura (Biswamohan)
SoO : Suspension of Operations
ULFA (I) : United Liberation Front of Asom (Independent)
(iv)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirteenth Report of the Committee on
'Security Situation in the North Eastern States of India'. The Two Hundred Thirteenth Report was
presented to Rajya Sabha/laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on 19th July, 2018.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Thirteenth Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I:  The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.1.4, 2.2.3, 2.2.5, 2.2.6, 2.3.14, 2.4.7, 2.5.9, and 2.8.3 (of Two Hundred Thirteenth
Report)
Total recommendations- 8
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter II:  The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies: Para Nos. 2.3.10, 2.6.12, 3.1.6, 3.1.10, 3.1.11, 3.2.3, 3.3.5,
3.3.8, 3.4.6, 3.4.7 and 3.5.5 (ibid)
Total recommendations - 11
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.7.5, 2.7.6 and 2.7.7  (ibid)
Total recommendations - 3
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action taken steps
in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter IV: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para No. 2.3.11 (ibid)
Total Recommendations - 1
In respect of 1 recommendation in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished interim
reply or couched its response in vague terms.
The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes
in respect of the Observations/Recommendations made in the Report.
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
SECURITY SCENARIO IN DIFFERENT STATES OF NER
1.1 Overall Security Scenario
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee observes the declining trend of insurgency-related incidents and improvement in the
overall security situation in NER that could be achieved due to efforts of the Central Government and
the State Governments. The Committee, however, cautions the Government that sustained efforts must
continue in this direction to achieve the goal of making the North Eastern Region completely free from
insurgency. (Para 2.1.4 of 213th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 Central Gov ernment and State Governments are making sustained efforts to achieve the goal of
making North Eastern Region free from insurgency. In 2017, the Region had the lowest insurgency
incidents, security forces and civilians deaths since 1997.
1.1.3 Insurgency incidents in 2018 have further declined by 24 per cent, upto 30th September, 2018
(2017-243, 2018-185), Security Forces and Civilian deaths in North East have further come down in
2018 (2017-40, 2018-27).
Further Recommendation
1.1.4 The Committees notes of further decline in the insurgency related incidents in 2018.
1.2 Arunachal Pradesh
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee while taking into account the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that
Arunachal Pradesh has no active insurgent group and is affected by the spill-over activities of the
insurgent groups based in Nagaland and Assam, feels that the Government must improve the security
situation in the border areas of Arunachal Pradesh that are located along the India-Myanmar border. The
Committee, in this connection, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must encourage, facilitate
and strengthen the interaction and cooperation between the police forces of Assam and Arunachal
Pradesh to obviate any unwarranted incidents along the border areas of Arunachal Pradesh.
(Para 2.2.3 ibid)
Recommendation
1.2.2 The Committee while perusing the data of 'Crime in India-2016' of cases of kidnapping and
extortion in Arunachal Pradesh published by the National Crime Records Bureau, finds the number of
2

3
such cases to be 146 in 2014, 175 in 2015 and 1 12 in 2016. This shows that the number of kidnapping
and abduction cases in Arunachal Pradesh remain high vis-a-vis the State's population.
(Para 2.2.5 ibid)
Recommendation
1.2.3 The Committee is also constrained to express its concern that unlike the overall North Eastern
Region, which shows a declining trend of insurgency-related incidents and casualties suffered by the
civilians, and an improvement in the security scenario, the State of Arunachal Pradesh has seen a rise
in the number of such incidents. The Committee is alarmed to observe that in 2012, Arunachal Pradesh
accounted for just 5 percent of the incidents in the entire region, however, in 2017, it accounted for
almost 20 percent of the incidents in the region. This is an indication of the fact that the security
situation has deteriorated in the State of Arunachal Pradesh vis-a-vis the entire North Eastern Region.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should intensify its efforts to contain the
spill-over insurgency activities from other States and improve the overall security scenario in Arunachal
Pradesh. (Para 2.2.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.4 Central Government, working with the Governments of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and security
forces has strived to improve security situation along the border areas of Arunachal Pradesh. As a result,
as on 30th September, 2018, insurgency incidents in border areas of Arunachal Pradesh have come
down. As against 48 insurgency incidents in Arunachal Pradesh, as on 30th September, this year these
incidents have come down to 22, recording more than 50% reduction in insurgency incidents. Efforts
are continuing to improve security situation further in Arunachal Pradesh at international border and areas
bordering Assam.
1.2.5 There is also improvement as regards kidnapping/abduction related to insurgency in Arunachal
Pradesh. Compared to 22 cases of kidnapping/abduction related insurgency in 2017 upto 30th September,
there is remarkable decline in number of persons kidnapped/abducted to 10 in year 2018. Efforts will
continue to contain insurgency related kidnapping/abduction in the Arunachal Pradesh.
Further Observation
1.2.6 The Committee notes the decline in insurgency incidents and kidnapping related incidences
in the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
1.3 Assam
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee observes that the Government's interlocutor, who was appointed for holding talks
with the Assam-based insurgent groups, was recently assigned the responsibility to initiate dialogue with
various stakeholders in Kashmir due to which the talks with the two factions of the National Democratic
Front of Bodoland have been stalled. The Committee also notes that due to the stalled talks, the
insurgent groups have become restive and have even resorted to hunger strike. The Committee is constrained

4
to observe that there is a lack of seriousness of purpose shown by the Government on this issue, by first
shifting the interlocutor to J&K and then not appointing another one immediately. The Committee
cautions the Government that if suspension of talks due to the absence of interlocutor is allowed to
become prolonged, the insurgent groups may become further restive and indulge in illegal activities. The
Committee is apprehensive that a lack of seriousness by the Government in holding the dialogue with
the insurgent groups may result in violation of So0 agreements by them. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Government must urgently appoint a separate interlocutor for talks with
the Assam-b ased insurgent groups, particularly NDFB/RD and NDFB/P. The Committee also recommends
that Government must ensure that the talks are held on a continuous b asis with utmost sincerity to keep
the insurgent groups at the negotiation table and maintain the security scenario in NER that has been
achieved with painstaking e fforts and numerous sacrifices. (Para 2.3.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 Shri A.B. Mathur has been appointed as Interlocutor on 4th January 2018 for talks with ULFA,
NDFB(S) & NDFB(RD) and Suspension of Operations groups KNO and UPF in Manipur. He has since
been holding talks with the groups entrusted to him.
Further Observation
1.3.3 The Committee notes the reply.
1.4 Manipur
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee observes that despite experiencing a decline in the number of incidents, the violent
incidents in Manipur, accounted for a staggering 54 percent of the total number of violent incidents in
the entire North eastern region during 2017. Moreover, the number of civilian casualties more than
doubled during 2017 as compared to the casualties during 2016. The Committee is perturbed by the fact
that the State of Manipur is still affected by the insurgency-related activities, and the number of violent
incidents remains quite high. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should intensify
the pace of engagement with insurgent groups and hold regular talks with them not only to arrive at a
settlement b ut to also maintain peace in the State. (Para 2.4. 7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 Security situation in Manipur has improved in the year 2018. As compared to 134 insurgency
related incidents, upto 30th September, 2017, in the year 2018 this has come down to 95 incidents.
Shri A.B. Mathur has been appointed as Gol's representative/ Interlocutor for holding talks with insurgent
groups of North East Region including State of Manipur. He has since been talking to KNO and UPF.
Further Recommendation
1.4.3 The Committee notes the appointment of interlocutor for holding talks with insurgent
groups of NER, including State of Manipur.

5
1.5 Meghalaya
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee notes that the security forces have been able to neutralise the Garo National
Liberation Army and most of the cadres of GNLA have surrendered or have been arrested. GNLA had
been a significant security threat to Meghalaya and the efforts of security forces to neutralise it are
praiseworthy. The Committee, however, cautions the Government that if the cadres, who have surrendered,
are not rehabilitated timely and adequately, then there is a possibility that the disgruntled groups may
potentially regroup to form a new outfit or indulge in illegal activities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must make sincere efforts to rehabilitate all the cadres
who have surrendered, by providing some financial assistance as well as opportunities for bringing them
into the mainstream so that these cadres may not relapse into the fold of insurgency. The Committee also
recommends that a sufficient number of security forces may be deployed in the entire Garo Hills Region
and sustained combing operations may be conducted to tackle all the remaining cadres of GNLA and
recover all the arms and ammunition that may be in their possession. (Para 2.5.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 The Surrender - cum - Rehabilitation policy for North East Region States has been comprehensively
revised w.e.f. April, 2018. Under the revised scheme, instead of ` 1.5 lakh as immediate grant in the
form of fixed deposit, the amount has been increased to ` 4 lakh and monthly stipend to the surrendered
cadres which was ` 3,500 earlier has been made to ` 6,000 per month for three years. There are
enhanced incentives for weapons/ammunition, besides provision for vocational training for self-employment
etc.
1.5.3 Government of India has continued its efforts with State Government and security forces to
improve security situation in Meghalaya. As a result, as against 23 insurgency related incidents in the
State of Meghalaya, as on 30th September, 2017, this has come down to 14 in the year 2018. Ministry
of Home Affairs has provided 15 Coys. to Meghalaya to counter-insurgency in the State.
Further Observation
1.5.4 The Committee appreciates that the Government has accepted the recommendation of the
Committee and revised the Surrender - cum - Rehabilitation policy and enhanced immediate
grant from ````` 1.5 lakh to 4 lakh and monthly stipend from ````` 3500/- to ````` 6000/- for three years
among other incentives for the insurgents who have abjured violence with the intention of
returning to the mainstream.
1.5 Tripura
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee observes that the security scenario in Tripura has shown marked improvement in
recent years with a steady decline in violence since 2013. As a result, AFSPA was withdrawn from the

6
areas falling in the jurisdiction of Tripura by the State Government vide its notifications dated 27th May,
2015. Since then, the State of Tripura has witnessed no incident of violence. The activities of main
underground outfits viz. National Liberation Front of Twipra-Biswamohan [NLFT(B)] and All Tripura
Tiger Force (ATTF) have been contained. The Committee feels that talks with NLFT(B) leadership for
peace at the State level must continue. (Para 2.8.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 Security situation in Tripura has improved remarkably and there has been no insurgency incident
in the State since 2016. Talks with NLFT has been initiated again in October, 2018.
Further Recommendation
1.6.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that talks with various factions of National
Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) has been initiated in October, 2018.

7
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLY
SECURITY SCENARIO IN DIFFERENT STATES OF NER
2.1 Assam
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee is disconcerted to note that Assam has the highest rate of violent crimes, and
kidnappings and abductions, among all the states of India. The Committee accepts that the insurgency-
related instances of kidnappings and extortions may be on a decline, but a general rise in the instances
of such crimes is worrying and the Committee is perplexed that despite a waning trend in insurgency,
violent crimes and kidnappings have been on a rise. The Committee apprehends that this rise may be
due to poor rehabilitation and settlement of former insurgents who may be indulging in such crimes for
ransom. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government, in coordination with the
State Governments, should closely monitor the activities of insurgents who have surrendered during the
last decade, and also those with whom the government is presently holding negotiations.
(Para 2.3.10 of 213th Report)
Action Taken
2.1.2 Mechanism has been established to monitor the activities of insurgents who have surrendered
during the last decade and also those with whom the Government is presently holding negotiations. The
Government has signed Suspensions of Operations (SoO) agreements with the groups of surrendered
militants and there are ground rules which prescribe rules and regulations to be followed by the surrendered
militants. A Joint Monitoring Group is in existence for monitoring of activities of insurgent groups and
violation of ground rules by their cadres. Besides, Surrender-cum-Rehabilitation policy for NE States has
been revised comprehensively effective from April, 2018 providing for constitution of Screening Committee
headed by the ADG/IGP (SB) comprising of Nodal Officers of the Army/CAPFs for coordinating
surrender and rehabilitation work of militants and monitoring activities of surrendered person.
Further Observation
2.1.3 The Committee notes the comments furnished by the Ministry.
2.2 Nagaland
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee appreciates that the security situation in the State of Nagaland has significantly
improved during the last two years. The number of insurgency-related incidents decreased by 43 percent
in 2016 as compared to 2015, and by 67 percent in 2017 as compared to 2016. The Committee is of
the view that this improvement in the security situation in Nagaland may be attributed to the signing
7

8
of the Framework Agreement between NSCN-IM and the Government of India. The Committee also
believes that the signing of the final Naga Peace Accord can bring long lasting peace to the State that
was once the hotspot of insurgency for the North Eastern Region. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Government should continue its efforts to engage the Naga groups and finalise the
Naga Peace Accord. (Para 2.6.12 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 T alks with NSCN/IM and other groups are continuing and efforts to reach a final settlement are
going on.
Further Recommendation
2.2.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would urge the Government to conclude
the negotiations and reach an agreement early with NSCN/IM and other groups.
2.3 Naga Peace Accord
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee observes that any final agreement will have some implications for the three States
viz. Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and Assam, where Nagas are residing in certain areas. The Committee
is of the considered view that any agreement that may be finally arrived at must allay the fears of the
stakeholders in these States and the State Governments must be kept abreast with the emerging dynamics
of the talks. (Para 3.1.6 ibid)
Recommendation
2.3.2 The Committee takes note of the developments that have taken place in the last few years
regarding Naga Peace Talks. While there have been positive outcomes, the Committee apprehends that
the Naga groups and tribal bodies are becoming restless due to the delay in concluding the talks. Recently
the representatives of all political parties, following an appeal by the Core Committee of Naga Tribal
Hohos and Civil Society Organisations, had signed a declaration that they will abstain from the election
if it is held without concluding the Naga Peace Agreement. This is indicative of the growing unrest
among the Naga Hohos. The Committee wonders as to why there is a delay in concluding the peace talks
when all other stakeholders other than the Government appear to be eager to conclude it. The Committee
apprehends that any further delay may harm the progress achieved during the last few years. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should conclude the peace talks, at the
earliest, based on a broad understanding over the most contentious issues. The Committee also recommends
that the Government should tread carefully on the issues sensitive to the Nagas and not let vested interests
highjack the peace narrative. (Para 3.1.10 ibid)
Recommendation
2.3.3 The Committee, keeping in view the historical dynamics of insurgency, wishes to remind the
Government that the most important aspect of any agreement with insurgents is the adequate rehabilitation
and settlement programme for the cadres of the insurgent outfits. NSCN (IM), being the largest group

9
in the entire region would have thousands of cadres who must be adequately settled to make the
agreement successful and to prevent the emergence of any rebel splinter groups. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry should prepare a detailed and generous rehabilitation-cum-settlement
scheme for the cadres who will surrender as part of the agreement. The Committee also recommends that
the Government should, nevertheless, proactively stay prepared for any kinds of scenario that may emerge
in the aftermath of this agreement, and keep the security forces and the intelligence agencies on the alert.
(Para 3.1.11 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.4 Negotiations with NSCN(IM) is at an advanced stage. Final settlement with NSCN(IM) will keep
interests of States of Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and Assam in mind. There will be consultation with
these States before arriving at the final settlement.
Further Recommendation
2.3.5 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry in regard to negotiations with NSCN
(IM).
2.4 Status of Negotiations in Manipur
Recommendation
2.4.1 The Committee feels that the frequency and pace of the talks do not seem encouraging as during
the last two years only three rounds of dialogue have taken place. The Committee understands that there
might have been several bottlenecks that would have obstructed the progress of the talks; however, the
bottom line is that the Government should ensure that the talks are held regularly and the issues are
resolved gradually. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should
make sincere efforts to expedite the talks and hold them more frequently. The Committee also recommends
that the Government should tread carefully on the political demands of the Kuki groups and ensure a
congruity between the agreement being finalised with the Nagas and the arrangement that may be made
for the Kukis. (Para 3.2.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 Shri A.B. Mathur, Government of India's representative/Interlocutor is holding regular talks with
KNO and UPF.
Further Recommendation
2.4.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that Government of India's Interlocutor
has been holding regular talks with KNO and UPF.
2.5 Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act in the North Eastern States
Recommendation
2.5.1 The Committee is unable to comprehend the divergent perceptions of the situation in Assam. On
the one hand, the Ministry has asserted that there has been an improvement in the security situation in

10
Assam and, on the other hand, the area declared as disturbed under the Armed Forces (Special Powers)
Act, has been increased. The Committee also notes that the State Government of Assam has notified the
whole State as disturbed area on the plea that it is not the appropriate time to reduce the area under
AFSPA. This is a paradoxical situation that needs to be resolved. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Central Government and the State Government should hold extensive discussions on the issue
and narrow down their perception about the necessity of AFSPA in Assam. (Para 3.3.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.2 Despite improvement in security situation in Assam, the State Government is of the view that
Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 is to continue in the entire State for some more time. The
last Notification in this regard was issued by the State Government on 28.08.18.
Recommendation
2.5.3 The Committee observes that the withdrawal of AFSPA from the state of Tripura has been quite
successful in ensuring a peaceful situation and has given a hope to the other States in the region. The
Committee is of the view that exercise of force must always be proportional to the operational requirements.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that with the improvement in security situation in most of the
States, the Government should consider gradually reducing the area under AFSPA, especially in the
States of Assam and Meghalaya. (Para 3.3.8 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.4 Ministry of the Home Affairs has removed AFSPA from the entire State of Meghalaya from
1st April, 2018. Application of AFSPA in the State of Arunachal Pradesh has been reduced to districts
of Tirap, Changlang & Longding and 8 police stations bordering the State of Assam.
Further Recommendation
2.5.5 The Committee notes that AFSPA has been removed from the entire State of Meghalaya
from 1st April, 2018. The Committee hopes that this would pave a new path towards peace in
Meghalaya. The Committee also notes that AFSPA, in Arunachal Pradesh, has been reduced to
three districts and eight police stations bordering the State of Assam.
2.6 Functioning of the Autonomous Councils in NER
Recommendation
2.6.1 The Committee notes that the State Government of Manipur has agreed to extend the provisions
of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution to the Autonomous District Councils in Manipur with certain
local adjustments. However, the State Government has not clarified what local adjustments it seeks and
the proposal is stuck due to lack of a response from the State Government. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue the matter and hold meetings with the State Government
to seek clarifications on the 'local adjustments' suggested by them. (Para 3.4.6 ibid)

11
Action Taken
2.6.2 State Government of Manipur is not agreeable to extending the provisions of Sixth Schedule of
the Constitution to Autonomous District Councils of Manipur.
Further Recommendation
2.6.3 The Committee notes the statement of the Ministry that the State government of Manipur
is not agreeable to extending the provisions of Sixth Schedule of the Constitution to the
Autonomous District Councils of Manipur whereas in 2001 it had conveyed its no objection for
the same.
Recommendation
2.6.4 The Committee is aware that the Autonomous District Councils (ADC) in Manipur have remained
ineffective due to various reasons. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs is considering
a proposal to amend the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution to improve the working of ADCs. The
Committee is of the view that the functioning of the ADCs needs to be strengthened through sufficient
devolution of funds and functions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take
an early decision on the proposal to amend the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India.
(Para 3.4.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.6.5 The proposal to amend the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India is under consideration of
Government of India. This was discussed in a meeting taken by Union Home Minister with Chief
Ministers of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram on 20th September, 2018.
Further Recommendation
2.6.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the proposal to amend the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution of India is under its consideration.
2.7 Modernization of State Police Forces (MoPF)
Recommendation
2.7.1 The Committee observes that the funds provided to the North Eastern States, under the Modernisation
of Police Forces (MoPF) Scheme, had substantially declined during 2015-16 and 2016-17. As compared
to the amount of Rs. 179.81 crore provided in 2013-14, an amount of only Rs. 45.94 crore was provided
during 2016-17. The Committee is aware that the MoPF Scheme was restructured during 2016-17 and
this may explain the low allocation of funds. However, the allocation of Rs. 83.98 crore granted in
2017-18 also falls way below the allocations granted during the previous years. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should enhance the allocation made for the North
Eastern States under this Scheme during the current financial year to adequately modernise the police
forces of the North Eastern States. (Para 3.5.5 ibid)

12
Action Taken
2.7.2 Central Government is committed to adequately modernize the Police Forces of the North-Eastern
States. The reason for low allocation of funds to North East during 2016-17 was due to the restructuring
of the Scheme. BE for the earlier years was substantially higher (2012-13: ` 900.00 crore, 2013-14:
`1847.00 crore, 2014-15: `1500.00 crore). In comparison, the BE for 2017-18 was 769 crore. As the
total allocation (Budget Estimates) for the Scheme declined, the proportionate allocation of the North-
Eastern States also fell. It may be mentioned that allocation to the States are based on a pre-determined
formula which has been in existence since 2005.
2.7.3 It is further added that for the North-Eastern States along with continuation of MoPF Scheme,
a special component for NE States, namely, "Assistance to North Eastern States for Special Projects/
Programmes for upgrading police infrastructure, training institutes, investigations facilities, etc." with
total central outlay of ` 90 crore has also been approved. So far, an amount of ` 20.28 crore has been
released during 2017-18 and 2018-19 for implementation for four projects to the North Eastern States
and further projects have been sought from these States.
Further Observation
2.7.4 The Committee notes the reply.

13
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
SECURITY SCENARIO IN DIFFERENT STATES OF NER
3.1 Mizoram
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee observes that since the year 2009, when the repatriation of Brus to Mizoram
began, only 1622 families out of around 5000 families have been repatriated. The Committee is disappointed
to note that not a single family could be repatriated during the last two years. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should initiate urgent measures to restart the repatriation process and ensure an early
repatriation of the Brus. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should prepare an adequate
financial assistance package comparable to the package being offered to the Kashmiri migrants to
encourage repatriation of Brus. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should also incorporate
provisions in the rehabilitation package to provide vocational training and opportunities for meaningful
livelihood, such as government jobs, to ensure peaceful rehabilitation of the Brus. The Committee desires
to be apprised about the action taken and progress achieved in this regard.
(Para 2. 7.5 of 213th Report)
Recommendation
3.1.2 The Committee observes that every time the repatriation process began, some protests occurred to
block the process and this has caused a huge delay in the repatriation process. The Committee is of the
view that this cannot be a coincidence and the protests seem to aim at blocking the repatriation process.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should put adequate security measures in place, in the relief
camps and in the areas where the Brus are to be rehabilitated, to tackle protests effectively and to instil
a sense of security among the Brus. (Para 2.7.6 ibid)
Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee is at pains to observe that the Brus have been living in pitiable conditions in the
relief camps. The Committee also notes observations of the Supreme Court regarding poor living conditions
and failure of the Government to ensure decent living conditions for the Brus who have been suffering
for a long time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently review the poor
living conditions in all the six relief camps where Brus are residing and provide all basic amenities to
the people in these camps. (Para 2.7.7 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.4 There was an agreement between Govt. of India, Governments of Mizoram, Tripura and Mizoram
Bru Displaced People's Forum (MBDPF) on 3rd July, 2018 for repatriation of 5,407 families comprising
13

14
32,876 persons residing in temporary camps in Tripura. This repatriation was to be completed by
30th September, 2018. According to the agreement, each repatriating family is to be given ` 4 lakh in
fixed deposit for two years, cash assistance @ ` 5,000 per month for two years, housing assistance
@ ` 1.5 lakh apart from transportation, administrative and other costs. Each person repatriating is to be
given free ration for two years. Consequent to the agreement, 48 families have repatriated to Mizoram
from Tripura.
3.1.5 It is mentioned that repatriation from 2010 to 2014 happened with the assistance of ` 80,000 per
family as housing and cash assistance and free ration for two years.
3.1.6 A Monitoring Committee under Special Secretary (Internal Security) has been constituted to
coordinate the implementation of the agreement.
Further Recommendation
3.1.7 The Committee expresses its concern over the abysmally low number of families repatriated,
and, as against the targeted 5407 families, only 48 families (less than 1%), could be repatriated
to the State of Mizoram. The Committee, however, expresses its satisfaction over the increase
in monetary assistance. Nonetheless, the Committee feels that besides these efforts the government
must develop a conducive environment by initiating dialogue with various stakeholders viz. Mizo
NGO, Bru Leaders, etc., for peaceful assimilation of the Brus in Mizoram.
3.1.8 The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that the Ministry has not provided any
comment on its recommendation regarding reviewing the poor living conditions in the six relief
camps where Brus have been residing after their exodus from the State. The Ministry has also
not provided the details of action taken by Government or the actions which have been
contemplated by the Government, for improving the living conditions. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its recommendation at Para 2.7.7 of the 213th Report and further recommends that
Government must expedite repatriation of Brus to Mizoram and desires that a comprehensive
and early action taken report be provided to the Committee for its perusal.

15
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
OVERALL SECURITY SCENARIO
4.1 Assam
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee is deeply worried to note that a large number of victims who were kidnapped or
abducted in Assam before and during 2016 are yet to be recovered. Even more worrisome is the fact that
a large majority, at more than 81 percent, of victims are women. The Committee is of the view that this
may also point towards a connection between such abductions and human trafficking. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that an inter-state investigation may be carried out to find out the reasons for this
extremely high rate of kidnappings of women. The Committee also recommends that sustained operations
must be launched to trace and recover the victims of kidnappings and abductions. The Committee desires
that the Ministry submit a detailed status note about the action taken to recover such victims.
(Para 2.3.11 of 213th Report)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The State Government of Assam has been requested to furnish a detailed status note on the issue
which is awaited. The same will be furnished to Rajya Sabha Secretariat separately. A meeting with State
Government has been arranged on the issue.
Further Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires to be informed of detailed
status about the action taken to recover victims of kidnappings and abductions.
15

16
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
SECURITY SCENARIO IN DIFFERENT STATES OF NER
Overall Security Scenario
The Committees notes further decline in the insurgency related incidents in 2018.
(Para 1.1.4)
Arunachal Pradesh
The Committee notes the decline in insurgency incidents and kidnapping related incidences
in the State of Arunachal Pradesh. (Para 1.2.6)
Manipur
The Committee notes the appointment of interlocutor for holding talks with insurgent
groups of NER, including State of Manipur. (Para 1.4.3)
Meghalaya
The Committee appreciates that the Government has accepted the recommendation of the
Committee and revised the Surrender-cum-Rehabilitation policy and enhanced immediate grant
from ````` 1.5 lakh to 4 lakh and monthly stipend from ````` 3500/- to ````` 6000/- for three years among
other incentives for the insurgents who have abjured violence with intentions of returning to the
mainstream. (Para 1.5.4)
Tripura
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that talks with various factions of National
Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) has been initiated in October, 2018. (Para 1.6.3)
Naga Peace Accord
The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry in regard to negotiations with NSCN
(IM). (Para 2.3.5)
Status of Negotiations in Manipur
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that Government of India's Interlocutor
has been holding regular talks with KNO and UPF. (Para 2.4.3)
Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act in the North Eastern States
The Committee notes that AFSPA has been removed from the entire State of Meghalaya
from 1st April, 2018. The Committee hopes that this would pave a new path towards peace in
Meghalaya. The Committee also notes that AFSPA, in Arunachal Pradesh, has been reduced to
three districts and eight police stations bordering the State of Assam. (Para 2.5.5)
16

17
Functioning of the Autonomous Councils in NER
The Committee notes the statement of the Ministry that the State government of Manipur
is not agreeable to extending the provisions of Sixth Schedule of the Constitution to the
Autonomous District Councils of Manipur whereas in 2001 it had conveyed its no objection for
the same. (Para 2.6.3)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the proposal to amend the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution of India is under its consideration. (Para 2.6.6)
Mizoram
The Committee expresses its concern over the abysmally less number of families repatriated,
as against the targeted 5407 families, only 48 families (less than 1%), could be repatriated to
the State of Mizoram. The Committee, however, expresses its satisfaction over the increase in
monetary assistance. Nonetheless, the Committee feels that besides these efforts the government
must develop conducive environment by initiating dialogues with various stakeholders viz. Mizo
NGO, Bru Leaders, etc., for peaceful assimilation of the Brus in Mizoram. (Para 3.1.7)
The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that the Ministry has not provided any
comment on its recommendation regarding reviewing the poor living conditions in the six relief
camps where Brus have been residing after their exodus from the State. The Ministry has also
not provided the details of action taken by Government or the actions which have been
contemplated by the Government, for improving the living conditions. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its recommendation at Para 2.7.7 of the 213th Report and further recommends that
Government must expedite repatriation of Brus to Mizoram and desires that a comprehensive
and early action taken report be provided to the Committee for its perusal. (Para 3.1.8)
OVERALL SECURITY SCENARIO
Assam
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires to be informed of detailed
status about the action taken to recover victims of kidnappings and abductions. (Para 4.1.3)

MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M on Tuesday, the 5th February, 2019 in Room No.63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
8. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
9. Shri Nagarajan P.
10. Shri Jagdambika Pal
11. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinayan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following four draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
*** Relate to other matters.
21

22
(iv) Draft 219th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Thirteenth Report on Security Situation in the North Eastern
States of India.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft 219th Report for consideration and adopted the same
without any change.
7. The Committee authorised the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament in the current session
itself.
8. * * *
9. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.