Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th March, 2013)  
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
 
 
REPORT NO. 
167


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

137
C.S.(H.A.)-326
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(v)
3. Acronyms ........................................................................................................................... (vi)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—50
Chapter – I Background of the Bill ........................................................................ 1—4
Chapter – II Examination of the Bill ....................................................................... 5—11
Chapter – III Further Examination of the Bill ......................................................... 12—20
Chapter – IV Suggestions Contained in Memoranda .............................................. 21—24
Chapter – V Final Deliberations and Clause-by-Clause Consideration and
Recommendations ................................................................................. 25—50
NOTE OF D ISSENT G IVEN BY S/ SHRI D. R AJA AND P RASANTA CHATTERJEE, M EMBERS,
RAJYA S ABHA ...................................................................................................................... 51—52
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF M EETINGS OF C OMMITTEE ......................................................... 53—92
6. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 93—136
(i) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 ................................................ 95—114
(ii) Press Release and . ........................................................................................... 115
(iii) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 .................................... 116—136

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
^2. Shri D. Raja
*3. Vacant
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
**9. Vacant
10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
16. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home
Affairs due to the appointment of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet.
* Due to the resignation of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on
Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
** Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Sixty Seventh Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred ♣ the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012  (Annexure-I) as introduced on 4 th December, 2012 in Lok
Sabha and pending therein, to the Committee on 28 th December, 2012, for examination and report
within three months.
3. The Bill seeks to substitute Sections 375, 376, 376A and 376B by replacing the existing
Sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of Indian Penal Code, 1860, and replacing the
word ‘rape’ wherever it occurs by the word ‘sexual assault’ and make the offence of sexual
assault gender-neutral besides widening the scope of offence of sexual assault. The Bill intends
to insert new sections 326A and 326B in the IPC to make acid attack a specific offence. The
Bill proposes to make offence under Section 354 and 359 of IPC more stringent and also seeks
to amend Sections 154, 160, 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 for providing
protection to women and male person under the age of 18 years and above 65 years. The Bill
further aims to insert a new Section 53A in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 wherein evidence of
the character of the victim or of his or her previous sexual experience shall not be relevant or
questioned.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in eight sittings held on 4 th, 21 st, 28 th January, 4 th, 11 th,
18th, 21 st and 26 th February, 2013. The Chairman in the Committee’s sitting held on 4 th January,
2013 apprised the Committee about the reference of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and
the Committee decided to issue a Press Release soliciting views of the individuals/organizations,
women organizations on various provisions of the Bill. The Committee also decided to obtain the
views of the State Governments/UT Administrations on the Bill.  In response to the Press Release
(Annexure-II ) issued, the Committee received 492 memoranda out of which 402 memoranda
signed by individuals were found to be identical. The Committee considered 90 relevant memoranda
and sent the same to the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish comments thereon. The comments
of the Ministry of Home Affairs on these memoranda and the suggestions of States/UTs
Government and Members of the Committee were considered during the course of examination of
the Bill. Views/suggestions from five State/UT Governments and four MPs were also received by
the Committee which were also sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs for their comments. The
Committee takes this opportunity to express its sincere thanks for the pains taken by public in
giving their views on this subject. The Committee however, expresses its displeasure to note that
only 5 State/UT Governments responded and other States/UTs could not send their views.
5. The Committee in its sitting held on 21 st January, 2013 heard the presentation of Home
Secretary on the Bill. The Committee, in its sitting held on 28 th January, 2013 took cognizance of
♣  Vide  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 50467 dated 2 nd January, 2013.

the fact that Justice J.S. Verma Committee (JVC) on Amendments to Criminal Law has submitted
its report to the Government on 23 rd January, 2013 and the copy of the report as received from
the Ministry of Home Affairs was circulated to the Members of DRSC on Home Affairs to consider
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 in the light of the observations and recommendations
made by JVC. The Committee in that sitting discussed the Bill viz-a-viz the recommendation of the
JVC in the presence of Legislative Secretary.
6. The Committee, in its sitting held on 4 th February, 2013 took cognizance of the
promulgation of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 (Annexure-III)  on 3 rd February,
2013 by the President of India and heard the explanation given by the Home Secretary of the
circumstances under which the said Ordinance was promulgated. The Committee, in its next sitting
held on 11 th February, 2013 examined the Bill viz-a-viz JVC report and the provisions of the
Ordinance, wherein the Legislative Secretary and the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
apprised the Committee about the suggestions made in the Verma Committee report which were
accepted by the Government and the provisions of the Ordinance viz-a-viz the Bill. The Committee,
in its next sitting held on 18 th February, 2013 further heard the Home Secretary and the Legislative
Secretary on the comparative statement on the provisions of the Bill, recommendations of JVC and
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013.
7. The Committee in its sitting held on 21 st February, 2013 took up the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill in the presence of Home Secretary. The Committee also took into
consideration provisions of the ordinance while taking up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
As per practice, the officers of the Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs were
also present in the sitting to respond to legislative/legal queries of the Members.
8. The Committee in its sitting held on 26 th February, 2013 considered and adopted this Report.
9. The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012;
(ii) Detailed background Note on the Bill as Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) The Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
(iv) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
(v) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872(1 of 1872);
(vi) One Hundred and Seventy Second Report on Review of Rape Laws of Law
Commission of India;
(vii) Report of Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law chaired by Justice J.S. Verma;
(viii) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013;
(ix) Comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the memoranda received from
individuals/public suggestions of State/UTs Government and Members of Parliament
and the Committee; and
(x) Oral evidence tendered by the representatives of Ministries of Home Affairs and Law
and Justice.
(iv)

10. Note of dissent given by Shri D. Raja and Shri Prasanta Chatterjee are appended to the
Report.
11. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI Department-related Parliamentary
26th February,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(v)

ACRONYMS
IPC Indian Penal Code
JVC Justice Verma Committee
NCW National Commission for Women
AIDWA All India Democratic Women Association
Cr. P.C. Criminal Procedure Code
HPC High Powered Committee
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs
HRD Human Resource  Development
GPS Global Positioning System
CCTV Close Circuit Television
MMS Multimedia Messaging   Service
FIR First Information Report
ITPA Immoral Traffic Prevention Act
PCSOA Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act
AFSPA Armed Forces Special Powers Act
IEA Indian Evidence Act
WCD Women and Child Development
I&B Information and Broadcasting
JJ Juvenile Justice
(vi)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
BACKGROUND OF THE BILL
1.1 INTRODUCTION
1.1.1 According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill,
2012 seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872. On the basis of the recommendations of the Law Commission of India
made in its One Hundred Seventy Second report on ‘Review of Rape Laws’ as well as the
recommendations of the National Commission for Women for providing stringent punishment for
the offence of rape, a High Power Committee (HPC) was constituted consisting of the
representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Law and Justice,
National Commission for Women, Law Commission of India and the Ministry of Home Affairs to
examine the matter considering the suggestions of various quarters on the subject. The High Power
Committee submitted its report along with the draft Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and
recommended to the Government for its enactment.
1.1.2 The Bill seeks to achieve the following objectives :–
(a) Substitute Sections 375, 376, 376A and 376B by replacing the existing Sections 375,
376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian Penal Code, and replacing the word
‘rape’ wherever it occurs by the words ‘sexual assault’, to make the offence of sexual
assault gender neutral and also widening the scope of the offence of sexual assault;
(b) Insert new Sections 326A and 326B in the Indian Penal Code to make acid attack a
specific offence;
(c) Enhance the punishment under Sections 354 and 509 of the Indian Penal Code, making
the offence more stringent;
(d) Amend Sections 154, 160 and 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for
providing male persons under the age of eighteen years or above the age of sixty-five
years and women more protection;
(e) Amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by way of inserting a new Section 53A wherein
evidence of the character of the victim or of his or her previous sexual experience
shall not be relevant or questioned.
1.2 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
1.2.1 According to the background note furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs, in the year
1997, Sakshi (NGO), a non-governmental organization engaged in empowering women, filed a Writ
Petition in the Supreme Court of India seeking, inter alia , directions concerning definition of the
expression ‘sexual intercourse’ as contained in Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(hereinafter called IPC). The Supreme Court directed the Law Commission of India to file its
response with respect to the issue raised in the Writ Petition. The Commission filed an affidavit
in July 1998. The Supreme Court, however, directed Sakshi to draw a note containing the precise
issues involved in the petition and directed the Law Commission of India to examine the said issues

2
afresh. The Law Commission, in its 172 nd Report, made recommendation for widening the scope
of rape and to make it gender neutral.
1.2.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs in the background note further stated that since the Criminal
Law and the Criminal Procedure are in the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution of India, the Report of the Law Commission was referred to the State Governments
for their views/comments. The State Governments were consulted on the recommendations made
by the Law Commission. Most of the State Governments supported the views of the Law
Commission. Thereafter, on the basis of the Law Commission’s Report, the Legislative Department
drafted a Bill. Meanwhile, the National Commission for Women (NCW) forwarded a separate Bill
on the same subject. Accordingly, the recommendations of the Law Commission of India, the draft
Bill prepared by the Legislative Department and the Bill forwarded by NCW were discussed by the
then Home Minister with the then Law Minister where the then Chairperson, National Commission
for Women was also present. It was stated that during the discussion, the view that emerged was
that various sexual offences specifically relating to males and females should be differentiated and
the crime should remain gender specific, and therefore, the recommendations of the Law
Commission would need a re-look taking into account the suggestions made by the National
Commission for Women.
1.2.3 The Ministry further stated in the background note that the Legislative Department,
accordingly, having regard to the sensitivity of the subject, was requested to revise the draft Bill
taking into consideration the above suggestions. It was also requested that the revised Bill should
address the existing inadequacies in the laws relating to sexual offences and also provide for
measures to deal with the sexual abuse of children through stringent provisions. Accordingly, the
Legislative Department prepared a revised Bill. The National Commission for Women recommended
some changes relating to ‘rape’ in its Annual Report 2004-05. Since the Criminal Law and the
Criminal Procedure are in the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India
and the laws are also being administered/implemented by the State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations, their views were sought on the recommendations made by the NCW in its
aforesaid Report. In order to get a quicker response, a Conference of the Home Secretaries of the
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations was convened on 7
th July, 2008 in Delhi
to discuss the matter relating to rape/sexual assault. There was no agreement as to the amendments
that should be carried out in IPC, Cr.P.C. and the Indian Evidence Act.
1.2.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs mentioned in its background note on the Bill that as the
subject matter relating to rape is sensitive in nature, it was decided that the Bill on rape laws may
be finalized after an in depth consultation with all concerned. Therefore, a High Powered
Committee (HPC) was constituted on 29
th January, 2010 under the Chairmanship of the former
Union Home Secretary comprising Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development;
Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs; Secretary, Legislative Department; Member Secretary,
NCW; Member Secretary, Law Commission of India; Special Secretary, MHA and Consultant
(Judl.), MHA as members to examine the issue relating to the review of rape laws. The HPC
discussed the matter in its meetings held on 12.2.2010 and 15.3.2010. The suggestions made by
the HPC were formulated into a draft Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2010 which was referred
to the State Governments for their comments/views. The draft Bill was also posted on the website
of the Ministry of Home Affairs for comments of the general public. The HPC after going into the
comments received from the various individuals and NGOs, the State Governments and also after
further consultation amongst its members on 10.08.2010, 04.10.2010 and 08.02.2011 finalized its
report along with the draft Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and recommended to the
Government for its enactment.
1.2.5 The Committee was further apprised that the provisions of the draft Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 as formulated by the HPC were further examined in the Ministry of Home

3
Affairs in consultation with Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice. After necessary
modifications, the Legislative Department provided a revised draft Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill,
2012. After consultation with other stake holders like Ministry of Law & Justice and Ministry of
Women & Child Development, a Cabinet Note on “Review of legal provisions pertaining to sexual
assault - Proposal to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872” was finalized and sent to the Cabinet for consideration on
02.07.2012. The Cabinet considered the note on 19.07.2012 and approved the proposal of
introduction of the Bill in the Parliament. Accordingly, the Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 04.12.2012.
1.3 FRESH DEVELOPMENT
1.3.1 A fresh development took place while the Committee was examining the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012. The President promulgated the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance,
2013 on 3rd February, 2013. The Committee felt surprised on this development, because the Bill
was already before it for examination and report and the Parliament was to meet for the Budget
Session within a fortnight. The Committee also took into account some reports coming from
women organizations and other civil societies protesting against the said Ordinance on account of
not accepting the recommendations of the Justice Verma Committee in toto .
1.3.2 The Committee in its sitting held on 4
th February, 2013 wanted Home Secretary to explain
the circumstances which necessitated the Government to issue this Criminal Law (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013.
Responding to the Committee’s query, Home Secretary replied as under:–
“in the last meeting, agreed that the Committee would give holistic recommendations which
take into account both the provisions in the Bill as introduced in the House as also the
recommendations of the Verma Committee. Sir, there has been no departure from that stand.
The Government sticks to that stand. Therefore, the Government’ s request would be that the
Committee should go into the Bill, the Ordinance and the other recommendations of the
V erma Committee which are not included in the Ordinance, or any other provision which
the Committee feels appropriate to have in a Bill of this nature. When the Committee gives
its recommendations, then the Government will have the benefit of its advice over the whole
gamut of issues. Then, I think, we can bring in amendments which are comprehensive in
nature, covering every aspect.”
1.3.3 The Committee sought to know whether the Committee could discuss the Ordinance.
Responding to that the Home Secretary replied as under:
“...my submission is that this Committee is entirely within its powers to take into account
any existing laws or proposed laws or any Ordinance or any other material which will have
a bearing on this subject. Therefore, the Committee will be very much within its rights to
go into the Ordinance as well. But, the Ordinance has two parts... the Ordinance is made
up of the provisions which were there in the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill and the
provisions which are there in the Verma Committee Report. Some provisions of the Verma
Committee Report are not there in the Ordinance; otherwise the Ordinance is only comprised
of these two. ... if you cover the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill and you cover the Verma
Committee Report, then, I think the whole gamut in any case would be covered. ..., as I
said, the Committee will be within its rights to take into account any material which has
a bearing on this subject.”
1.3.4 In the meeting of the Committee held on 11
th February, 2013, the Chairman informed the
Members that sub rule (2) of Rule 66 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the

4
Rajya Sabha envisages a situation where an Ordinance can be promulgated to enforce the
provisions of a Bill which is pending before the Council. Identical rule also exists in Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Lok Sabha.
1.3.5 The Chairman further stated that he has been given to understand that there had been
instances where Ordinances were issued on the Bills, which were under consideration of the
respective Committees. The Electricity Law (Amendment) Bill, 1997, the Lotteries (Regulation) Bill,
1998, the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment
Bill, 2008 and the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 are some of the Bills
on which Ordinances were issued when they were under consideration of the respective
Committees and in such cases the Committees had gone ahead with the consideration of the Bills
and gave their reports thereon.
1.3.6 The Chairman then informed the Members that in the light of the above, he feels that the
Committee may continue with the examination of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and
present its Report thereon.

5
CHAPTER-II
EXAMINATION OF THE BILL
2.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 21 st January, 2013 heard the presentation of Home
Secretary on the provisions of the Bill. In the said meeting the Law Secretary and the
representatives of the Legislative Department were also present.
2.2.1 The Home Secretary while highlighting the necessity of the Bill, informed that the
Legislative Department, on the basis of recommendations of the Law Commission of India, drafted
a Bill proposing amendment in Section 375 IPC (Rape) making it gender-neutral, Sections 376A to
376D, 377, 509 of IPC along with suitable changes in Cr.P.C., 1973 and the Evidence Act, 1872.
The Committee asked the Home Secretary to differentiate between the recommendations of the Law
Commission, the Bill forwarded by the NCW and the present Bill. The Committee also sought to
know about the reasons for difference in approach on the issue of fines prescribed under different
Sections as in the Section 326A IPC, a maximum fine of Rs. 10 lakh; in Sections 354 and 509,
a minimum fine of Rs. 1,000 has been proposed. However, in Sections 167A, 326B, 376, 376A
and 376B of IPC, neither the minimum nor the maximum fine has been indicated. The Committee
wanted the Home Secretary to explain the reasons for not making mandatory, recording of the
statement of a woman, against whom an offence under Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and
509 of IPC is alleged to have been committed or attempted, by a woman police officer by leaving
scope for lacunae in the proposed law by retaining the words ‘as far as possible. The Committee
also wanted to know from Home Secretary whether the proposed amendments address the issues
raised by social activists, women workers, NGOs, legal experts the other concerned people in the
aftermath of the recent gang-rape in Delhi on 16
th December, 2012.
2.2.2 The Home Secretary stated that after the brutal bus gang rape in Delhi, the Government set
up a three-member Committee headed by a retired Chief Justice of India, one member being a
retired Chief Justice of a High Court and another member being an ex-Solicitor General.
2.2.3 The Home Secretary further added that the terms of reference of the Justice V erma
Committee were two-fold which inter-alia  included that the process of justice must be made
speedy so that the guilty are brought to book quickly and the punishment may be made as stringent
as possible.
2.2.4 The Home Secretary pointed out that two important demands were raised by the civil
society groups in the aftermath of that horrendous incident. One was for provision of death penalty
and another was pertaining to the age of majority for the criminal. He further stated that as far
as death penalty is concerned, as the victim of Delhi gang rape had died, is an admissible penalty,
and the government would be pleading for death penalty for convicts.
2.2.5 The Chairman pointed out that the general demand of the civil society was that even if there
is rape, not followed by death, still there should be death penalty and wanted to know the reaction
of the government on this issue. The Home Secretary responded as under:–
“... our view is that the death penalty is supposed to be given in very limited cases, the
rarest of rare cases. We have seen from experience that, by and large, there is also a
constituency against the death penalty, and either the death penalty is not given by the
courts very often, or, even where it is given, in many instances, it has been commuted. So,
5

6
basically, if you provide for a death penalty here, then, you will have to provide for death
penalty against many other similar types of cases, which, I think, will become something
which will impede rather than enhance justice. The next best provision is punishment for
life, which is already provided for. ... what we are doing in the proposed amendment is, we
are taking away the provisos which give the courts the discretion to award lesser
punishment. ...so that the courts do not have the discretion to award lesser punishments
under some sections. ...”
2.3 A Member of the Committee wanted to know the compelling circumstances for the
Government to commute death penalty into life imprisonment. Another Member added that there is
a view against capital punishment and India needs to take a categorical stand on capital punishment.
2.3.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 21
st February, 2013 had a detailed discussion on the
issue of death penalty enshrined under section 376A which provides “Punishment for causing death
or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim”. The said provision states that such an accused
will be punished with a rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty
years, but may be extended for imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder part of his
life or death. A Member of the Committee pointed out that as for death penalty, the State will have
to take a decision. Many countries have abolished it but India is still having death penalty in the
law. The Chairman of the Committee pointed out it is allowed as per the existing laws. It is a
general feeling that if somebody causes death he/she has to be given death sentence.
2.3.2 Another Member added that any act which results in death comes under the purview of
section 302 of IPC. It is a heinous crime, which calls for death penalty. The accused in a gang-
rape, not resulting in death, will get away without any capital punishment.
2.3.3 Other Member viewed that under section 376A, life imprisonment may be made the
maximum punishment. Death sentence need not be included because capital punishment does not
deter anybody from murdering someone, it does not stop someone from raping someone. It does
not actually stop many things which law prohibits. The Chairman of the Committee pointed out that
even if provision of death penalty is not there in Section 376A but rape followed by murder would
automatically attract Section 302 of IPC. The Government has already issued an Ordinance. The
Committee should send a proper message of giving extreme penalty only in case of death or the
victim becoming vegetative for the rest of his life.
2.4 Regarding the attendance of the witnesses for investigation, the Home Secretary informed
that the proposed amendment provides that any person below the age of 18 would not be called
to assist the investigation, etc. The investigating officer will have to go to his residence. However,
the Home Secretary viewed that under the mentioned provision, no woman should be called to the
police station to assist investigation. But for males, who are not victims, who are accused, their
attendance will need to be there at the police station rather than the police officer going their
homes.
2.4.1 Clarifying further on the issue whether the victim would be called to the police station or
woman officer would record the statement at her residence, the Home Secretary added that  the
proposed law says that, as far as possible, the statement would be recorded by a woman police
officer. He pointed out that the provision says, ‘as far as possible’, because in every police station,
at a particular time, a woman officer may not readily be available, though the Central Government
have been pressing the State Governments to recruit more women in police. He also stated that
the Central Government is of the view that at least 33 per cent of the police force should be
women. In fact, in the last Conference of the Chief Secretaries and the DGPs, it was also urged
upon State Government to consider and examine whether any reservation can be made for women
in recruitment of police. But despite the requests made by the Central Government, the percentage

7
of women in police throughout the country is quite low. So, there would be many instances where
women police officers are not available.
2.5 As regards whether there was any departure between this proposed amendment and the
recommendations of the Law Commission, the Home Secretary stated that there is a departure
because the recommendation of the Law Commission has said that if a woman police officer is not
available, then, a woman Government officer should be there and if a woman Government officer
is also not available, then, another woman who may be a member of an NGO or something else.
2.5.1 The Home Secretary opined that where a woman police officer is not available, then, a
female Government servant in the vicinity, should have been included, in the proposed amendment
and assured the Committee that while considering the recommendations of the Justice Verma
Committee the Government would again examine this aspect, and the Government would bring
amendment in the light of the recommendations made by the Committee. In case there is any legal
angle involved in that, she could have assistance of male police officer standing by.
2.5.2 In regard to the gender neutral nature of the Bill, responding to the query of the Chairman
of the Committee regarding the difference between the recommendations made by the NCW and
this Bill as stated as under:–
“....the main focus of the recommendations of the NCW was that the offence of rape should
not be made ‘gender neutral’. In fact, that is the stand which most of the women groups
still hold on to. ... the Amendment makes the offence of rape ‘gender neutral’. That is the
key difference between the two. And, whether it should be ‘gender neutral or not’, is, I
think, a question which we will have to address.”
2.5.3 Responding to the query of a Member, the Home Secretary replied that outraging the
modesty of women is a gender specific offence because outraging the modesty applies only to
women.
2.6 Indian Panel Code, 1860
2.6.1 The Home Secretary initiated the discussion with the new Section, namely, Section 166A.
The existing Section 166 of IPC spells a provision about a public servant disobeying the law with
intent to cause injury to any person. The Home Secretary pointed out that Government proposes
to add specific provisions which will provide for enhanced punishment in case investigating officer
asks for the attendance of any person when that officer is not supposed to ask for the attendance
of that person. That means, if a police officer is not supposed to call for the attendance of a
woman at the police station and if he does so, then there will be a provision for punishment.
2.6.2 Differentiating between the existing Section 166 and the proposed Section 166A, the Home
Secretary clarified that the proposed Section 166A is more specific and does away with the intent
while in the first part, the intent is manifest meaning that the public servant will be punished only
when he does a particular act knowing that it will cause injury or damage to another person or
wanting that such injury or damage is caused so that mens rea is there. The Home Secretary
further added that in Section 166A if a public servant calls a woman witness or a woman victim
to the police station for the purpose of investigation, though his intention may not be mala fide
but still he would be punished. However, the Home Secretary admitted that the provision appears
to be slightly draconian but the purpose of the proposed amendment is to ensure that the police
officer does not unnecessarily call the women victims to the police station. The Home Secretary
further clarified that if a woman voluntarily goes to the police station to make the complaint, the
proposed amendment would not be invoked. The proposed provision relates to procuring attendance
while registration of an offence is dealt in a separate law. The Law Secretary clarified that the
proposed provision is for the purpose of investigation.

8
2.6.3 The Home Secretary apprised the Committee that the Government is proposing to insert
Section 326A and 326B along with a proviso to Section 326A and explanation to 326B, after
Section 326 of IPC. Section 326 relates to voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons
or means. Section 326A provides for punishment for acid attacks. The proposed Section 326A
states that whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims or
disfigures or disables any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt by
throwing acid on or administering acid to that person, with the intention of causing or with the
knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may be for life and
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees. Provided that any fine imposed under this section
shall be given to the person on whom acid was thrown or to whom acid was administered.
2.6.4 A Member of the Committee desired that if the economic position of the accused under
Section 326A is strong, he must be liable to be punished with more than rupees ten lakh as the
cost of medical treatment and rehabilitation of victim of acid attacks require considerable amount
of money besides mental agony.
2.6.5 The Home Secretary then explained that under Section 354, whoever assaults or uses
criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
2.6.6 Clarifying the necessity for proposed amendment in Section 354, the Home Secretary
clarified that the Government is not bringing forth any substantial change in the said Section but
proposing only a change in the operative part of the section which defines the crime. He clarified
that, whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, is gender specific. He also stated that
they increased the upper limit for punishment from two years to five years.
2.6.7 The Committee further sought clarification with regard to the word ‘outraging the modesty’
and whether removing the saree or touching a person considered to be outraging the modesty or
whether there is any physical assault outraging the modesty. The Home Secretary clarified that if
a person forcibly catches hold of the hand of any girl, it will come under the ambit of this section,
because he has used criminal force and that criminal force has outraged her modesty. If a person
removes the dupatta of any lady, that will come under this Section.
2.6.8 Responding to a query relating to false accusation in view of special provision for woman
only, the Home Secretary stated that there is specific provision for dealing with false and malicious
accusation in IPC.
2.6.9 The Committee, thereafter, took up Section 375 of IPC, which defines ‘sexual assault. The
Home Secretary pointed out that the amendment widens the definition of ‘sexual assault’, which
is comprehensive and, in his opinion, there is agreement of almost all parties on the issue. He
clarified that, by and large, the provision is the same as the previous provisions. The change has
been made in the first part. Another change has been made in the age of consent which has been
raised to 18 years.
2.6.10 A Member of the Committee felt that even though the age of wife has been increased from
15 years to 16 years, it is still below the stipulated age of 18 years for the girl to marry under
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, before which the marriage is considered to be a child
marriage and can be declared void at the instance of any of the couple. Even in the case of
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, if the groom is below 21 years of age and the bride is below
18 years, the marriage is voidable at the option of either of these two who were children at that
time. He viewed that there is also a need to have consistency in law and wanted to know as to
why it is 16 years and not 18 years.

9
2.6.11 The Home Secretary conceded that the provision indicates the practical reality. He
mentioned that the marriage of a girl below 18 years of age is voidable and not void ab initio .
There are numerous marriages where the girl has been below 18 years of age. Therefore, unless
there is a provision all those marriage would become illegal and punishable.
2.6.12 Another Member raised the issue relating to Section 375 which spells out about a person
who is said to commit ‘sexual assault’. He sought to be apprised about the wordings along with
its implications as stated in sub-Section(a) (ii), “...except where such penetration is carried out for
proper hygienic or medical purposes.” The Home Secretary explained that such provision has
become necessary because it has been stated that penetration is not necessarily by penis but by
any object manipulated by such person. This is to clarify instances where a doctor is examining
a person for medical purposes. There should be an exception provided for this.
2.6.13 The Home Secretary further explained the provision enshrined in Section 376 (1) regarding
punishment for sexual assault. The Home Secretary clarified that the idea of sub-Section (2) is to
include whoever, being in a position of authority, committing a sexual assault. It includes anybody
in a position of authority. This also includes sexual assault on a woman knowing that she is
pregnant or is under 18 years of age or being a member of group of persons having a common
intention and in furtherance of that intention commits sexual assault. The Home Secretary added
that all cases, where there is a gang activity involved, come under aggravated offence.
2.6.14 The Committee, thereafter, took up Section 509 of IPC for discussion. The Home Secretary
pointed out that the amendment  intends to increase the punishment from one year to three years
of imprisonment with fine, which may not be less than one thousand rupees. Any lewd remark,
any sound or gesture also is included. A Member wanted to know whether the said provision
includes eve-teasing, the Chairman of the Committee clarified that eve-teasing is a general phrase.
2.7 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
2.7.1 The Committee was apprised by the Home Secretary that Section 154 of Cr. P.C. provides
for registration of offences and the proposed amendment makes a proviso that if the information
is given by the woman against whom an offence under Section 354, Section 375, Section 376,
Section 376A, Section 376B and Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been
committed or attempted, then such information shall be recorded, as far as possible, by a woman
police officer. The Home Secretary further added that the Ministry of Home Affairs had a
discussion on this provision where the Law Commission suggested that it should be recorded, as
far as possible, by a woman police officer, failing which by a woman Government servant or by
a woman from one of the organisations interested in the welfare of women, etc. The Home
Secretary agreed that Government has to apply its mind to the said provision because in his opinion
attempt should be to ensure that as far as possible such statements are recorded by women.
2.7.2 Some Members of the Committee felt that the words ‘as far as possible’ may give a scope
for escape to hold that there is no woman officer in any specific police station. However, the Home
Secretary pointed out the stand taken by the Law Commission that a woman police officer or an
officer should be there. The Committee observed that to enforce the proposed amendment,
Government needs to pursue with all the State Governments asking them at the earliest to have
at least 33 per cent women police force because in the police stations in rural areas there are
women constables but there are no women officers as such.
2.7.3 The Chairman of the Committee  wanted to know whether under Section 154 of Cr.P.C., it
is mandatory to reduce in writing every information relating to the commission of a cognizable
offence and should be signed by the person giving it. The Home Secretary replied in affirmative.
The Chairman further queried if a police officer fails to record the First Information Report

10
whether one has to inform the District Police Superintendent. The Home Secretary again replied
in affirmative stating that any person, aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge
of a police station to record the information referred to in sub-Section (1) may send the substance
of such information, in writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who, if
satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, shall either
investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer subordinate
to him.
2.7.4 Some Members observed that  the registration of FIR must be made mandatory as the
responsibility of the Station House Officer who must first register it and in case of his inability
to register it, then he must inform the Superintendent of Police in writing that, “I received a
complaint like this and I did not register for this reason.” The Home Secretary, subscribing to the
view of the Committee, added further that, apart from the Superintendent of Police, some authority
outside the police hierarchy should also be involved meaning thereby that it should be made
mandatory for them to report also to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the District Magistrate
about complaints which they have not registered and the complainant should also have the freedom
to complaint not only to the Superintendent of Police but also to the District Magistrate. The
Chairman further desired to know whether the judicial or subordinate court could be involved in
this process. The Home Secretary pointed that could be possible, but the problem could be that
the subordinate courts are very over-worked.
2.7.5 The Committee then discussed the proposed amendment in Section 160 of the Cr. P.C.,
which provides for police officer’s power to require attendance of witnesses. Proviso to the
Section 160 stipulates that no male person under the age of 15 years or woman shall be required
to attend any place other than that place in which such male person or woman resides. The
proposed amendment adds to the proviso to Section 160 that no male person under the age of 18
years or above the age of 65 years or a woman would be required to attend at any place other
than the place in which such male person or woman resides.
2.7.6 The Committee, thereafter took up Section 161 Cr.P.C, which relates to examination of
witnesses by police. Government is proposing amendments by inserting a proviso after sub-Section
(3) that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under Section 354, Section 375,
Section 376, Section 376A, Section 376B and Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code is alleged to
have been committed or attempted shall be recorded, as far as possible, by a woman police officer.
The Home Secretary underlined the fact that the instant provision relates to investigation. The
Committee may consider keeping it as ‘as far as possible’ by a woman police officer or making
it mandatory.
2.7.7 The Home Secretary thereafter apprised the Committee about the proposed amendment in
Section 273 of Cr. P.C. which relates to evidence to be taken in the presence of accused. In
Section 273 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, before the Explanation, the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:–
“Provided that where the evidence of a person below the age of eighteen years who is
alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault or any other sexual offence, is to be
recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such person is not
confronted by the accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination
of the accused”.
2.7.8 The Home Secretary acquainted the Committee that, under the existing provision, the normal
procedure is that evidence is to be recorded in the presence of the accused. He pointed out that
the proposed amendment provides that where the evidence of a person below the age of eighteen
years who is alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault or any other sexual offence, is to

11
be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such person is not confronted
by the accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination of the accused.
2.7.9 Coming to Section 327 of Cr.P.C. relating to Court to be open, the Home Secretary stated
that, as per the existing provision, the place in which any Criminal Court is held for the purpose
of inquiring into or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public
generally may have access, so far as the same, can conveniently contain them.
2.8 INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
2.8.1 The Chairman of the Committee pointed out  at the Statement of Objectives and Reasons –
Para 2(e), which says, ‘amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by way of inserting a new section
53A wherein evidence of the character of the victim or of his or her previous sexual experience
shall not be relevant or questioned.’ The Law Secretary apprised that the proposed provision is in
pursuance to court ruling whereupon a specific amendment is being brought.
2.8.2 The Home Secretary clarified that  the present Section 53 of the Evidence Act says, “In
criminal cases, previous good character is relevant. In criminal proceedings, the fact that the
person accused is of a good character is relevant.” He further stated that they want to add Section
53A in the Evidence Act. The people were making use of this provision to attack the character of
the victim. Therefore, Section 53A is proposed to be added so that one cannot go to the issue of
question of character of a person.
2.8.3 Enlightening the Committee about the proposed amendment in Section 114A, which relates
to presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecutions for sexual assault, the Home
Secretary apprised the Members about changes, which are consequential in nature and the word
‘rape’ has been substituted with the words ‘sexual assault’.
2.8.4 Responding to the Committee’s query regarding the implications of Section 146, the Home
Secretary stated that the implications are that while in a normal criminal proceeding, a witness may
be tested by questioning his veracity. An attempt may be made to question his veracity or to shake
his credit by injuring his character. In this case, this territory shall not be entered into as to what
the person’s previous sexual history has been. After the amendment, the spirit of the law would
be that a man and a woman may be having sexual relations, without marriage, for the past five
years. If, at any point of time, even after five years or six years or whatever, she says that any
intercourse has happened without her consent, then, this question shall not be put to her that you
have been having sexual relations with him for the past five years. So, the thing becomes slightly,
to that extent, dangerous. At any point of time, a woman can say that the consent was not there.

12
CHAPTER-III
FURTHER EXAMINATION OF THE BILL
3.0 The Committee, in its sitting held on the 4th February, 2013, held further discussions on
the provisions of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 in comparison with the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 promulgated on the 3rd of February, 2013.
3.1 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that after the
horrendous rape case of 16
th December, 2012, a Committee comprising of Justice J.S. Verma,
former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court with Justice (Retd.) Leila Seth, former Chief Justice
of the Himachal Pradesh High Court and Shri Gopal Subramanian, former Solicitor General of India
was set up on 23
rd December to give recommendations on amending laws, to provide for speedy
justice and enhance punishment for criminals in sexual assault cases of extreme nature. The
Committee submitted its report on 23
rd January, 2013. Justice Verma Committee made a number of
recommendations relating to their terms of reference as well as outside it. The recommendations
made by the Committee can be grouped into two parts – (a) general policy matters and
administrative issues and (b) recommendations regarding the amendments to the Criminal Laws as
per their terms of reference.
3.1.1 As far as the general policy matters and administrative issues are concerned, the Verma
Committee has devoted a chapter to police reforms and a chapter on electoral reforms. The Verma
Committee has given a draft Bill of Rights for women and have also made recommendations
regarding education. They have also made a number of recommendations on administration such
as police stations being required to have CCTVs to ensure that proper procedures are being
followed in handling, recording and filing complaints; provision of adequate safety measures and
amenities in all public transport vehicles with security guard, GPS and CCTVs; a public emergency
response system for putting in place medico-legal guidelines on how to perform a medical
examination of a victim of sexual assault, etc. The set of recommendations are being referred to
the concerned Ministries to examine and take actions.
3.1.2 He further stated that as regards the recommendations regarding amendments to Criminal
Law, Justice Verma Committee has agreed to most of the provisions of the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 which is pending before the Parliamentary Standing Committee. Hence,
there is a broad convergence between the provisions in the pending Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill
and recommendations of Justice Verma Committee. The Committee had not made any suggestions
regarding amendments to be made for expeditious trial.
3.2 AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
3.2.1 The Additional Secretary stated some of the major recommendations made by the Verma
Committee in addition to the provisions contained in the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill relate to
right to private defence of body in case of acid attack, which may extend to the causing of death.
This recommendation has been accepted and incorporated in the Ordinance. Further, the Verma
Committee recommended for increase in punishment from one year to five years, imprisonment for
a public servant knowingly disobeying any direction of law, including not recording information
given to him about sexual offences against women. This recommendation has been accepted
subject to the punishment remaining to be for one year or with fine or with both. In any case,
public servant faces Departmental action in addition to above punishment.
12

13
3.2.2 The Chairman of the Committee pointed out that the Verma Committee recommended
imprisonment of five years but the Ministry of Home Affairs agreed to imprisonment for one year
only. The Additional Secretary stated that the provision of Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill have
been kept intact.
3.2.3 As regards, the offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid under the new
Section 326A, the Additional Secretary apprised the Committee that the JVC recommended that the
compensation to be paid to the victim of acid attack should be adequate to meet, at least, the
medical expenses incurred by the victim. The provision of fine of Rs.10 lakhs to be paid to the
victim, as provided in the Bill and Ordinance, is considered better and adequate.
3.2.4 The Legislative Secretary clarified that the provision of the Bill, as it exists, very clearly
stipulates, “Provided that any fine imposed under this section shall be given to the person on whom
acid was thrown or to whom acid was administered.” So far as the legislation is concerned, there
seems to be no ambiguity. Under the proviso to the Section 326A, clearly stipulates that whatever
is being paid as a fine has to be given to the victim.
3.2.5 As regards, Section 326B, the Legislative Secretary stated that there is no such provision
so far as the existing IPC is concerned. The provision, as it exists, in the Ordinance almost
captures the existing provision of the Bill as well as major portion of the recommendations given
by the Verma Committee.
3.2.6 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, underlined the fact that the provision
of compensation has not been given in case of attempt to throw acid under Section 326B, since
there will not be any injury and medical expenses in an attempt and, therefore, the recommendation
of Justice Verma Committee in this regard is redundant.
3.2.7 The Committee, thereafter, took up consideration of Section 354. The Legislative Secretary
pointed out that the Verma Committee suggested that the provisions of the original Bill should be
replaced with an offence of sexual assault and punishment for sexual assault. In fact, what the
Verma Committee wanted was that the offence of rape under Section 375 should be retained. After
examining the Verma Committee Report, the original Section 354 has been retained as it is. Only
the punishment has been increased from one year to five years. In addition, new offences, which
were recommended by the Verma Committee with regard to sexual harassment, voyeurism, stalking
and disrobing of women, have been created, which were earlier not there in the Bill, have been
incorporated in the Ordinance.
3.2.8 Responding to the query of the Chairman of the Committee about the exact meaning of
voyeurism, the Legislative Secretary submitted as under:–
“in fact, ...the content of the section itself explains what exactly ‘voyeurism’ means.
Whoever watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in
circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed either by
the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator shall be punished.”
some lady has gone to buy a dress and she goes to the room to see whether it is properly
fitting or not. Nobody is supposed to see her in that room. If somebody has put a false
camera or a hidden camera there, and he watches that lady, he will commit an offence
under 354C. It has been specifically provided now. If you look at the general definition of
‘modesty’, as it already existed, probably, it could have been covered, but now, it has been
made more explicit.”
3.2.9 Clarifying a hypothetical situation that a lady is in a private act with her husband and
somebody shoots the film and then put it on the video or through MMS, wanted to know whether
the said provision would cover the offence, the Legislative Secretary answered in the affirmative.

14
3.2.10  The Legislative Secretary submitted, with reference to Section 354D, that stalking is again
a new offence, which has been recommended by the Verma Committee and which the Ministry of
Home Affairs and the Government have accepted it and the same has been incorporated in the
Ordinance.
3.2.11  Explaining ‘stalking’ under Section 354D, the Legislative Secretary pointed out that the
first part of sub-Section (a) of 354D defines offence of stalking which reads as under:–
“Whoever follows a person and contacts, or attempts to contact such person to foster
personal interaction repeatedly, despite a clear indication of disinterest by such person, or
whoever monitors the use by a person of the internet, email or any other form of electronic
communication, or watches or spies on a person in a manner that results in a fear of
violence or serious alarm or distress in the mind of such person, or interferes with the
mental peace of such person, commits the offence of stalking.”
3.2.12 The Legislative Secretary added that there was no such provision and stalking is a new
offence which is being created on the basis of the recommendation made by the Verma Committee.
Responding to a query of a Member, Legislative Secretary pointed out that offence under Section
354D is gender neutral, and if a woman takes a photograph of a man, that is also an offence.
3.2.13 Another Member felt that, in actual practice, it is clearly in respect of offences committed
against women. Generally speaking, in society, there may be similar practices which are obnoxious,
reprehensible, committed in respect of boys and the approach, in this context, of law should be
gender neutral. He further stated that instead of the word “rape” using the word “sexual assault”
is in order to cover everything. Otherwise, rape is confined to an offence committed by a man
against a woman, by a boy against a girl.
3.2.14 Differentiating between the offence of ‘sexual harassment’ and ‘sexual assault’ the
Legislative Secretary submitted before the Committee as under:–
“Precisely that is the reason.…… If you look at the Bill, you will find we have created two
types of offences. One is sexual harassment which is of a lower level. Then, sexual assault
is a substitute for the existing rape. The intention was, as per the recommendations made
by the Verma Committee and as per whatever inputs we got from the Ministry of Home
affairs, when we drafted the law, the sexual harassment and sexual assault, both should be
separately defined. Sexual assault is a serious offence as compared to the sexual harassment
because earlier, it was only modest thing. Now it is a sexual harassment which covers a
wider compass. Similarly, sexual assault also covers a wider compass. And also it is gender
neutral. This is the provision we have tried to incorporate.”
3.2.15 On the issue of making the offence gender neutral, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home
Affairs submitted as under:-
“... when an assault takes place between two individuals, be it man against woman, or, man
against man, or, boy against boy, or, woman against woman, when it is a sexual assault
with the intention either to rape or bodily harm which covers under the definition of rape,
etc., to an equal kind of thing. There is a sexual assault on an individual. So, that is why
it is gender neutral. It doesn’t exclude man against woman. It includes man against woman
mostly. Most of the rape cases which come to us are men against women. But that doesn’t
mean that reverse should not be taken care of, or, boy against boy should not be taken care
of.”
3.2.16  The Legislative Secretary, thereafter, pointed out that in regard to Section 370, the existing
provision under IPC relates to buying or disposing of any person as a slave which is a very, very

15
restricted provision, which exist since 1860. The proposal now is substitution of new Section 370
and Section 370A to deal with trafficking of persons as such and not only the slavery.
3.2.17 The Legislative Secretary further pointed out that the recommendation of the Verma
Committee has been accepted and incorporated in the Ordinance but the same was not part of the
Bill. He clarified that the provision is basically covering human trafficking which is gender neutral.
3.2.18 The Chairman of the Committee viewed that the Government is  unnecessarily complicating
the issue. The basic idea is to stop the flesh trade. If anybody exploits somebody and then uses
them for flesh trade, it should be punishable.
3.2.19 A Member of the Committee opined that slave is the original concept. The original Section
370 dealt with only slavery and the amendment now is comprehensive, which includes slavery,
other forms of sexual exploitation.
3.2.20 The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs added that India is a signatory to the U.N.
Convention on Organised Crime, which is actually universal definition of ‘human trafficking’. This
is actually a supplementary protocol to the UN Convention on Trafficking and Organised Crime.
This definition is used world over and it has been just brought in here.
3.2.21 The Legislative Secretary stated that the new offence being created under Section 370A is
neither in the existing law nor in the pending Bill before the Parliament. This Section relates to
employing of a trafficked person.
3.2.22 He added that the said provision under Section 370A  is on the recommendation of the Verma
Committee, which has been accepted by the Government and incorporated in the Ordinance.
3.2.23 The Chairman of the Committee, expressing his reservation on the provision under Section
370A, felt that it might be misused in the rural areas. Government should understand the
consequences of what is being done. He cited agricultural sector, in rural areas, where farmers go
and pay amount to somebody, hire some 10 or 30 people and if somebody files a complaint, the
said provision would automatically cover the farmer. The Chairman felt that the Government should
reconsider its decision to propose such amendment and definition of ‘trafficking’ should confine
to ‘sexual exploitation’.
3.2.24 Another Member of the Committee subscribing to the view opined as under:–
“...fact that there are many agencies which employ maids and workers. These kinds of
sexual offences are camouflaged. But that doesn’t mean that to kill a rat we have to burn
the Fort. That is something which we will have to go through because this can be tried
separately in the labour laws. This can be tried separately in various other laws, not
necessary that we have to try it under IPC or the Evidence Act which is a separate criminal
law which deals with criminal offences.”
3.2.25 Responding to this, the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, stated as under:–
“Trafficking, as such, is a large scale phenomenon happening in the country, which is
completely masked. There are two dimensions to it. It happens in all types of forms, in all
forms of deception and deceiving. Now, within this, what, in fact, found was that it is
completely mutated itself in different forms. Today, it may be of some nature. Tomorrow,
it may be domestic servants. Some other day, it could be something else. It could be bride.
For example, now we are seeing in Haryana the brides are being imported at a particular
cost, and so on and so forth. How it goes is something which we do not know. Probably,
trafficking is the generic word, which we need to use, and under that, we have to definitely
attract any possible interaction in future. That is the reason we thought of this.”

16
3.2.26 One Member was of the view that the ambiguity in this clause could entail many of the
people who are brought as domestic helpers across the country who are paid well. This provision
could also be used against those people who get employed, which is a different debate all together.
He felt that this is possibly a larger ambit going beyond the concept of trafficking for the purpose
of prostitution. He also felt that in making the amendment in the original provision in the IPC
relating to slavery more comprehensive and covering sexual exploitation, the Government have
brought in the concept of bonded labour also, which may be a law by itself. It can be a law for
bonded labour. But that deserves a specific law by itself. He was of the further opinion that while
the Committee is examining the issue in terms of sexual exploitation of women particularly because
of rape etc., the comprehensive amendment that Government has made under Section 370 or
Section 370A, be confined to sexual exploitation.
3.2.27 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, stated that the  Government have taken
note of the comments the Committee. The Legislative Secretary endorsing to the view of the
Ministry of Home Affairs also took note of the concerns expressed by the Committee on this issue
and maintained that the Government would reexamine the issue and the observation and
recommendation of the Committee would be looked into from drafting angle and whatever changes
are needed Government would look into it.
3.2.28 The Committee then took up Section 375 for examination. The Legislative Secretary
informed that Government is adding Sections 375, 376, 376A. Existing Sections are being replaced
because they deal with the offence of rape which was not considered to be gender neutral. Now,
instead of ‘rape’, the definition of ‘sexual assault’ is given in Section 375 and other Sections. The
Verma Committee had, in fact, recommended that the definition of ‘rape’ should be retained. But
as the scheme of the Act originally introduced in the Bill was that the offence of sexual assault
should be gender neutral, therefore, the recommendation of the Verma Committee has not been
accepted by the Government to that extent that the offence of rape should be retained. Instead of
the term ‘rape’, the term ‘sexual assault’ has been defined, which include the offence of rape. The
definition has been made much wider.
3.2.29 Section 376 deals with punishment for sexual assault. Under existing provision in IPC, there
was punishment for rape but it is now punishment for sexual assault. The Legislative Secretary
pointed out that in the Verma Committee recommendation there is no suggestion for death penalty.
It is an addition made by the Government at two places where either it leads to the death or it
leads the victim to a vegetative stage or for repeat offence.
3.2.30 Section 376A deals with sexual assault by husband upon his wife during separation, which
is again based on the provision of the Bill. The Verma Committee has not made any
recommendation on this issue.
3.2.31 Clarifying the position relating to sexual assault during separation, the Legislative Secretary
pointed out that this is a stage when divorce has not been granted, but they are living separately
under judicial separation.
3.2.32 Switching over to Section 376B, intercourse by public servant with a woman in his
custody, the Legislative Secretary pointed out that there is enhancement of punishment. The
existing punishment is for five years. Now it is being enhanced to ten years. The Chairman of the
Committee viewed that if a public servant indulges in a custodial rape, then, there has to be a
severe punishment. Another Member, subscribing to the view of the Chairman, felt that when a
woman is in custody, he is much more responsible for her well-being. If he indulges in raping that
woman, then the punishment of ten years is not enough and the punishment should be enhanced
to life imprisonment in such cases or death penalty.

17
3.2.33 The Chairman of the Committee added that use of the term intercourse in Section 376B is
also wrong and the same should be read as “Rape by public servant against the woman in his
custody” because when it is “intercourse”, it has to be with consent. Responding to the query, the
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs clarified that the Verma Committee have also used
the word “intercourse”. The punishment is less than five years but it may exceed to ten years.
However, the same has been enhanced in the Ordinance.
3.2.34 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs pointed out that the person in position
of authority, may be a public servant or a superintendent or a manager of a jail, remand home or
other place of custody or under any law, for the time being, in force, or a women’s or children’s
institution or the management of a hospital or the staff of a hospital. If they take advantage of
the position in which they are placed in a superior position and seduce or induce a person and have
sexual intercourse, then it is punishable. The Legislative Secretary, clarifying the issue, stated that
the doubt, which is being expressed, may be resolved while paying attention to the explanation
given just to Section 376B, which says ‘sexual intercourse shall mean any of the act mentioned
in sub-clauses (a) to (d) of Section 375’.
3.2.35 Another Member, referring to Section 376 C, wanted to know about the safety of a woman
working in private places like corporate sector, construction work and farming sector because it
could happen there also. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, replied that the provision
of “Being in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship” under the Section, covers all this
in private sector also.
3.2.36 Another Member pointed out that Section 376B includes the situation in hospitals. One
member drew attention to the two-finger test by a doctor of a rape victim and felt that, as far
as gynecological diagnosis is concerned, with the advent of the Transience Sonography, it is much
superior to the two-finger test. The Member suggested that the provision for doing away with the
two-finger test has to be included in the Bill.
3.2.37 The Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the issue has been referred
to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
3.2.38 The Committee took up Section 376D, which specifically deals with sexual assault by gang.
The Legislative Secretary informed that the Verma Committee used the word gang rape. Instead of
‘rape’, the Government is using the words ‘sexual assault’ in the Bill, and, therefore, it is sexual
assault by gang. The punishment prescribed here is not less than 20 years, but which may extend
to life and, in addition, compensation also.
3.2.39 The Legislative Secretary apprised the Committee that Section 376E deals with punishment
for repeat offenders. He pointed out that the Verma Committee did not say about death sentence
but Government has added it in the Bill. The Chairman sought to know the purpose of giving life
imprisonment for repeat offence instead of death penalty. The Legislative Secretary replied that
there are two places where death penalty has been added. One is, repeat of offences, and the other
is, where the victim goes into vegetative state or it leads to the death of the victim.
3.2.40 The Legislative Secretary pointed out that Section 509 of IPC, deals with insult of modesty
of a woman. Here again, basically the punishment is being increased from one year under the
existing provision to a term, which may extend to three years and also with fine.
3.2.41 The Chairman of the Committee wanted to know the safeguards against misuse of this
Section. The Legislative Secretary clarified that when a group of students in a college itself
or while travelling in a bus or travelling in a train or walking in a park, pass certain remarks
against a woman, those will be covered under Section 509. Another Member wanted to know
as to when the Justice Verma Committee has recommended this Section for being repealed,

18
then why the Government is retaining it. The Additional Secretary, responding to the query,
clarified as under:–
“basically we retained because of the increasing eve-easing and other things that are taking
place in a college. It should be a deterrent against eve-teasing because today eve teasing
can take place in many ways by gesture, by sound, by showing pornography, by attracting
into that. We agree that the Justice Verma Committee did not give it. They said that it could
be repealed. We retained it because the provision was already there.”
3.2.42 The Chairman of the Committee sought to know whether Section 509 has been applied
against anybody at any time and sought to be apprised of the experience of the Delhi Police. The
representatives of Delhi Police submitted before the Committee as under:–
“This is the Section we use for eve teasing principally. Previously it was not a cognizable
offence. Now, we made it a cognizable offence. Previously you would have to go through
a lot of difficulty in trying to convert a non-cognizable offence into a case triable by a
Magistrate also. This is a summary procedure which the court has to take and permission
has to be sought from the Magistrate. In fact in the last DGs’ conference which we had
on 4th January, they said that if you want to have zero tolerance society with respect to
crime against women; and this is the starting point of all crimes against women. They said
that you make this cognizable, come what may.”
3.2.43 The Chairman of the Committee suggested that Government should bring ragging also under
Section 509 of IPC since most inhuman things are done, including sexual assault, sexual
intercourse, and other things. Boys are asked to remove their clothes and then walk naked.
3.3 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
3.3.1 The Committee then took up consideration of the amendments of Sections relating to
Criminal Procedure Code. The Legislative Secretary pointed out that existing Section 54A of Cr.PC
is being modified. The modified form, as provided in the Ordinance and as recommended by the
Verma Committee, is a procedural aspect making it more convenient for identification of the person.
3.3.2 The Chairman of the Committee suggested that the word “may” should be substituted by
the word “shall”. Responding to that, the Legislative Secretary pointed out that the Government has
intentionally put the word “may” because, at many of the places, the facility of the video graphing
may not be available. The Chairman of the Committee stated that, nowadays, in every taluk, in
every village, marriages, birthdays, etc., are videographed. Therefore, there should not be any
problem in making videograph mandatory.
3.3.3 The Committee, thereafter, took up the proposed amendments in the Code of Criminal
Procedure. In Section 154 Cr.P.C., in respect of the new offences, which have been created, with
regard to procedure one proviso has been added, “provided that the information is given by a
woman…” This is with regard to registering the FIR. The Legislative Secretary stated that the
Verma Committee has also made a similar recommendation. The Chairman of the Committee pointed
out that the words “as far as possible” need to be deleted to ensure that the recording of the
statement must be made alternatively by a woman Government officer in the absence of a woman
police officer.
3.3.4 The Committee then took up section 160 Cr.P.C. The existing provision is also captured
here. The Legislative Secretary stated that the Government is giving certain protection to the
physically disabled person or persons who are below the age of 18 years or above the age of 65
years or women. The proviso specifically provides “that no male person under the age of 18 years
or above the age of 65 years, a woman or a physically or a mentally disabled person shall be

19
required to attend at any place other than the place in which such male person or woman resides”.
This is the protection being given to them so that they are not summoned unnecessarily.
3.3.5 The Committee took up Section 161 of the Cr.P.C., which deals with examination of the
witnesses by the police officer. The Legislative Secretary pointed out that the Verma Committee
makes no recommendation. But, in the Bill, which is pending before the Parliament, certain
amendments were made, adding the new sections, which are being created as new offences, under
the existing Bill. Accordingly, a proviso is being added to Section 161 where assistance of a woman
police officer will be available. The Chairman of the Committee suggested that the words “as far
as possible” should be deleted and in the absence of woman police officer, other woman
Government officer should be deputed.
3.3.6 The Committee then took up section 164 of Cr.P.C., which relates to recording of the
confessions and the statements. The Legislative Secretary pointed out that the said provision is a
new section being added with regard to the offences specifically being created under this
Ordinance. The Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such
offence has been committed in the manner prescribed in sub-Section (5) as soon as the
commission of the offence is brought to the notice of the police. The Legislative Secretary added
that this is a safeguard, as being built-in, that if a person is disabled, then the assistance of an
interpreter or a special educator is to be provided when the statement is recorded and the same
shall be videographed.
3.3.7 The Legislative Secretary informed the Committee that Section 198B of the Cr.P.C. has been
included in the Ordinance on the basis of the recommendation of the Verma Committee. He added
that Section 198B is relatable to Section 376B, which deals with sexual assault by husband upon
his wife during separation. It is said that, in such cases, cognizance shall be taken only if the wife
is making a complaint and not otherwise. Any third person making a complaint cannot be taken
cognizance.
3.3.8 The Committee took up Section 273, which is with regard to evidence to be taken in
presence of the accused. An exception is being carved out that his statement should not be
recorded in the presence of the accused person.
3.3.9 The Legislative Secretary pointed out that Section 327 of the Cr.P.C. is a proviso being
added for in camera proceedings with regard to the offences which are being created. Otherwise
Section 327 provides that the proceedings have to be in open court. Here, it shall be in camera.
The Chairman of the Committee viewed that it must not be left to the discretion of the Magistrate,
rather be made mandatory.
3.3.10  The Legislative Secretary further pointed out that there are certain amendments made in the
Schedule to the Cr.P.C. with reference to the new offences, which have been created afresh. The
Government has categorized those offences as cognizable or non-cognizable or bailable or non-bailable
with reference to the period of sentence prescribed in each of the offences. Generally where the
sentence is less than three years the offence is bailable and non-cognizable. He added that the
procedure laid is the general practice and there is no bar even to make the offence cognizable where
the punishment is less than three years. But normal principle is followed in this Schedule.
3.4 Indian Evidence Act, 1872
3.4.1 There are certain related amendments in the Indian Evidence Act. Section 53A of the Indian
Evidence Act is a new addition, which was there in the Bill and the Ordinance also. It was stated
that this exception has become necessary because, in many cases, normally, on behalf of the
accused, they say this is the character of the victim. That is why, this exception has been made.

20
3.4.2 The Committee took up Section 114A of Indian Evidence Act, which deals with certain
presumptions. The Legislative Secretary pointed out that the offences, which have been created
under Section 376(2) where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved, and the question is
whether it was without the consent of the other person alleged to have been sexually assaulted,
and such other person’s state in that person’s evidence before the court that such person did not
consent. The court shall presume that such person did not consent, meaning thereby the burden
of proof is being shifted on to the accused person.
3.4.3 The Committee took up the examination of Section 119 of Indian Evidence Act which is
being amended. At present, it deals with only the dumb witnesses. Its scope is being widened. If
the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the provision provides as to how his evidence is
to be recorded and statement is to be videographed. That provision again is being made here. The
Chairman wanted to know the recommendations of the Verma Committee. The Legislative Secretary
read out the recommendation of the Verma Committee, which reads as under:–
“Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take the
assistance of a special educator or interpreter in recording the statement, and such statement
shall be video graphed.”
3.4.4 The Chairman of the Committee pointed out that the word ‘writing’ has not been included.
Communicate verbally means only through the mouth. If he communicates through writing that
should also be permissible.
3.4.5 The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, pointed out that the whole process of
examination and cross-examination relies entirely on the oral examination, and there is no system
of taking affidavits at all.
3.4.6 The Legislative Secretary then pointed out that in  Section 146 of the Evidence Act, which
relates to questions lawful in cross-examination, there is a proviso in the existing provision, which
stipulates “Provided that in a prosecution for a rape, for attempt to rape, it shall not be permissible
to put questions in the cross-examination as to her general immoral character”. Now, this is being
substituted by a new proviso.
3.4.7 A Member of the Committee desired to know, in the context of the proposed amendment
in the Ordinance, the legal stand on prostitution and whether prostitution is legal or illegal in India.
The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the law relating to sex workers is
covered under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1986. It was stated that prostitution is not
illegal. However, India has not outlawed prostitution but outlawed solicitation. India has outlawed
running a brothel and keeping the earnings of running a brothel with some one.

21
CHAPTER-IV
SUGGESTIONS CONTAINED IN MEMORANDA
4.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 4 th January, 2013 decided to issue a Press Release
soliciting views of the individuals/organizations, women organizations on various provisions of the
Bill. The Committee also decided to obtain the views of the State Governments/UT Administrations
on the Bill. In response to the Press Release issued, the Committee received 492 memoranda out
of which 402 memoranda signed by individuals were similar in content. The Committee considered
90 relevant memoranda received which were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish
comments thereon. The comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on these memoranda and the
suggestions of States/UTs Government and Members of the Committee were considered during the
course of examination of the Bill. Views/suggestions from five State/UT Governments and four
MPs who are Members of the Committee, were also received by the Committee which were also
sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs for their comments.
4.1.1 The summary of the suggestions as received from the public and states/UTs Government
are enumerated below:–
• Rape and other sex related offences should have a separate law and not be a part of
IPC.
• Include attack by any liquid apart acid that can have a debilitating affect on the victim.
• The amendment of point no. 5(3)(k) in Chapter II of the ‘Juvenile Justice Act, 2000’
by reducing the age accepted for “juvenile” or “child” from a person who has not
completed eighteen years of age to a person who has not completed fourteen years of
age. Other memoranda contained suggestions for reduction of age in male juvenile from
18 to 15-16 years and in another memoranda suggestion for age limit for juvenile was
12 years of age.
• Make judiciary accountable for delay.
• Amend laws to prevent misinterpretation by unscrupulous lawyers to delay court
proceedings.
• Enhancement of infrastructure for courts.
• Create complaint boxes in each district and town, villages and conduct awareness
programme.
• Install GPS system in police vehicles and Surveillance Cameras at strategic locations to
be monitored by the senior Committee Members from public and Government.
• Amendments in Section 375 of IPC, Section 16 of Juvenile Justice Act, Sections 53(A),
160, 164, 273, 302 of CrP.C so as to establish a procedure for providing effective
justice to the victim of a heinous crime as well as a deterrent so that commission of
such offence be reduced.
• Reforms in education system imparting cultural values and effective measures to be
enforced to prohibit film industry from showing item songs parallel to pornography and
denigrating women folks.
21

22
• Strict criminal action against media which showcases women in poor light.
• Suitable provisions may be inserted into the bill for regulating the media.
• Provision to issue automatic gag order to the media to prevent conducting a media trial
and needlessly tarnishing a person’s reputation in a subjudice case.
• Provision for Punishment of hang to death even for simple rape, chemical castration to
men.
• Victims privacy and dignity must be maintained throughout the medical examination and
must not be subjected to archaic and degrading method of examination.
• Waiver of medical test for filing rape cases;
• Live-in relation should not be rape.
• Only any physical relation under threat or force should be termed as rape or sexual
assault.
• Investigation should be time bound and also be entrusted to senior police officials.
• Time limit for investigation to maximum 60 days and trail should be completed within
1 year.
• Compulsory women cells within all police stations throughout India.
• Strict action for dereliction of duty against police officers who refuse to file Rape/
Sexual violence complaints.
• Recruitment of women force with 48% quota on SC/OBC.
• Police force must act free from the influence of local politicians having feudal ideology.
• Amendment in Section 34(A) and 34(B) of Indian Penal Code for making provision for
punishment for life imprisonment to criminals who disturb the life of others by causing
disturbance in social life and governmental spheres.
• District Police/Inspector General of Police must send report of incident to Law Ministry
and Home Ministry.
• Prohibition on physical exposure by women in visual and printing advertisements for
commercial purpose,
• Introduction and practice of Islamic Law in IPC to stop/minimize crimes such as rape,
kidnapping, murder, robbery, etc.
• There should be mandatory safeguards to prevent the misuse/abuse of the proposed law.
• Compensation to falsely accused in sexual assault cases.
• Judicial reforms should be undertaken with priority.
• The age limit for juveniles should be 12 years.
• The phrase ‘outraging the modesty of a woman’ must be removed and replaced with
‘violation of dignity and/or bodily integrity’.
• Investigation of sexual assault cases should be under the guidance of a team including
Gynecologist, Sexologist, Neurologist, IPS Officer and Sociologist and all should be
female.

23
• Section 357A of Cr PC should also be amended to ensure that in all acid attack cases,
the woman, have the right to claim ad-interim  compensation, separate from any
compensation the victim may receive under any other legal provision.
• Amendment to section 6 of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 so that for
offences of rape and sexual assault committed by the armed forces there shall be no
need for prior sanction to initiate criminal proceedings and for bringing the case within
the purview of the criminal court.
• Deletion of requirement of prior sanction for prosecution of a member of the Armed
Force for Central Armed Police Forces under Section 197 (2) (3) and (2A) Cr.P.C and
similar provisions under special laws such as AFSPA for all cases of rape or any other
form of sexual violence.
• Sexual assault by security forces, Sexual assault at the instigation of or with the consent
or acquiescence of a public official, Sexual assault at the time of caste, ethnic or
communal violence, sexual assault against physically disabled and mentally unwell
women, Public stripping and parading of women must be included as aggravated form
of sexual assault.
• If law is harsher against rape, parameter of establishing proof should also be stricter.
• There should be protection to sr. citizens and whistle blowers.
• Drugging the victim and raping should be included. In Section 375, the definition of
“without her consent” be clarified to include cases of “passive submission.”
• ‘Informed consent’ as per Section 164 of Cr.P.C be operationalised. Informed consent
for examination, evidence collection, treatment and informing the police be specifically
be taken.
• The right to health care including psycho-social support must be included as part of the
CrPC as this is more than often violated. CrPC must include the key elements of the
details regarding sexual assault to be noted by the doctor such as: type of assault –
whether and what kind of penetration occurred. If there was non-penetrative assault in
terms of fondling, kissing, sucking, licking of body parts, forced masturbation, place,
time lapse between the incident and reporting to doctor, activities undertaken since the
assault, use of threats/weapons/intoxication.
• A copy of the medical report must be handed over to the survivor free of charge.
• The Bill increases the age of consent for sexual intercourse outside of marriage to 18
years. The Bill amends the exception to increase the age of the wife for non-criminal
sexual intercourse and other sexual activities within marriage to 16 years from 15 years.
This is at variance with the age of consent under the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012 (PCSO Act). Under the PCSO act, the age of consent for sexual
acts is 18 years. It does not create an exception in favour of sexual acts between a
husband and a wife, when the wife is over 16 years of age.
• The doctrine of command/superior responsibility be incorporated in the law against
sexual assault of persons.
• A national protocol be developed for the dignified treatment and medical examination of
survivors of sexual assault, particularly prohibiting the finger test.
• Making the offence of rape and sexual assault gender neutral only in so far as the
victim is concerned, but making the perpetrator male.

24
• An explanation ‘any of the act committed against a sex workers fall within the offence
of sexual assault for the purpose of the Section 375 of IPC must be added as a
explanation.
• Complaint of sexual assault on sex workers should be registered.
• Pri-trial familarisation visit to court by the victim must be undertaken and the date and
time for recording the evidence of the women should be fixed in advance and be
communicated at least two week prior to the date so fixed.
• Rape and sexual assault committed on Dalit women as caste crime/violence be
recognized as a category of aggravated sexual assault under law.
• Sections 114A of Indian Evidence Act (IEA) should be completely dispensed away with
as it is being misused heavily to convert consensual sex into rape cases.
• Courts should be allowed some discretion in trying juveniles as adults, under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, after considering the circumstances relating to heinous crimes
like rape, acid attack, homicide etc.
• If marital rape is included in the proposed Bill it should be reflected in section 376A of
the Bill, which should not be restricted to the status of separation and the punishment
should not be an imprisonment of 2-7 years, but should comply with the punishment
suggested under section 376 respecting clause 376 (2)(e).

25
CHAPTER-V
FINAL DELIBERATIONS AND CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE
CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
5.1 Final Deliberations
5.1.1 The Committee, in its meeting held on 21 February, 2013, held the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill. The Committee decided to consider the Bill clause-by-clause in the light
of the provisions of the Ordinance promulgated by the Government. Some of the important
decisions are dealt hereunder before giving the recommendations clause-wise.
5.2 Section 100 of IPC
5.2.1 The Committee took up the Section 100 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), which is provided
in the Ordinance and not there in the Bill. The Home Secretary informed the Committee that they
had discussed with the Ministry of law and came with a slightly better formulation, which reads
as under:
“After sixthly, the following shall be inserted:
An act of throwing or administering acid, which may reasonably call apprehension that
grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such act.”
The Committee decided to go ahead with the new formulation of the Ministry.
5.3 Section 166 of IPC
5.3.1 The Committee took up Sect ion 166 A of the IPC. The Chairman informed the Committee
that the Committee may accept the Section 166A as provided in the Ordinance. However, he
suggested that the punishment may be made rigorous imprisonment. The Home Secretary agreed
to the proposition and assured to change it accordingly. Then, some Members expressed doubt as
to whether this imprisonment would be cognizable and non-bailable. They strongly felt that it
should be made cognizable and non-bailable. The Home Secretary and the Law Secretary stated that
it can be made cognizable and non-bailable. The Committee felt that the Ministry may consider
this.
5.4 Section 326B of IPC
5.4.1 In Section 326B, some Members suggested that instead of the words ‘attempts to
administer’, there should be the words ‘administers or attempts to administer’. The Home
Secretary agreed with the view of the Members.
5.5 Section 354B of IPC
5.5.1 The Chairman informed the Members that Section 354 B provides for punishment of
imprisonment which is not less than three years and that may be extended to seven years.
However, some Members felt that this punishment is insufficient and should be increased. They
also suggested that it could be made life imprisonment. The Committee, however, decided to
25

26
increase it to five years and ten years. Some Members suggested that it should be perpetrator or
aggrieved or perpetrator or complainant instead of perpetrator or any other person. However, the
Committee felt that the victim has to be a woman and the perpetrator can be anybody. By simply
saying perpetrator or complainant, no justice would be done to women.
5.5.2 Some Members felt that in certain occasions there may be crowd which cheers and applaud
the disrobing of a woman publicly, and in such cases, entire crowd should be held responsible.
The Committee, however, felt that only those who cooperate can be held. But holding the entire
crowd watching is stretching too far.
5.6 Section 354C of IPC
5.6.1 While discussing about Section 354C, which provides for voyeurism, some Members felt
that the punishment of one year for the first offence is not sufficient; it should be increased. The
Committee, however, felt that it is already one year to three years and three to seven years for
second offence. The punishment cannot be increased more than one year at one go for the first
offence. Some Members again raised the issue of making accused or perpetrator gender specific.
The Committee, however, decided to go with the present proposition as provided in the Bill and
Ordinance.
5.7 Section 354D of IPC
5.7.1 While discussing about Section 354D, some Members expressed doubts regarding the words
‘watches’ or ‘spies’ on a person and their implication. It was felt that though the word ‘spies’ on
a person can be understood but the word ‘watches’ may have wider ramification. The Home
Secretary stated that ‘watches’ or ‘spies’ is directly on the person who is being stalked; it is not
the internet or any other electronic communication. He also stated that casual watching by accident
would not attract this Section. Watching has to be designed and it must result in a fear of violence
or serious alarm or distress in mind of such person or interferes with the mental peace of the
person. The Committee, however, felt that Home Secretary should discuss with Law Ministry
and take a view in the matter.
5.8 Sections 370 and 370A of IPC
5.8.1 While discussing about trafficking in Section 370 and Section 370A, some Members
expressed the doubt about the use of the words ‘forced labour’ or ‘services’ in the present law.
It was felt that since the law specifically belonged to criminal assault, all provisions relating to
labour, forced labour, etc., should appropriately be dealt in different laws. The Home Secretary
agreed with the view of the Committee and stated that the words ‘forced labour’ or
‘services’ can be removed and that can be separately dealt under the relevant Act. However,
the Committee felt that while removing these provisions, the Government should not give
an impression that these provisions and the related crimes are not being taken care of.
They are also equally important and they should be appropriately dealt in the concerned law.
5.9 Section 375 of IPC
5.9.1  While discussing about Section 375, some Members felt that the word ‘rape’ should also
be kept within the scope of sexual assault. The Home Secretary clarified that there is a change
of terminology and the offence of ‘rape’ has been made wider. Some Members also suggested that
somewhere there should be some room for wife to take up the issue of marital rape. It was also
felt that no woman takes marriage so simple that she will just go and complain blindly. Consent
in marriage cannot be consent forever. However, several Members felt that the marital rape has the

27
potential of destroying the institution of marriage. The Committee felt that if a woman is aggrieved
by the acts of her husband, there are other means of approaching the court. In India, for ages,
the family system has evolved and it is moving forward. Family is able to resolve the problems
and there is also a provision under the law for cruelty against women. It was, therefore, felt that
if the marital rape is brought under the law, the entire family system will be under great stress
and the Committee may perhaps be doing more injustice. Some Members also suggested that the
age mentioned in the exception to the Section may be raised to 18 years from 16 years. The
exception provides that sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under 16 years of age, is not sexual assault. The Home Secretary, responding to this
suggestion, stated that by doing so by one stroke, the marriages in thousands in different States
would be outlawed. One Member again suggested that for the words ‘with or without the other
person’s consent, the words ‘with or without the complainant’s consent’ may be used. The
Committee, however, felt that by using complainant, a proper message will not go and existing
formulation may continue.
5.10 Section 376 of IPC
5.10.1 While discussing Section 376, the Committee felt that in sub-Section (1) of Section 376,
the liability of the accused to pay compensation to the victim, which shall be adequate to meet at
least medical expenses incurred by the victim should also be included. The Committee, accordingly,
decided to add this in sub-Section (1) of Section 376. Some Members also mentioned that the State
needs to take care of the medical expenditure, treatment, etc. of the victim. Responding to this,
the Home Secretary mentioned that there is a scheme for providing this. The Committee, however,
felt that first the accused should be asked to pay victim’s medical expenses by way of fine. In
case, the accused is not in a position to pay if he is a labourer, or if he is a poor person, then
the State may step in to take care of the medical expenses and the treatment of the woman, who
is a victim. The Home Secretary was, accordingly, directed to do needful in the matter.
5.10.2 In Sub-Section 2 of Section 376, the Chairman brought to the notice of the Home Secretary
that in item (j) of sub-Section 2 of Section 376, the word ‘political’ has been deleted in the
Ordinance where it is there in the Bill. The Committee decided to include the word ‘political’. One
Member felt that there should be a clause providing for punishment when a person has a medical
condition that can be transmitted through sexual intercourse and that person knowingly commits
such intercourse without use of protection and that act should also be brought under aggravated
crime. The Home Secretary, however, stated that this does not come under the category of ‘sexual
assault’; it has to be differentiated. He stated that Section 270 of the IPC provides for punishment
for this though it is slightly less. The Committee felt that the punishment should be increased and
sought to know whether that can be amended suitably. The Home Secretary agreed to the
suggestion of the Committee.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that punishment
under Section 270 may be increased suitably.
5.11 Section 376A of IPC
5.11.1 While discussing Section 376 A, some Members felt that the Government will have to take
a decision regarding death penalty. It was stated that several countries have abolished the death
penalty whereas India is continuing with it. However, the majority of the Members felt that the
issue of abolishing death penalty is totally a different matter and needs to be discussed and decided
separately. Since, as on date, death penalty exists in the law, the Committee cannot recommend for
abolishing death penalty. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the death penalty being
proposed in Section 376A is only in the extreme case where the victim has died or goes in a
vegetative state and in Section 376E in the case of a repeat offender. The Committee was of the
view that extreme penalty of death will be given only in case of death or the victim being in

28
vegetative state for the rest of his or her life. Normally, the death sentence is not given for just rape.
Accordingly, majority of the Members agreed to the view of accepting present provision for death.
5.12 Section 509 of IPC
5.12.1 The Committee then discussed about Section 509. The Bill originally provides for a fine of
Rs.1,000/- besides simple imprisonment for a term up to three years but the Ordinance does not
contain the amount of fine. The Committee, however, decided that the amount should be included
in the provision and it should be increased to Rs.2,000/-.
5.13 Section 54A of Cr.PC
5.13.1 The Committee then took up Section 54A of the Cr.PC. This provision is in the Ordinance
whereas the Bill does not contain this. The Section, originally, as in the Ordinance, provides that
if a person identifying the person, arrested, is mentally or physically disabled, the identification
process may be videographed. The Committee felt that the word ‘may’ should be changed to ‘shall’
and decided to make recommendation accordingly.
5.14 Section 154 of Cr.PC
5.14.1 Some Members felt that the use of words ‘as far as possible’ should not be there because
whenever a statement is taken from a woman, a woman officer should always be there. The
Committee, accordingly, decided to delete the words ‘as far as possible’. The Committee also felt
that whenever a woman police officer is not available, any woman Government officer could be
made available to record the statement. The Committee decided to make an appropriate amendment
in the Section. Similarly, in Clause (b) of the Second Proviso, the words ‘may be recorded’ may
be changed to ‘shall be recorded’. The Committee, accordingly, decided to make an appropriate
amendment in the Bill.
5.14.2 The Committee makes specific recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs on each
clause of the Bill.
5.15 Clause-by-Clause consideration
5.15.1 Clause 1(A) (Section 100 IPC) (Insertion of new Clause in the Bill)
5.15.1.1 The Committee notes that Ordinance contains an amendment to Section 100 of IPC.
However, such an amendment is not there in the Bill, which is under consideration of the
Committee. The Home Secretary, during the course of discussion, stated that they have got better
formulation after consulting the Law Ministry. Now they want to insert a new description after
sixthly. The Committee agrees with the view point of the Home Secretary. Accordingly, the
following Clause may be inserted in the Bill before Clause 2:-
“Clause 1 (A) In the Indian Penal Code (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Penal
Code), in Section 100, after the clause sixthly, the following shall be inserted:
Seventhly- An act of throwing or administering acid which may reasonably cause
apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such act.”
The Clause 1(A) is inserted.
5.15.2 Clause 2 (Section 166A)
5.15.2.1 This clause seeks to insert a new section 166A in the Indian Penal Code regarding public
servant disobeying direction under law.

29
5.15.2.2 The Committee took note that a similar provision is there in the Ordinance with some
additional amendment which needs to be added in the Bill. The Committee also felt that the
provision of simple imprisonment is not sufficient in view of the gravity of the crimes committed
under Sections 354, 354A, 354B, 354C, sub-Section (2) of Section 354D, Sections 376, 376A,
376B, 376C, 376D and 376E. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word “rigorous”
may be inserted after the words “shall be punished with” in the Section. Accordingly, the text of
Section 166A of the Bill may be substituted by the following:-
“166A. Whoever, being a public servant,––
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him from requiring the
attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an offence
or any other matter, or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction of the law
regulating the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation, or
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section (1) of section 154 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and in particular in relation to cognizable offence
punishable under Section 354, Section 354A, Section 354B, Section 354C, sub-Section (2)
of Section 354D, Section 376, Section 376A, Section 376B, Section 376C, Section 376D
or Section 376E,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term, which may extend to one year
or with fine or with both.
5.15.2.3 The Committee also felt that the punishment for the offence of failure to record any
information in relation to Sections mentioned above, should be made cognizable and non-
bailable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may consider this.
Subject to the above observation, the Clause is adopted, as amended .
5.15.3 Clause 3 (Sections 326A and 326B)
5.15.3.1 This clause seeks to insert new Sections 326 A and 326B to make acid attack or attempt
to throw acid specific offense. The Committee took note of the amendments made in these
Sections 326A and 326B in the ordinance which widened the nature of the crime and also added
two explanations in Section 326B. The Committee felt that the changes made in the Ordinance are
required to be brought in the Bill. The Committee, accordingly, makes the following
recommendations.
(i) Section 326A, the following amendments may be made:
Add the word “by” before the word “administering”.
Add the words “or by using any other means” before the words “with the intention
of’”.
Substitute the words “which may extend to imprisonment” for the words “which
may be”.
(ii) Section 326B:
Add the word “administers” before the words “attempts to administer”.
Add the words “or attempts to use any other means” before the words “with the
intention of”’.

30
Read the word “Punishable” as “Punished”
Read the “Explanation” as “Explanation 1”.
In Explanation 1, Substitute “326B” by “this Section”.
After Explanation 1, add the following explanations:-
Explanation 2.–– “Permanent or partial damage” includes deformity, or maiming,
or burning, or disfiguring, or disabling any part or parts of the body of a person.
Explanation 3.–– For the purposes of Section 326A and this Section, permanent or
partial damage or deformity shall not be required to be irreversible.”
5.15.3.2 The Committee takes note of the fact that highly concentrated acid are sold freely
in open market which are used by the perpetrators in committing the offence of acid attack.
The Committee feels that the sale of concentrated acid should be regulated and should be
sold to the people only on the production of a certificate issued by a competent authority
so as to ensure that it is sold to the genuine end-users.
Subject to the above observation, the Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.15.4 Clause 4 (Section 354 IPC)
5.15.4.1 This clause seeks to amend section 354 to enhance the punishment for assault or criminal
force to women with intent to outrage her modesty.
5.15.4.2 The Committee feels that the minimum fine of one thousand rupees needs to be
increased to five thousand rupees. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word
‘one’ be substituted by the word ‘five’ before the word ‘thousand’.
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.15.5 Clause 4A (Sections, i.e., 354A, 354B, 354C and 354D of IPC) (Insertion of new
clauses)
5.15.5.1 The Committee noted that new Sections, i.e., 354A, 354B, 354C and 354D have been
added in the Ordinance to cover various aspects pertaining to sexual harassment and related matters
and felt that they need to be incorporated in the Bill as well.
5.15.5.2 Section 354A of the Ordinance provides for sexual harassment and punishment therefor.
Section 354B provides for assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe. In
this section, the punishment provided is not less than three years but which may extend to seven
years and with fine. The Committee feels that the punishment is not sufficient for the crime
and should be increased to five years, extendable to ten years with fine.
5.15.5.3 Section 354D deals with stalking. The Committee is of the view that all the crimes
mentioned in this Section and punishment provided therefor, also need to be incorporated in the Bill.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the following clause may be inserted after Clause 4:–
“4A. After Section 354 of the Indian Penal Code, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:––
‘354A. (1) The following acts or behaviour shall constitute the offence of sexual
harassment––
(i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures;
or

31
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) making sexually coloured remarks; or
(iv) for cibly showing pornography; or
(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature.
 (2) Any person who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-
Section (1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to five years,
or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any person who commits the offence specified in clause (iii) or clause (iv) or clause
(v) of sub-Section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description that
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
“354B. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the
intention of disrobing or comp elling her to be naked in any public place, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years
but which may extend to ten years and with fine”.
New Section, Section 354C: Voyeurism:
“354C. Whoever watches, or captures the image of, a woman engaging in a private act
in circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed
either by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine, and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term, which shall not be less than three years, but which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.–– For the purposes of this section, “private act” includes an act of
watching carried out in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected
to provide privacy, and where the victim’ s genitals, buttocks or breasts are exposed or
covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or the person is doing a
sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in public.
Explanation 2.–– Where the victim consents to the capture of images or any act, but not
to their dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated, such
dissemination shall be considered an offence under this section.
New Section, Section 354D: Stalking :
“354D. (1) Whoever follows a person and contacts, or attempts to contact such person to
foster personal interaction repeatedly, desp ite a clear indication of  disinterest by such
person, or whoever monitors the use by a person of the internet, email or any other form
of electronic communication, or watches or spies on a person in a manner that results in
a fear of violence or serious alarm or distress in the mind of such person, or interferes with
the mental peace of such person,  commits the offence of stalking:
Provided that the course of conduct will not amount to stalking if the person, who
pursued it, shows––
(i) that it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the person
accused of stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention and
detection of crime by the state; or

32
(ii) that it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or requirement
imposed by any person under any law; or
(iii) that in the particular circumstances the pursuit of the course of conduct was
reasonable.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
The Clause is inserted.
5.16 Clause 4B (Sections 370 and 370A of IPC) (Insertion of new Clause)
5.16.1 This new clause seeks to deal with trafficking of person and employing them for exploitation
by substituting Section 370 of IPC (buying or disposing of any person as a slave) with Sections 370
and 370A. These new Sections are provided in the Ordinance, which are not there in the Bill. The
Committee feels that these new Sections need to be brought in the Bill also. The Committee
accordingly recommends that the following new clause may be inserted before clause 5.
“4B. For Section 370 of the Penal Code, the following Sections shall be substituted,
namely:–
Section 370: Trafficking of a Person. (1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation,
(a) recruits, (b) transports, (c) harbours, (d) transfers, or (e) receives, a person or persons,
by–
First.— using threats, or
Secondly.–– using force, or any other form of coercion, or
Thirdly.–– by abduction, or
Fourthly.— by practising fraud, or deception, or
Fifthly.–– by abuse of power, or
Sixthly.–– by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or benefits, in
order to achieve the consent of any person having control over the person recruited,
transported, harboured, transferred or received,
commits the offence of trafficking.
Explanation 1.–– The expression “exploitation” shall include prostitution or other forms of
sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery,
servitude, or the forced removal of organs.
Explanation 2.–– The consent of the victim is immaterial in a determination of the offence
of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

33
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a minor, it shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one minor at the same time,
it shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
fourteen years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.
(6) When a public servant including police officer is involved in the trafficking of a minor
then such public servant shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’ s natural life.
(7) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of minors, on more than one
occasion, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’ s natural life.
Section 370A: Employing of a Trafficked person
“370A. (1) Whoever, despite knowing, or having reason to believe that a child has been
trafficked, employs such child in any form of labour, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
seven years, and with fine.
(2) Whoever, despite knowing or having reason to believe that an adult has been trafficked,
employs such adult for labour, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years, and shall also
be liable to fine.”
5.16.2 The Committee finds that labour-related issues have been included in both the Sections 370
and 370A of the Ordinance, which are equally important. The Committee feels that since this law
being exclusively for sexual assault and related issues, labour and other related issues should be
dealt in a separate law.
5.16.3 The Home Secretary during the discussion agreed with the view point of the Committee and
assured to look into the matter. The Committee desires that both Sections 370 and 370A may be
relooked in the light of the above observations.
5.16.4 The Committee also notes that forced prostitution and induced prostitution should be
brought under the ambit of the expression ‘exploitation’ and ‘sexual exploitation’. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may look into the matter and
bring both forced prostitution and induced prostitution under the ambit of ‘exploitation’ and
‘sexual exploitation’.
Subject to the above observation, the Clause 4B is inserted.
5.17 Clause 5 (Sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C 376D and 376E of IPC)
5.17.1 This clause seeks to substitute Sections 375, 376, 376A and 376B by Sections 375, 376,
376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian Penal Code replacing the offence “rape” by “sexual
assault” to make the offence gender neutral and also to widen the scope of the offence. The age
for consent has been raised from 16 years to 18 years in sexual assault. It was also proposed in
the Bill to raise age of wife from fifteen to sixteen years in the exception for sexual assault. The
Committee took note that the Ordinance made further amendments to the provisions as contained
in the Bill and also brought in some new Sections. The new Sections in Ordinance provide for

34
punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of the victim, punishment
for sexual assault by gang, and punishment of deaths for repeat offenders.
5.17.2 The Committee finds that the definition of ‘sexual assault’ has been revised drastically in
the Ordinance to widen the ambit of sexual assaults of various nature, which has more implications
than envisaged in Section 375 of the Bill. The Committee feels that the provisions contained in
Section 375 in the Ordinance need to be incorporated in the Bill. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the following text of Section 375 contained in the Ordinance may be substituted
for the text of Section 375 of the Bill.
“375. Sexual assault — A person is said to commit “sexual assault” if that person––
 (a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth urethra or anus of another
person or makes the person to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the
vagina, the urethra or anus of another person or makes the person to do so with him or
any other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of another person so as to cause penetration into the
vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such person or makes the person to do so
with him or any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the penis, vagina, anus, urethra of another person or makes such
person to do so with him or any other person;
(e) touches the vagina, penis, anus or breast of the person or makes the person touch the
vagina, penis, anus or breast of that person or any other person,
except where such penetration or touching is carried out for proper hygienic or medical
purposes under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:
First— Against the other person’ s will.
Secondly— Without the other person’ s consent.
Thirdly— With the other person’ s consent when such consent has been obtained by putting
such other person or any person in whom such other person is interested, in fear of death
or of hurt.
Fourthly— When the person assaulted is a female, with her consent, when the man knows
that he is not her husband and that her consent is given because she believes that he is
another man to whom she is or believes to be lawfully married.
Fifthly— With the consent of the other person when, at the time of giving such consent,
by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by that person
personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, the other person
is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that action to which such other
person gives consent.
Sixthly— With or without the other person’ s consent, when such other person is under
eighteen years of age.
Seventhly — When the person is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.–– Penetration to any extent is “penetration” for the purposes of this
section.

35
Explanation 2.–– For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include labia
majora.
Explanation 3.–– Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the person by
words, gestures or any form of non-verbal communication, communicates willingness to
participate in the specific act:
Provided that, a person who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall not
by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception.–– Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not
being under sixteen years of age, is not sexual assault.”
5.17.3 The Committee, however, notes that in the Exception provided after clause (e)
appears to be covering all the sub-sections whereas clauses (a) and (d) should not be
covered under the Exception. The Committee recommends that this may be looked into
while bringing the new Bill.
5.18.1 Section 376.  Section 376 provides punishment for sexual assault. Sub-Section (1) of
Section 376 provides punishment for sexual assault with not less than 7 years imprisonment,
extendable up to life with fine. The Committee is not in agreement with the imposition of fine
without mentioning about the intricacies involved in attending to the medical needs of the victim.
5.18.2 Similarly, Ordinance contains ‘rigorous imprisonment’ whereas in the Bill, it is only
‘imprisonment’. The Committee recommends that the word ‘rigorous’ may be added before
the word ‘imprisonment’.
5.18.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word “to pay compensation to the victim,
which shall be adequate to meet at least the medical expenses incurred by the victim” may be
substituted for the word “fine” at the end of sub-Section(1).
5.18.4 With regard to punishment for aggravated sexual assault under sub-Section (2), the
Committee notes that there is an item relating to armed forces in the Ordinance, which is not there
in the Bill.
5.18.5 The Committee feels that this provision needs to be incorporated in the Bill, and
recommends that the following item may be inserted before item (c):
(bb) being a member of the armed forces is in the area by virtue of deployment by the
Central or a State Government, commits sexual assault; or
5.18.6 The Committee also notes the inclusion of the words “guardian or teacher” in Section
376(2) (e) of the Ordinance. These are also necessary and need to incorporated in the Bill. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the words “guardian or teacher” may be inserted after
the word “relative”.
5.18.7 The Committee further notes that the Ordinance has dealt the issue of gang rape in a
separate Section comprehensively. The Committee also would like to deal with gang rape separately
and recommends that the following provision mentioned in Section 376(2) may be omitted:
(h) being a member of a group of persons having a common intention and in
furtherance of that intention commits sexual assault; or
5.18.8 The Committee also notes that in the Ordinance, a new clause has been added regarding
sexual assault on a person incapable of giving consent. The following text may, accordingly, be
inserted at clause (h):

36
“(h) commits sexual assault, where the person assaulted is incapable of giving consent;
or”
5.18.9 The Committee is in agreement with the existing provision in the Bill in respect of clause
(i) of sub-Section (2). The Committee is not making any amendment to this clause, though the
Ordinance has deleted the word ‘political’. However, for clarity, the clause is reproduced as under:
“(i) being in a position of economic or social or political dominance, commits sexual
assault on a person under such dominance; or”
5.18.10 The Committee further notes that the definitions of “police officer” and “armed forces”
have been provided at Clause (c) and (d) under the Explanation 1 of the Section 376(2) in the
Ordinance which are not there in the Bill. The Committee recommends that the following clauses
may be 
added after clause (b) of Explanation 1:–
“(c) “police officer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to the expression “police”
under the Police Act, 1861;
(d) “armed forces” means the naval, military and air forces and includes any member of
the Armed Forces constituted under any Act for the time being in force, including the
paramilitary forces and any auxiliary forces that are under the control of the Central
Government or the State Government.”
5.18.11 The Committee also notes that the Explanation 2 at the end of the Section 376 (2)
is redundant in view of the new Section 376D dealing with sexual assault by gang. The
Home Secretary agreed with the view. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
Explanation 2 to Section 376(2) may be deleted.
5.18.12 Section 376A . Section 376A is a new Section in the Ordinance which is not there in the
Bill. This Section prescribes punishment of rigorous imprisonment not less than 20 years,
extendable up to remainder of natural life or death for causing death or resulting in persistent
vegetative state of the victim. The Committee feels that this Section is necessary to meet the
contingency mentioned therein. The Committee accordingly recommends that the following Section
may be inserted in the Bill before the present Section 376A:-
“376A Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of the
victim.”
“Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) of
Section 376 and in the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the
death of the person or causes the person to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that
person’ s natural life, or with death.”
5.18.13 The attention of the Committee was also drawn to the issue of clemency given by
the President of India. The Committee noted that some persons convicted for rape and
murder were given clemency by the President. The Committee also noted a case wherein
the accused died well before the clemency was given. The Committee feels that application
for clemency should not be considered in rape and murder cases. The Committee also feels
that mercy petitions should be disposed of within three months. The Committee would also
like to suggest that reasons for granting clemency should also be made public.
5.18.14 Present Sections 376A and 376B of the Bill may be re-numbered as 376B and
376C.

37
5.18.15 Section 376 B.  The re-numbered Section 376B of the Bill deals with sexual assault by
husband upon his wife during separation. The original Section 376A of IPC is proposed to be
changed by replacing the word “sexual assault” in place of sexual intercourse” besides prescribing
imprisonment of two years, extendable up to seven years along with fine in place of maximum
imprisonment of two years along with fine.
5.18.16 Section 376 C.  The re-numbered Section 376C of the Bill deals with sexual intercourse
by a person in authority. The Committee notes certain changes made in the Ordinance which also
need to be incorporated in the Bill.
5.18.17 The Committee recommends the following amendments:–
The words “or in a fiduciary relationship” may added in clause (a) of the Section 
after
the word “authority”.
The words “and abuses such position or fiduciary relationship” may be substituted for the
words “takes advantage of the position and”.
The word “rigorous” may be added before the word “imprisonment”.
5.18.18 Sections 376D and 376E.  These Sections are provided in the Ordinance which are not
there in the Bill. Section 376D deals with punishment for sexual assault by gang and 376E deals
with punishment for repeat offender. The Committee feels that these offences also need to be
addressed in the Bill. The Committee recommends that the following Sections may be added after
the re-numbered Section 376C:–
“Section 376D. Sexual assault by gang.
376D. Where a person is sexually assaulted by one or more persons constituting a group
or acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed
to have committed the offence of sexual assault, regardless of gender and shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years,
but which may extend to life and shall pay compensation to the victim which shall be
reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of the victim.
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this Section, imprisonment for life shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life.”
Section 376E: Punishment for repeat offenders.
376E. Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under Section 376
or Section 376A or Section 376C or Section 376D and is subsequently convicted of an
offence punishable under any of the said Sections shall be punished with imprisonment for
life, which shall mean the remainder of that person’ s natural life or with death.”
Subject to above observations and recommendations, the Clause is adopted, as
amended.
5.19 Clause 6 (Section 509 IPC)
5.19.1 This Clause seeks to amend Section 509 of IPC to enhance the punishment from one year
to three years and fine not less than rupees one thousand for using words, gestures, acts, etc. to
insult the modesty of a woman.
5.19.2 The Committee notes that while the fine prescribed under the Bill was not less than one
thousand rupees, the Ordinance does not mention only amount of the fine. The Committee is of

38
the view that fine for eve teasing should be increased from one thousand rupees to two thousand
rupees to effectively tackle the problem. The words ‘one thousand’ be replaced with the words
‘two thousand’.
The clause is adopted, as amended.
5.20 Clause 6-A (Section 54A Cr.P.C.) (Insertion of a new Clause)
5.20.1 This Clause seeks to insert two provisos to the Section 54A of Cr.P.C which deals with
the identification of the person arrested. This amendment is there in the Ordinance and not there
in the Bill. The Committee feels that the facility of videography is available in every part of the
country. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the word ‘may’ be replaced with the word
‘shall’ in the second proviso after the word ‘process’. The following new Clause may, accordingly,
be inserted in the Bill:
“6A. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Code of Criminal Procedure), in Section 54A, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:–
“Provided that, if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically
disabled, such process of identification shall take place under the supervision of a Judicial
Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to ensure that such person identifies the person
arrested using methods that the person is comfortable with:
Provided further, that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically
disabled, the identification process 
shall be videographed.”
The clause is inserted, as amended.
5.21 Clause 7 (Section 154 Cr.P.C)
5.21.1 This Clause seeks to insert a proviso at the end of Section 154 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1970 to provide that as far as possible information given by a woman for offence under
Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 shall be recorded by a woman police officer.
5.21.2 The Committee notes that the proviso made under Section 154 of Cr.P.C. has been changed
substantially in the Ordinance by including Sections 326A, 326B, 376C, 376D, 376E along with
Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376E and 509 of IPC to ensure wider
application of this Section. Besides, a new proviso has also been added. The Committee feels
that the words ‘as far as possible’ would frustrate the very purpose of this provision, and
need to be omitted. Further, the Committee is of the view that in the absence of woman
police officer, other woman Government officer may be deputed for recording the
information.
5.21.3 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Clause 7 may be substituted by the
following:
“7. In Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-Section (1), the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence under
Section 326A, Section 326B, Section 354, Section 375, Section 376, Section 376A, Section
376B, Section 376C, Section 376D, Section 376E and Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code
is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information shall be recorded by
a woman police officer or in her absence by other woman Government officer and such

39
woman shall be provided legal assistance and also the assistance of a healthcare worker or
women’ s organisation or both:
Provided further that—
(a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under Section 354, Section 354A,
Section 354B, Section 354C, Section 354D, sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) of Section
376, Section 376A, Section 376B, Section 376C, Section 376D or Section 376E of the
Indian Penal Code alleged to have been committed or attempted is temporarily or
permanently mentally or physically disabled, then such information shall be recorded by a
police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to report such offence or at a
convenient place of such person’ s choice, in the presence of a special educator or an
interpreter, as the case may be;
(b) the recording of such information shall be videographed.
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate
under clause (a) of sub-Section (5A) of Section 164 as soon as possible.”
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.22 Clause 8 (Section 160 Cr.P.C.)
5.22.1 In t his clause, Section 160 of the Cr.P.C. is proposed to be amended by providing that no
male person under the age of 18 years and above the age of 65 years or a woman shall be required
to give personal attendance. As of now, a male person below 15 years and a woman is not required
to give attendance to a police man. The Ordinance includes physically or mentally disabled person
also. This needs to be brought in the Bill.
5.22.2 The Committee also feels that the words ‘fifteen years’ as prescribed in the proviso of the
Section 160 of Cr.P.C. may be retained.
5.22.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word ‘eighteen’ may be 
substituted by the
word ‘fifteen’ and the words ‘or a physically or mentally disabled person’ may be added after the
word ‘woman’.
The clause is adopted, as amended.
5.23 Clause 9 (Section 161 Cr.P.C.)
5.23.1 This Clause seeks to amend Section 161 of Cr. P.C. regarding the statement by a woman
about alleged offence under Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 shall be recorded as far
as possible by a woman officer.
5.23.2 The Committee notes that the Ordinance includes certain new Sections, viz., Sections 354A,
354B, 354C, 354D, 376C, 376D, 376E along with Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509
of IPC. The proviso in the Bill and the Ordinance also contain the words ‘as far as possible’. The
Committee recommends that the words ‘as far as possible’ may be omitted and the words ‘or in
her absence other woman Government officer’ may be added at the end. The proviso may,
accordingly, be substituted by the following:-
“Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under Section
354, Section 354A, Section 354B, Section 354C, Section 354D, Section 375, Section 376,
Section 376A, Section 376B, Section 376C, Section 376D, Section 376E or Section 509 of
the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be recorded
by a woman police officer or in her absence other woman Government officer.”

40
The clause is adopted, as amended.
5.24 Clause 9A (Section 164 Cr.P.C.) (Insertion of a new Clause)
5.24.1 The Ordinance has an amendment to Section 164 of the Criminal Procedure Code proposing
to insert a new sub-Section (5A) after sub-Section 5. This provides recording of statement of the
victim for crime committed against victim under certain Sections of the IPC along with provisos.
The Committee feels that this new sub-Section is necessary for the procedural purpose and should
be brought in the Bill. The Committee also recommends that the words “may be videographed” may
be replaced by “shall be videographed” in the second proviso. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the following new Clause may be inserted in the Bill before Clause 10:
“9A. Insertion 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after sub-Section (5), the following
sub-Section shall be inserted, namely:-
“(5A)(a) In cases punishable under Section 354, Section 354A, Section 354B, sub-Section
(2) of Section 354C, sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) of Section 376, Section 376A,
Section 376B, Section 376C, Section 376D or Section 376E of the Indian Penal Code, the
Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has
been committed in the manner prescribed in sub-Section (5), as soon as the commission of
the offence is brought to the notice of the police:
Provided that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently physically
or mentally disabled, the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special
educator in recording the statement:
Provided further that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently
physically or mentally disabled, the statement made by the person, with the assistance of
an interpreter or special educator, 
shall be videographed;
(b) a statement recorded under clause (a) of a person who is temporarily or permanently
physically or mentally disabled shall be considered a statement in lieu of examination-in-
chief, as specified in Section 137 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 such that the maker
of the statement can be cross-examined on such statement, without the need for recording
the same at the time of trial.”
The Clause is inserted.
5.25 Clause 9B (Section 198B Cr.P.C.) (Insertion of a new Clause)
5.25.1 The Ordinance also provides for insertion of a new Section, viz., Section 198B which is
not there in the Bill. This Section provides for making the offence, as provided in Section 376B
of Indian Penal Code, cognizable. The Committee feels that this Section is necessary and needs to
be brought in the Bill. This Committee, therefore, recommends that the following new Clause may
be inserted 
after Clause 9A:–
“9B. After Section 198A of the Criminal Law Procedure Code, the following Section shall
be inserted, namely-
“198B. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under Section 376B of the Indian
Penal Code where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon prima facie
satisfaction of the facts, which constitute the offence upon a complaint having been filed
or made by the wife against the accused husband.”
The Clause is inserted.

41
5.26 Clause 10 (Section 273 of Cr.P.C.)
5.26.1 This Clause seeks to insert a new proviso to Section 273 of Cr.P.C. so that court would
be required to make appropriate measures to ensure that a person below the age of 18 years and
who is alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault etc. is not confronted by the accused
although the right of cross examination would still be there.
The Clause is adopted.
5.27 Clause 11 (Section 327 of Cr. P.C.)
5.27.1 This Clause 11 seeks to amend Section 327 of Cr.P.C. substituting the words, figures or
letters “trial of rape or an offence under Sections 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian
Penal Code”, by the words, figures or letters “trial of sexual assault or an offence under Sections
354, 376A and 376B of the Indian Penal Code”. However, the Ordinance contains three additional
Sections, viz., 376C, 376D and 376E of the IPC.
5.27.2 The Committee recommends that words “Section 376C, 376D and 376E” may be
inserted after “Section 376B”.
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.28 Clause 12
5.28.1 First Schedule to the Cr.P.C. also needs to be amended to incorporate the above changes,
especially in the light of the enhanced punishment under various Sections. This Clause seeks to
carry out the consequential changes at the appropriate places in the First Schedule to the Cr.P.C.
under the heading “1-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”.
5.28.2 The amended Schedule is reproduced as below:–
(a) after the entries relating to Section 166, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:–
12 3 4 5 6
166A Public servant Rigorous cognizable Non- Magistrate of
disobeying direction Imprisonment for Bailable the first class
under law one year or fine
or with both
(b) after the entries relating to section 326, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:–
12 3 4 5 6
326A V oluntarily causing Imprisonment for cognizable Non- Court of
grievous hurt by not less than ten bailable Session
use of acid, etc. years but which
may extend to
imprisonment for
life and maximum
fine of 10 lakh
rupees.
326B V oluntarily thr owing Imprisonment for cognizable Non- Court of
or attempting to five years but bailable Session
throw acid which may extend
to seven years
and fine.

42
(c) for the entries relating to section 354, the following entries shall be substituted,
namely:––
12 3 4 5 6
354 Assault or use of Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Any
criminal force to 1 year which may bailable Magistrate
woman with extend to 5 years,
intent to outrage and with fine not
her modesty. less than five
thousand repeees.
354A (1) Sexual harassment Imprisonment which Cognizable Non- Any
of the nature of may extend to 5 bailable Magistrate
unwelcome physical years or with fine
contact and advances or with both.
or a demand or
request for sexual
favours.
(2) Sexual harassment Imprisonment which Cognizable Bailable Any
of the nature of may extend to 1 Magistrate
making sexually year or with fine
coloured remark or or with both.
showing pornography
or any other
unwelcome physical,
verbal or non-verbal
conduct of sexual
nature.
354B Assault or use of Imprisonment of not Cognizable Non- Any
criminal force to less than 5 years bailable Magistrate
woman with intent but which may
to disrobe. extend to 10 years
and with fine.
354C Voyeurism Imprisonment of not Non-  Bailable Any
less than 1 year but cognizable Magistrate
which may extend
to 3 years and with
fine for first
conviction.
Imprisonment of not Cognizable Non- Any
less than 3 years but bailable Magistrate
which may extend to
7 years and with
fine for second or
subsequent conviction.
354D Stalking Imprisonment of not Cognizable Non- Any
less than 1 year but bailable Magistrate
which may extend to
3 years and with fine.

43
(d) for the entries relating to Sections 370, the following entries shall be substituted,
namely:––
12 3 4 5 6
370 (1) Trafficking of Im prisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of
person. not less than 7 bailable Session
years but which
may extend to
10 years and
with fine.
(2) Trafficking of Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of
more than one not less than 10 bailable Session
person. years but which
may extend to
imprisonment for
life and with fine.
(3) Trafficking of a Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of
minor. not less than 10 bailable Session
years but which
may extend to
imprisonment for
life.
(4) Trafficking of Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of
more than one minor. not less than bailable Session
14 years but
which may extend
to imprisonment
for life.
(5) Public servant Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
or a police officer life which shall bailable Session
involved in mean the remainder
trafficking of of that person's
minor. natural life.
(6) Person convicted Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
of offence of life which shall bailable Session
trafficking of minor mean the remainder
on more than one of that person's
occasion.  natural life.
370A (1) Employing of a Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of
trafficked child. not  less than 5 bailable Session
years but which
may extend to
7 years and with
fine.
(2) Employing of a Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of
trafficked adult not less than 3 bailable Session
person. years but which
may extend to
7 years and with
fine.

44
(e) for the entries relating to Sections 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D, the following
entries shall be substituted, namely:––
12 3 4 5 6
376 (1) Sexual assault R igorous Cognizable Non- Court of
imprisonment of bailable Session
not less than
7 years but which
may extend to
imprisonment for
life and shall also
be liable to pay
compensation to
meet expenses of
the victim.
(2) Sexual assault Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
by a police officer imprisonment of bailable Session
or a public servant not less than
or member of armed 10 years but which
forces or a person may extend to
being on the imprisonment for
management or on life and with fine.
the staff of a jail,
remand home or
other place of
custody or women's
or children's
institution or by a
person on the
management or on
the staff of a
hospital, and sexual
assault committed
by a person in a
position of trust or
authority towards
the person assaulted
or by a near
relative of the
person assaulted.
376A Person committing Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
an offence of sexual imprisonment of not bailable Session
assault and inflicting less than 20 years
injury which causes but which may
death or causes the extend to imprisonment
person to be in a for life which shall
persistent vegetative mean the remainder
state. of that person's
natural life or with
death.

45
12 3 4 5 6
376B Sexual assault by Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
the husband upon not less than 2 bailable Session
his wife during years but which (but only on
separation. may extend to the complaint
7 years and with of the victim)
fine.
376C Sexual intercourse Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
by a person in imprisonment for bailable Session
authority. not less than
5 years but which
may extend to
10 years and with
fine.
376D Sexual assault by Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
gang. imprisonment for bailable Session
not less than 20
years but which
may extend to
imprisonment for
life which shall
mean the remainder
of that person's
natural life and
compensation to
the victim.
376E Repeat offenders Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
life which shall bailable Session
mean the
remainder of that
person's natural
life or with death.
(f) Entry relating to Section 509, in column 3, for the words, “Simple imprisonment for one
year, or fine, or both”, the words “Simple imprisonment for 3 years and with minimum fine
of Rs. 2,000” shall be substituted.”
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.29 Clause 13 (Section 53A of the Indian Evidence Act)
5.29.1 This Clause seeks to insert new Section namely, Section 53A after Section 53 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 regarding evidence of conduct or character of the victim or previous sexual
experience with any person. The Ordinance contains some additional Sections incorporated in this
Section which are not there originally in the Bill.
5.29.2 The Committee recommends that the text in Section 53A in this Clause may be substituted
by the following:–
“53A. In a prosecution for an offence under Section 354, Section 354A, Section 354B,
Section 354C, sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) of Section 376, Section 376A, Section

46
376B, Section 376C, Section 376D or Section 376E of the Indian Penal Code or for
attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of
the character of the victim or of such person’s previous sexual experience with any person
shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent or the quality of consent.”
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.30 Clause 14 (Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act)
5.30.1 This Clause seeks to substitute Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which
provides for presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for sexual assault.
Ordinance includes additional Clause (m) and has the words ‘such person’ in the place of the
words ‘he or she’.
5.30.2 The Committee recommends that after the words ‘Clause (l)’, the words ‘or clause (m)’
may be inserted and the words ‘she or he’ may be substituted by the words ‘such person’
wherever they occur.
The following text may be substituted for Section 114 A:–
“Substitution of new section for section 114A–
‘114A. In a prosecution for sexual assault under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c), clause
(d), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g), clause (h), clause (i), clause (j), clause (k), clause
(l) or clause (m) of sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where sexual
intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was without the consent
of the other person alleged to have been sexually assaulted and such other person states
in that person’s evidence before the court that such person did not consent, the court shall
presume that such person did not consent.
Explanation.–– In this section “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned
in clauses (a) to (c) of Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.”
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.31 Clause 14A (Section 119 of the Indian Evidence Act) (Insertion of a new Clause)
5.31.1 The Ordinance provides for substitution of Section 119 of the Indian Evidence Act which
is not there in the Bill. This replacing Section deals with witness who is unable to communicate
verbally. The Ordinance contains the words ‘may be video graphed’ but the Committee feels that
it may changed to ‘shall be video graphed’. The Committee recommends that the following new
Clause may be inserted 
before Clause 15:-
“14A. For Section 119 of the Evidence Act, the following Section shall be substituted,
namely:–
119. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other manner in which
he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written and
the signs made in open Court, evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take the
assistance of a special educator or interpreter in recording the statement, and such statement
shall be videographed .”
The Clause is inserted.

47
5.32 Clause 15 (Section 146 of the Indian Evidence Act)
5.32.1  This Clause seeks to substitute the proviso under Section 146 of the Indian Evidence
regarding questions not to be put during the cross-examination of the victim, in the case of sexual
offence.
5.32.2  The Committee takes note of the text of the new proviso, as drafted in the Ordinance
includes consequential changes due to addition of new Sections in IPC connected with sexual
assault. The Ordinance also replaces the words ‘his or her’ by ‘such victim’.
5.32.3 The Committee recommends that the text of the proviso may be substituted by the
following:–
“Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the
Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of
consent is an issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in
the cross-examination of the victim as to the general immoral character, or previous sexual
experience, of such victim with any person for proving such consent or the quality of
consent.”
The Clause is adopted, as amended.
5.33 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
5.33.1  Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which are
of consequential/drafting nature, namely, “2012” and ‘Sixty-third’ to be substituted by “2013'” and
‘Sixty-Fourth’ year, respectively.
The Committee adopts the Bill, as amended, and commends for being passed.
5.34 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
5.34.1  Besides the specific recommendations made on the clauses of the Bill in the
preceding paragraphs, the Committees also makes some general observations and
recommendations in the following paragraphs.
5.35 Compensation to the Victim of acid attack
5.35.1  The Committee is of the view that in case the convict is not in a position to pay
fine to the victim, both the Government of India and State Governments should take steps
to rescue the victim. In this regard, the Committee is given to understand that the issue
is already under consideration of the Ministry and Women and Child Development. The
Central Government, through the Ministry of Women and Child Development may evolve
a scheme to ensure that the compensation amount is taken care of and given to the victim.
Moreover, the Committee feels that the treatment of victim cannot wait till the final
disposal of the case. The Government should take necessary steps to ensure medical
treatment of victim.
5.36 Better Policing System
5.36.1  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress
upon the State Governments to set up women cells compulsorily in all the police stations
throughout the country so that victim woman could be able to have free and easy access
to lodge complaints against the perpetrators. Women cell in each police station would

48
further enhance the participation of women in the policing system. The Committee also
took note of the fact that women police in over all police strength in the country is only
about 6% which is very inadequate. The Committee is of the view that the strength of the
women police force should be at least be 33 per cent of total strength, and therefore
recommends that Union Ministry of Home Affairs may impress upon the State Governments
to take suitable measures in this regard.
5.36.2  The Committee feels that registration of FIRs should be made mandatory. The
Committee is of the strong view that strict action should be taken for dereliction of duty
against the officer, who refuses to receive complaints on Sexual violence. The Committee
also recommends that once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on to the higher police
officer for information and necessary direction in the matter to ensure time bound
investigation. The Committee further recommends that investigation should be done within
a period of 60 days, and charge sheet should be filed in time so that justice is not denied.
5.36.3  The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs may impress
upon the State/ UT Governments to make suitable arrangements for installation and
enforcement of Global Positioning System (GPS) along with tracking system in police
vehicles and Surveillance Cameras at all strategic locations. The GPS and tracking system
would not only enhance the functional and operational efficiency of the Police but would
also inject transparency in the system besides smooth and easy tracking of crimes in the
country.
5.37 Better portrayal of woman
5.37.1  The Committee is concerned about increasing commodification of women in the
society. Women are portrayed in poor light through obscene, vulgar pictures/scenes. It is in
this context that the Committee feels that the content of entertainment programmes should
be without obscenity, vulgarity and violence, which is also in the interest of a healthy, moral
and ethical well being of the Society.
5.37.2  The Committee would appreciate if air-time on different channels of electronic
media is allocated for programmes for sensitization of viewers about cultural and human
values, traditions and customs and also portraying woman in high esteem. Programmes on
family values, respect for women culture and traditions can go a long way in strengthening
the moral fabric of the society. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs may take up the matter with the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to address
the issue with all concerned stakeholders and issue necessary guidelines in this regard.
5.38 Judicial Reforms
5.38.1  The Committee is of the view that our judiciary is woefully short of infrastructure
which results in huge pendency of cases. There are a number of instances where cases come
for first hearing in the courts after years of wait. Such long delays shake the faith of
citizens in the system and breeds cynicism and hopelessness. The age old saying that justice
delayed is justice denied is particularly true for women victims of sexual assault who have
to face day-to-day trauma of re-living the painful experience for years during the trial.
5.38.2 It is in this light that establishment of fast track courts for speedy trial of sexual
assault cases becomes extremely important. The Committee recommends that adequate
funds should be dedicated for the establishment of fast track courts so that trials can take
place on a day-to-day basis. Government may consider setting up of fast-track courts in
every district wherever the pendency is very high. The Committee would like to impress

49
upon the Department of Justice to take up the matter with the Chief Justice of India and
Chief Justices of High Courts on the need of speedy trial of cases. The Judiciary must take
steps to see that the trial is completed within two months of filing of the charge-sheet.
5.38.3  The Committee was informed that in the light of the recent incident of gang rape
of a young women in the national capital, the Minister of Law and Justice has written to
the Chief Ministers of all States and Chief Justices of all High Courts to set up Fast Track
Courts for concluding trial in rape cases. The Committee recommends that the decision of
the Government to create 10% additional position of judges for creation of permanent fast
track courts, as directed by the Supreme Court in its judgment given in the case of Brij
Mohan Lal and others versus  Union of India and others given on 19.04.2012 may be
implemented.
5.38.4  The Committee was also informed that Rs. 5000 crores have been given as grants
to the States for the years 2010 to 2015 in order to undertake various initiatives such as
increasing court working hours, enhancing support to lok Adalats and providing additional
funds to State Legal Service Authorities etc. The Committee feels that the amount of
Rs. 5000 crores for five years is not sufficient for the purpose in view of the huge pendency
of cases in courts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the amount of Rs. 5000
crores may be enhanced to Rs.10,000 crores. The Committee is of the view that more such
initiatives are required for providing sufficient infrastructure for the existing and the new
courts and for appointment of judges and recruitment of administrative staff.
5.39 Moral Education
5.39.1  The Committee is of the opinion that school curriculum plays an important role in
early socialization of children. A healthy school curriculum can lay foundation for an all
round development of adult personality. Several psychological studies indicate that values
imparted by agencies of early socialization such as schools and parents have life long impact
on the individual.
5.39.2  The Committee, therefore, feels that school curriculum should include values which
encourage children to respect their fellow human being specially women, poor and the
needy. School curriculum should reflect the best elements of our age old cultural values,
customs, traditions along with universal human values. The Committee recommends that
the Government may take necessary steps for promoting Gender sensitization among
teachers, parents and children so that gender bias may be removed. The Government should
also ensure that enough emphasis is laid on removing gender bias, strengthening family
system and inculcating moral and family values while preparing text books and modules
teacher training.
5.40 Ragging
5.40.1 The practice of ragging in educational institutions in the country is on the rise. Every
year several cases are reported in the media wherein innocent young students are subjected
to immense physical and psychological trauma which leaves deep scars on the psyche of the
students for the rest of their lives.
5.40.2 Though the act of ragging often starts with bullying of freshers by the seniors, at
times, it acquires sexual overtones causing deep embarrassment to students of both the
sexes, even leading to the extreme step of committing suicide. The Committee is of the
opinion that limiting punishment for ragging to rustication and other disciplinary acts by
educational institutions will not be enough to obliterate this menace. Therefore, it should

50
be made a cognizable offence with punishment attracting provisions Criminal Law,
particularly for the instances where ragging takes the overtones of sexual harassment/
assault.
5.41 Responsibility of Higher Officers
5.41.1 In case the crime committed by the subordinate is in the knowledge of the higher
officer and he does not take timely action, such superior officer should be held responsible
and omission of such acts on the part of superior officer must be recorded in his official
dossiers/ACR.
5.42 Repeat Offenders
5.42.1 The Committee has been given to understand that in our country, there is no system
of keeping a watch on repeat sex offenders. The Committee has also been given to
understand that, according to a study conducted on the sex offenders, majority of the
offenders had committed a sex crime earlier and escaped notice of the police authorities and
were roaming freely. The Committee has also been given to understand that Western
European countries and the US have developed a mechanism for tracking such type of sex
offenders and are maintaining a data base in this regard. The Committee recommends that
a suitable mechanism may be evolved to keep a watch on habitual and repeat sex offenders.
The Committee also recommends that after the conviction on first offence, the names of
the convicted persons should be publicized for information of the public. The Central Crime
Records Bureau should include the data in their records. The State and UT Governments
also should set up crime records bureaus and the data, including the names of convicted
people must be maintained and updated, from time to time.

51
NOTE OF DISSENT ON THE 167 th REPORT OF THE DRPS COMMITTEE ON
HOME AFFAIRS ON THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL, 2012, GIVEN
BY SHRI D. RAJA, MEMBER, RAJYA SABHA AND SHRI PRASANTA
CHATTERJEE, MEMBER, RAJYA SABHA
We express our dissatisfaction with the way it the Verma Committee recommendations have
been diluted and we express the opinion that the Committee should recommend to the Government
to include those recommendations before placing the Bill in Parliament.
As far as the present Bill is concerned
1. Clause 5 adopts a gender neutral definition of sexual assault as has been done in Section
8 of the Ordinance. This is totally unacceptable, unjust and trivializes the large increase in the
number of rapes by men. This clause is against the recommendation of the Verma Committee
which had suggested that the perpetrator of the Crime should be defined as a man. The clause is
also against the earlier proposed Government Bill in 2010 which rightly made the law gender
specific as far as adults were concerned and the accused persons could only be men while the
complainants/victims were women.
2. The definition of rape in the Verma Committee report should be the definition used in the
Bill. The present Clause 5.24 dealing with Sec 375 of the IPC accepts the flawed definition. We
disagree with this.
3. Both the Ordinance and the Standing Committee exempt marital rape from being considered
a crime under Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code. This is contrary to the provisions of the
Indian Constitution which considers all women as equal human beings who have a right to live with
dignity and free from violence within and outside marriage. This is also contrary to the Verma
Committee report which had pointed out that the “exemption for marital rape stems from a long
outdated notion of marriage which regarded wives as no more than the property of their
husbands”……. “whereas marriage is in modern times regarded as a partnership of equals”.
4. Clause 5 raises the age of consent from 16 to 18 years in cases of sexual assault under
Section 375 IPC. However, the social reality is that there are many instances of consensual sexual
activity between adolescents between the ages of 16 and 18 and it would lead to injustice if in
these cases there was prosecution for rape. The Law Commission in its 205
th report has made a
recommendation which may form the basis of this amendment we suggest. By way of a proviso
to clause ‘sixthly’ to Section 375 IPC to exempt such consensual activity from the purview of
statutory rape provided the accused person is not more than 5 years older.
5. While the proposed Government Bill of 2010 had added that if rape is committed by a
person in a position of social, economic and political dominance this would be considered an
aggravated form of the offence, the Ordinance (3 of 2013) removes the word ‘political’ from this
definition. The Standing Committee has also agreed with this change in definition. We totally
disagree with the word “political” being deleted. The word ‘political’ should be added to Section
376 Clause (j) as this was meant to address rape which is often committed with impunity on the
most vulnerable sections of women in our society. Several instances of these forms of rape by
those in positions of political power have been highlighted in the past few years.
6. The Standing Committee echoes the Ordinance in making sexual assault on a legally
separated wife under Section 376B IPC punishable with a minimum imprisonment of two years and
51

52
a maximum of seven years. We completely disagree with this and see no reason why sexual assault
on any separated wife should be punishable with less imprisonment and should not be considered
as ordinary sexual assault.
7. In Clause 4A, the Standing Committee does not suggest any amendment of Section 354 of
the IPC that deals with non-penetrative sexual assault but only suggests enhancement of the
punishment. The wording of Section 354 which states that assault or use of criminal force to any
woman “intending to ……outrage her modesty” is archaic and inappropriate and should be changed
according to the suggestion of the Verma Committee.
8. The Verma Committee had suggested that the definition of sexual assault in Section 354 of
the Indian Penal Code should be replaced by the following words:
“(a) Intentional touching of another person when such act of touching is of a sexual nature and
is without the recipient’s consent.
 (b) Using words, acts or gestures towards or in the presence of another person which create an
unwelcome threat of a sexual nature or result in an unwelcome advance.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, ‘acts’ shall include the display and dissemination of
pornographic material…..”
It had prescribed a punishment of imprisonment upto 5 years for the offence under the
suggested sub-clause (a) and upto 1 year for the offence under sub-clause (b). Since this clause
also replaced Section 509 of the IPC the Verma Committee had suggested repeal of Section 509
of the IPC. However, though Clause 4A in Section 354A defines Sexual Harassment it still retains
Section 509 IPC which again uses archaic language which is insulting to women. We object to this.
9. In Clause 2, the Standing Committee had suggested that in Section 166 A if a public servant
‘knowingly’ disobeys any direction of law he should be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year. The term of rigorous imprisonment should extend to two
years and a minimum should be fixed. The word ‘knowingly’ should be deleted as lack of
knowledge of law cannot be allowed to be a defence and will always be used as a convenient
defence in these cases.
10. At present under Section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, no woman or person
above 65 years of age or a male person below 15 years of age is required to attend at a Police
station and should be questioned in their residence. Though it had been suggested that the age of
the male person should be increased to 18 years the standing Committee in Clause 8 has not
accepted this. Anyone upto 18 years should ordinarily be questioned at his residence.
11. In point 5.47 on responsibility of higher official, the Committee report only recommends a
recording in his official Dossier – ACR. We disagree with this. The Higher officer must be held
responsible and also punished for this.
12. Death Penalty: Since there are many issues which have been raised about Death Penalty, it
is not necessary to include this in the present Bill.
13. Section 376 (2)
• Being a man, commits rape on a person in the course of communal or sectarian violence;
• Being a man, who is not a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, commits
rape on a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, knowing that the
person is a member of the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribes;
14. On Trafficking: Government must consider to bring a Comprehensive Bill in human
trafficking which is a process leading to commercial sexual exploitation and labour exploitation.

53
MINUTES

54

55
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Friday, the 4 th January, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
10. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
11. Shri Rathod Ramesh
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Mangotra, Secretary (BM)
2. Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary (UT)
3. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri B.S. Bassi, Special Commissioner of Police (Admn)
55

56
3. Shri Ranjit Narayan, Special Commissioner of Police (Crime)
4. Shri Dharmendra Kumar, Special Commissioner of Police (L&O)
5. Shri Sudhir Yadav, Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
6. Shri S.N. Shrivastava, Special Commissioner of Police (Spl. Cell)
7. Shri Virender Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police (Headquarter)
8. Shri S.B.K Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime)
9. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
10. Shri K.C. Dwivedi, Addl. Commissioner of Police (ND)
11. Shri Anil Shukla, Additional Commissioner of Police (Headquarters)
12. Ms. Suman Nalwa, Dy. Commissioner of Police (CAW)
13. Shri Rajan Bhagat, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. B.A. Aggrawal, Secretary
      2. Shri D. Bhardwaj, JS & LA
Representatives of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri Devender Kumar Sikri, Secretary
      2.   Shri Anil Kumar Gulati, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
Shrimati Sudha Krishnan, Joint Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and made a reference to the passing
away of recent Delhi gang rape victim in a Singapore hospital. The Committee observed a minute’s
silence as a mark of respect to the memory of departed soul. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised
the Members of the agenda of the meeting i.e. further hearing the Secretary of the Ministry of
Home Affairs, Commissioner, Delhi Police, Secretaries, Department of Justice and Legal Affairs and
representative of Ministry of Finance on the issues of setting up of fast track courts, shortage of
PCR vans and vacancies in Delhi Police and stringent punishment including death penalty for rape/
gang rape convicts which remained inconclusive during the meeting held on 27
th December, 2012.
The Chairman also welcomed Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana and Shri D. Raja who have been attending
meeting for the first time after their nominations to the Committee.
3.0 The Chairman also informed the Members that the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
and Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012  have been referred
to the Committee for examination and report within three months. The Chairman suggested that the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 may be taken up on priority as it seeks to provide stringent
punishment for the offences of rape. The Chairman also suggested that a Press Release may be
issued soliciting view of the individuals/organizations, women organizations on the various
provisions of the Bill. He also suggested that views of the State Governments/UT Administrations
may also be obtained in this regard. The Committee after some discussion agreed to the
suggestions of  the Chairman
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
4.0 * * *
*** Relates to other matters.

57
5.0 * * *
6.0 * * *
7.0 * * *
8.0 Some more queries were raised by Members which were replied to by the witnesses.  With
regard to queries concerning speedy trails in Fast Track Courts, financial assistance to States in
setting up of Fast Track Courts, penalties and court procedures, the Chairman suggested that they
will be taken up while examining the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

58
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st January, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Adsul
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
13. Shri Datta Meghe
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
15. Shri Rathod Ramesh
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
17. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shumsher K. Sheriff, Secretary-General
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
58

59
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
3. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
4. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
5. Shri Ashutosh Jain, Director
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1 Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Law Secretary
I. Opening Remarks
2.0 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. The
Chairman then made a reference to the presence of Secretary General, Rajya Sabha in the meeting
and welcomed him and stated that his presence would prove to be useful during deliberations of
the Committee. He then apprised the members about the Agenda of the day which was to hear the
presentation of the Home Secretary on the following Bills:-
(i) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012; and
(ii) The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012.
Reference of Bills to the Committee
(i) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
3.0 The Chairman informed the Committee Members that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
referred the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 which was introduced in Lok Sabha on
4
th December, 2012 and pending therein, to the Committee on Home Affairs on 28 th December, 2012,
for examination and report within three months.
3.1 He added that the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 seeks to amend the Indian Penal
Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 in order to
review rape laws.  He sought co-operation and suggestions of Members for in depth examination
of the Bill.
3.2 He informed the Members that the Secretariat has written to all the State/UT Governments
seeking their views/opinion/suggestions on the Bill. He further informed that the Secretariat has also
issued a Press Release seeking views of public and other stakeholders.
(ii) ***
4.0 * * *
4.1 * * *
*** Related to other matters.

60
4.2 * * *
(iii) Declaration of Interest by Members in Subject/Bill undertaken for examination
5.0 The Chairman then read out the following rule 294 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business of Rajya Sabha for information of the Members:–
“Whenever a member has a personal or specific pecuniary interest (direct or indirect) in a
matter being considered by the Council or a Committee thereof, he shall declare the nature
of such interest notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the Register, and shall
not participate in any debate taking place in the Council or its Committees before making
such declaration”.
[On Arrival of Union Home Secretary and other officials]
III. Presentation on the Bill
( i ) ***
6.0 * * *
6.1 * * *
6.2 * * *
(ii) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
7.0    The Home Secretary made a presentation on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012. The
Chairman asked him to address following issues during presentation:–
• Difference between the recommendations of the Law Commission, the Bill forwarded by
the NCW and the present Bill.
• Difference in approach among different Sections of I.P.C. in regard to  minimum fine.
• Making recording of the statement of a woman, against whom an offence under
Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 of IPC is alleged to have been committed
or attempted, by a woman police officer mandatory?
• The extent to which the proposed amendments address the issues raised by social
activists, women workers, NGOs, legal experts and the other concerned people in the
aftermath of the recent gang-rape committed in Delhi on 16
th December, 2012 and
proposal to add some more provisions or change certain present proposals.
8.0 The Home Secretary stated that after the brutal bus gang rape case in Delhi, the
Government set up a three-member Committee under a retired Chief Justice of India, one
member being a retired Chief Justice of a High Court and another member being an ex-Solicitor
General. He further stated that the Government had given that Committee a time of 30 days and
the Committee almost concluded its recommendations, and it was going to present its Report
before the Government on 23
rd of January 2013. He added that the Government had also given
that Committee a copy of the Bill, which is before the Parliament, and the Government expects
the Committee to make suggestions regarding any further amendments which, it feels, are
necessary.
*** Related to other matters.

61
8.1 The Home Secretary further added that the terms of reference of the Committee were two-
fold.
■ The process of justice must be made speedy so that the guilty persons are brought to
book quickly.
■ The punishment may be made as stringent as possible.
8.2      The Home Secretary opined that there were two  important   demands which were raised
by the civil society groups in the aftermath of that horrendous incident. One was for provision of
death penalty and another was pertaining to the determination of age of majority for the criminal.
8.3 The Chairman and Members then raised following issues/queries pertaining to the Bill:–
• Government’s view on death penalty for rape;
• Attendance of victims required during investigation. Whether the victim would be called
to the police station or one officer will go to her place to record the statement?
• Use of word ‘sexual assault’ instead of ‘rape’ in the Bill.
• Logic behind providing more protection to a person above 65 years of age, when a
person of above 60 years is considered senior citizen.
• Inconsistency between punishments for acid attack which  is ten years and for rape it
is only seven years.
• Definition of life imprisonment?
• Applicability of Section 166A of Cr.P.C in case  a woman goes to police station to make
a complaint and the officer refuses to register the complaint.
• Difference in phraseology with regard to the operative part of section 166 of which
states “shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year or with fine or with both”  and in the amendment wherein it has been stated “shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine
or with both.”
• Reasons for maintaining Section 354 gender specific.
• Implications of proposed amendment in Section 146 of the Evidence Act which bars
previous sexual history of victims of  sexual assault taking into account?
8.4 The Home Secretary and Legislative Secretary clarified on some issues raised. The
Chairman then directed the Home Secretary to furnish following documents to this secretariat:–
• Written replies/clarifications on the issues raised in the sitting.
• A copy of justice Verma Committee Report after it has submitted its Report.
• Content of discussions in DGP’s Conference regarding increasing recruitment of female
personnel in Police and para military forces.
8.5 The Chairman observed that the filing of FIR should be mandatory. There should be
specific period for investigation and then filing  charge-sheet to see that trials are completed with
in a specific period. There should also be ‘moral education’ in the schools in consultations with
the HRD Ministry. The media, particularly, television should be sensitized, about the contents of

62
serials, movies, advertisements with regard to vulgarity, obscenity, violence, rape scenes, etc. The
Chairman also directed the Secretariat to remind the States/UTs to give their views/suggestions on
the Bill within the stipulated time.
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again on Monday, the 28 th January, 2013.

63
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 28 th January, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
12. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
13. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
3. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
63

64
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
informed them of the agenda of the meeting i.e., further consideration of the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012. He informed that Justice J.S. Verma had submitted Report on the
Amendments to Criminal Law to the Government and copies of the said report had been circulated
to the Members. He proposed to consider the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 in the light
of the observations and recommendations made by the J.S. Verma Committee. The Chairman also
took on record a representation from the All India Democratic Women’s Association on the subject.
3.0 * * *
3.1 He then, emphasized on the importance of the issues contained in the Bill, which has shaken
the conscience of the entire country, and on which people are agitated. He opined that thin
attendance would send a wrong message across the country. The Chairman also informed that he
would write a letter to all the Members requesting them to attend meetings regularly.
4.0 The Chairman also made it very clear that the Committee would deal with Justice Verma
Committee’s recommendations only to the extent of the proposed Bill and asked the legislative
Secretary to prepare a clause-wise comparative chart of the provisions of the Bill vis-a vis
recommendations made by Justice Verma. With regard to other recommendations or observations
of the Justice Verma Committee, he opined that those would  have to be dealt with by respective
Departments. The Chairman also requested Members to go through the recommendations of Justice
Verma Committee concerning to IPC, Cr. P.C. and the Evidence Act.
5.0 The Committee then discussed with the Legislative Secretary on the provisions of the Bill.
The following issues came up for discussion with the Legislative Secretary:–
• Provisions dealing with sexual assault or black mailing after making a video clipping;
• Protections against motivated false allegations;
• Trial of personnel of  Armed Forces by the civil courts, as suggested by  Justice Verma
Committee and Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act;
• V oyeurism;
• shifting the burden of proof on the accused, specifically in  crimes against a woman;
• Confining the scope of Section 354 of IPC only to woman and not to ‘person’.
6.0 The Chairman then directed the Legislative Secretary to have a comparative chart including
provisions of the Bill and Verma Committee Report proposals and sent to the Committee.
7.0 The Legislative Secretary assured to furnish comments on the various issues raised by the
Members. He, however, opined that with regard to false allegations, there should be certain in-built
safeguards so that these provisions are not misused by those who want to misuse it for ulterior
purposes.
8.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

65
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 4 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
15. Shri Datta Meghe
16. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
17. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
18. Shri Lalu Prasad
19. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
20. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
21. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
65

66
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
3. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
3. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. Surender Singh Chahar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Inder Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the day i.e., to further hear the Home Secretary on the Criminal
Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 in the light of the Justice Verma Committee Report.
3. The Chairman, thereafter apprised the Members that the Government promulgated the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 on 3
rd February, 2013 even while the Committee was
examining the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012. The Members felt surprised on fresh
development, and also took note of the reports coming from Women organizations, civil societies
and other fora protesting against the said Ordinance on account of not accepting the
recommendations of Justice Verma Committee in toto.
3.1 The Committee, thereafter, wanted the Home Secretary to explain the circumstances which
necessitated the Government to issue the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013. Responding
to the Committee’s query, Home Secretary replied that the Committee could give holistic
recommendations after taking into account both the provisions in the Bill, Ordinance and also the
recommendations of the Verma Committee.... or any other provision which the Committee felt
appropriate to have in the Bill. The Government would have the benefit of the Committee’ s advice
over the whole gamut of issues.
3.2 The Committee sought to know whether it could discuss the Ordinance.  Responding to that
the Home Secretary replied that the Committee was entirely within its powers to take into account
any existing laws or proposed laws or any Ordinance or any other material which will have a
bearing on this subject.
3.3 A Member of the Committee opined that since the Ordinance was issued, it takes
precedence over the Bill because the Ordinance is the law. Another Member stated that the
Ordinance was only an improvement of the Bill in the light of the recommendations of the Verma
Committee. In his view the Government has accepted some portions of the Verma Committee
recommendations, and they have incorporated them  in the Ordinance.
3.4 The Home Secretary further responded to the queries of the Members of the Committee by
submitting that the Ordinance was not the final Act as it was an interim measure and  it has to
be followed by a Bill which would then be debated and translated into an Act by the Parliament.
3.5 Some Members, however, expressed their reservations as to whether the Committee can
continue to examine the Bill and make recommendations thereon. Moreover, that by not examining
the Bill further, would the Committee be abdicating its responsibility? Some Members also raised

67
the question that by issuing an Ordinance has the Government by-passed the Committee and the
Parliament? Responding to the view point of a Member of the Committee that an Ordinance has
been issued which in a way makes the original Bill referred to meaningless because it is the
Ordinance which was the law on the date, the Home Secretary added as under:–
The Home Secretary while responding about the relevance of the Bill, stated that  when the
proposed amendments, whether they are in the Bill or in the Verma Committee
recommendations, are considered, it should be against the backdrop of the existing law and
the existing law is not the IPC as it was, as it existed before the Ordinance, but the
provisions of the IPC as amendable by the Ordinance is the law. He further stated that law
is already in the public domain and the Committee has to take that into account. He further
clarified that the Committee has to take the existing law into account.
3.6 The Chairman clarified that the Government was very much in its jurisdiction to promulgate
Ordinance when the Parliament is not in Session. He added that when the Committee was
examining the Bill, the Government has forwarded a copy of JVC Report to the Committee for
discussion and the Government is also not under any legal obligation to accept all the
recommendations of the JVC. Therefore, DRSC on Home Affairs would consider only those
recommendations of the JVC which are related to prevent atrocities, violence and offence against
women.  The Home Secretary, thereon, endorsed that the stand of the Government was to get the
benefits of observations/recommendations of the Committee on Home Affairs for suitable
incorporation in the Bill replacing the Ordinance.
3.7 The Chairman then  stated that he would approach the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and
seek his guidance in the matter and find out whether there was any problem with regard to
proceeding further on examination of the Bill, after the Ordinance is issued.
3.8 The Chairman, then, requested all the Members to go through the Ordinance, Justice Verma
Committee recommendations, proposed Bill and come prepared with their suggestions.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.04 
P.M. to meet again on 11 th February, 2013.

68
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11 th February, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Adsul
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
11. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
12. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
15. Shri Lalu Prasad
16. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
17. Shri Ravneet Singh
18. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
68

69
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri K. Skandan,  Additional Secretary
2. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
3. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
4. Shrimati Praveen Kumar Singh, Director (CS)
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
3. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
4. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Legislative Counsel
5. Shri Udaya Kumara, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri B.A. Agrawal, Secretary
2. Shri D. Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
3. Shri T.K. Mallick, Assistant Legal Adviser
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda i.e.  to further hear the Home Secretary on the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012. The chairman also informed that in the meeting held on 4th February,
2013, the Home Secretary explained the circumstances under which the Ordinance was
promulgated and the Committee discussed the changed situation due to promulgation of the
Ordinance.
3.0 The Chairman clarified that as per the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha, an Ordinance can be promulgated to enforce the provisions of a Bill
which is pending before the Council and there had been similar instances in the past when Bills
were under consideration of the respective Committees and Ordinances were issued and in such
cases the Committees had gone ahead with the consideration of the Bills and gave their reports
thereon. He also mentioned about the decision taken in that sitting to continue with the examination
of the Bill, 2012. He further informed that he met the Secretary General and Chairman, Rajya Sabha
in this regard.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
4.0     The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to explain comparative position of
provisions of the Bill vis-a-vis the Ordinance and the suggestions made by the Verma Committee.
He also asked to explain the reasons for not accepting those suggestions made in the Verma
Committee.
5.0 The Additional Secretary, MHA submitted that Justice Verma Committee made a number of
recommendations relating to their terms of reference as well as outside it. The Committee had not
made any suggestions regarding amendments to be made for expeditious trial. The
recommendations made by the Committee can be grouped into two parts – (a) general policy
matters and administrative issues and (b) recommendations regarding the amendments to the
Criminal Laws as per their terms of reference. The general policy matters and administrative issues
deal with police reforms, education and electoral reforms. They have given a draft Bill of Rights

70
for women. The Committee has recommended for installation of CCTVs in police stations to ensure
proper procedures in handling, recording and filing complaints; provision of adequate safety
measures and amenities in all public transport vehicles with security guard, GPS and CCTVs;
a public emergency response system with one central ER No. and medico-legal guidelines to
perform a medical examination of a victim of sexual assault, etc. The Additional Secretary also
stated that such recommendations had been referred to the concerned Ministries for actions.
5.1 As regards the recommendations regarding amendments to Criminal Law, the Additional
Secretary informed that Justice Verma Committee had agreed to most of the provisions of the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and there was a broad convergence between the provisions
in Bill and recommendations of Justice Verma Committee.
5.2 He mentioned that in addition to the provisions in the Bill, Justice Verma Committee had
recommended certain other things such as Right to private defence of body, sexual harassment,
disrobing of a woman, voyeurism, stalking, etc., which have been accepted and incorporated in the
Ordinance. Regarding punishment for a public servant for knowingly disobeying any direction of
law, Justice Verma Committee recommended for five years, but the Government had agreed to one
year by keeping the provision of the Bill intact.
5.3 Regarding compensation to the victim of acid attack under section 326 of IPC, Justice
Verma Committee recommended that the compensation should be adequate to meet, at least, the
medical expenses incurred by the victim. However, the Government considered that the fine of
Rs.10 lakhs was better and adequate and accordingly retained the same. Clarifying the issue
whether compensation would be from the State or from the perpetrator, in case the accused does
not have the means to pay the fine or the compensation, the representatives of the Ministry
submitted that under Section 357A of Cr.P.C. victim compensation is provided and ‘to the extent
possible’, the Government will do it under compensation scheme. The perpetrator will undergo
additional punishment or imprisonment in case he fails to pay the compensation. The Committee
was not convinced and felt that the expression ‘to the extent possible’ was a very vague term
which should be omitted and Centre and the State Governments must together come to the rescue
and rehabilitation of victim and ensure compensation. The Chairman also observed that the States
also do not have adequate resources. Therefore, the Central Government must evolve a scheme to
compensate the States to share the financial burden. Clarifying the issue of compensation in case
of attempt to throw acid, the additional Secretary maintained that since there would not be any
injury and medical expenses in that case, the recommendation of Justice Verma Committee in this
regard was redundant.
5.4 With regard to Section 354 of IPC, the legislative Secretary submitted that the Verma
Committee wanted it to be replaced with an offence of sexual assault and punishment for sexual
assault. After examining the Verma Committee Report, the original Section 354 has been retained
but with increased inprisonment from one year to five years. In addition, new offences, which
were recommended by the Verma Committee with regard to sexual harassment, voyeurism, stalking
and disrobing of women, have been created on the basis of recommendation of Verma Committee,
which were earlier not there in the Bill.
5.5 Commenting on Section 370 of IPC, the Legislative Secretary submitted that it existed
since 1860 and was very restrictive in nature dealing with buying or disposing of any person as
a slave. The new proposal sought to substitute it with new Sections 370 and 370A to deal with
trafficking of persons including the slavery as well as making it gender neutral. The chairman
observed that exploitation should include sexual exploitation only and other aspects should be
taken care of separately. However the Joint Secretary, MHA informed that it was actually
universal definition of ‘human trafficking’ and the country is a signatory to the U.N. Convention
on Organised Crime.

71
5.6 A new offence under Section 370A for employing a trafficked person has been added in
the Ordinance on the basis of the recommendation of the Verma Committee. The Chairman
however observed that such provisions could be misused in the rural areas, where farmers hire
people. If somebody files a complaint, they would be arrested. Therefore ‘trafficking’ should mean
trafficking for sexual purpose. Another member also opined that this could also be against those
people across the country who employ domestic helpers. Another Member opined that it includes
bonded labour which deserved a specific law by itself. The Joint Secretary, MHA submitted that
trafficking was a large scale phenomenon happening in the country in all types. He cited practices
in Haryana where the brides were being imported at a particular cost. The Additional Secretary
stated that the concern of the Committee was noted and assured to re-examine it.
5.7 The Legislative Secretary informed that the Verma Committee wanted to retain the offence
of rape under 375. However the Legislative Department thought to make the offence of rape as
gender neutral with the word ‘sexual assault’ to make it wider and including the offence of rape
also. One Member of the Committee questioned the intention of making the offences gender neutral
in view of the increasing atrocities and violence against women in the country.  However, other
Members reacted to this and opined that it should be gender neutral as it covers wider ambit of
the entire issue. The Legislative Secretary clarified that the Government has created two types of
offences. One is sexual harassment which is of a lower level. However, the other one, sexual
assault, is a substitute for the existing rape, is a serious offence.
5.8 Regarding Sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D and 376E of IPC, the Legislative
Secretary informed that the offences had been made gender neutral and in two Sections 376A and
376E which deal with death penalty in case the action of accused leads to death or vegetative state
of the victim or in the case of repeat offenders, though Verma Committee did not recommend. The
Verma Committee also had not made any recommendation on Section 376B dealing with sexual
assault by husband upon his wife during separation.
5.9 Under  Section 509 of IPC dealing  with modesty of a woman,  the punishment has been
increased from one year to three years and also with fine. The Committee wanted to know the
experience of Delhi Police and safeguards against misuse of this Section as well as reasons for
retaining it when Justice Verma Committee has recommended for its repeal. Responding to the
queries, the Additional Secretary submitted that the Government has retained as a deterrent against
increasing eve teasing and the offence has been made cognizable to have zero tolerance society
with respect to crime against women; and this is the starting point of all crimes against women.
The Committee opined that ragging was also needed to be brought under it as inhuman things,
including sexual assault, removal of clothes and then walking naked were being done under it. It
sometimes led to suicide and murder.
6.0 Regarding amendments of Section 54A of Criminal Procedure Code, The Legislative
Secretary pointed out that existing Section 54A of Cr.PC was being modified to take care of
procedural aspect to make it more convenient for identification of the person. The Chairman of the
Committee suggested that the videography, should be mandatory.
6.1 With regard to proviso to Sections 154 and 161 of Cr.P.C., the  Legislative Secretary stated
that the Verma Committee has also made a similar recommendation. The Committee desired that the
words “as far as possible” may be deleted and recording of the statement could be entrusted  to
a woman Government officer in the absence of a woman police officer.
6.2 Section 160 Cr.P.C. provide certain protection to the physically disabled person or persons
who are below the age of 18 years or above the age of 65 years or women to see  that those
people are not summoned unnecessarily. The Chairman observed that the upper age of 65 years
should be reconsidered. He also felt that the age of juvenile should also be revisited.

72
6.3 The Section 164 of Cr.P.C. deals with recording of the confessions and the statements. A
new sub-section is being added for recording of the statement of the person against whom such
offence has been committed as soon as the commission of the offence is brought to the notice
of the police. The Legislative Secretary further stated that if the victim is disabled, then the
assistance of an interpreter or a special educator is to be provided when the statement is recorded
and the same may be videographed. The Committee felt that the videography should be mandatory.
6.4 With regard to Sections 198B and 273 and 327 of Cr. P.C. and  Section 53A  of the
Evidence Act, the Committee agreed to the provisions made there under. Regarding Section 119 of
the Evidence Act, the Committee felt that videography should be made mandatory.
7.0 The Chairman also asked the representatives to furnish information on the issues not
respond orally in the meeting.
8.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9.0 The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

73
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 18 th February, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shrimati Kanimozhi
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Lalu Prasad
14. Shri Rathod Ramesh
15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
17. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Secretary
73

74
2. Shri K. Skandan, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
4. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
5. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
Representative of Delhi Police
Shri S.B.K. Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police, Crime
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
      2. Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
      3. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
      4. Shri Udaya Kumara, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. Surender Singh Chahar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Inder Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. clause by clause consideration of  the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012.
[At this Stage, witnesses were called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked the Home Secretary to respond to the
issues/queries raised by the Members of the Committee during the last sitting.
4. On the issue pertaining to trafficking, the Home Secretary expressed agreement with the
view of the Committee that the Bill should limit itself to sexual aspects or sexual violence and not
tread into areas which could be covered by other Acts. On the issues of compensation to be given
to the victims, he informed that the Central Government was urging all the State Governments to
bring schemes for compensation under the relevant provisions of the law. However on the point
of payment of compensation to victim by Government in case of inability of the convict to pay
fine,  he stated that the Government would not be able to agree because if Government accepts
this, then it would have to be applicable to all IPC crimes and the State cannot afford. Using the
taxpayers’ money for compensating crimes committed by a particular person would not be
sustainable. The Chairman, however, was not convinced and mentioned that the Committee would
make its recommendation in this regard after discussing among Members.
5. With regard to use of word ‘intercourse’ under Section 376B of IPC as it could give a
wrong signal, the Home Secretary clarified that the words ‘sexual assault’ had not been used
because after  inducing or seducing, the consent had been obtained and if it amounts to sexual
assault, then this section will not apply.
6. Regarding section 509 of IPC which related to insult to the modesty of a woman, the
Chairman enquired about the safeguards against the misuse of this Section and the experience of
Delhi Police. The representative of Delhi Police informed that under section 509, 229 cases in 2011
and 236 cases in 2012 were registered. In the year 2013, in the first month only, Delhi Police had
registered 306 cases as more women were coming forward. He further submitted that under this
section, the chargesheet is filed on the basis of the statements of the girl and sometimes, it
becomes difficult because a complaint may be with some ulterior motive also. The Home Secretary

75
submitted that eve teasing was the most common problem and most girls try to swallow it. As it
was a non-cognizable offence with simple imprisonment of one year and if the case was forwarded
to the Magistrate, he may or may not take action or may take years to decide the case. In that
circumstance, the boy might be back on the roads doing the same thing again, exposing the girl,
to more hazards. The Government therefore was proposing to make the offence cognizable with
enhanced punishment to three years. Commenting on the possibility of the provision being misused,
the Home Secretary clarified  that kind of probability was not so much because before the Courts,
mens rea  is an essential element to a crime which has to be established. Regarding necessity of
having Section 509 when Section 354A covers “unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures” and
“non-verbal conduct of sexual nature” under it, the Committee observed that while Section 354A
straightaway deals with sexual harassment in gender neutral way, whereas Section 509 deals with
most common offences being committed on the streets, in schools, colleges.
7. With regard to amendments in Cr.P.C., the Home Secretary agreed to the suggestion of the
Committee and informed that Government was planning to do away with the words ‘as far as
possible’ and putting the words ‘should be recorded by a woman police officer, or, if the woman
police officer is not present, by any other woman officer.’
8. Regarding proposed exemption of attendance to a male witness of under 18years in Section
160 of Cr.P.C., the Home Secretary submitted that the Government had no objection in retaining
the original provision of 15 years.
9. With regard to Section 53A of the Evidence Act, the Chairman, while taking note of the
legal status of prostitution, asked about the remedy available in case a prostitute files a complaint
after changing her mind. The Home Secretary admitted that this kind of hazard was there, and,
it would always be there in all cases of sexual relations.  Responding to a query regarding changing
of mind by lady due to non fulfilling of promise after living together for years or for a considerable
time, the Home Secretary opined that in such case, sexual assault may not be made out but a case
of breach of promise could be made out because for making out a case of sexual assault, she
would have to prove that there was no consent. When the chairman drew attention to the fact that
Consents were not given in writing, the Home Secretary admitted existence of grave hazard in this
regard.
10. With regard to sexual harassment during ragging, the Home Secretary submitted that ragging
would come under section 509 and it could not be any excuse to exempt any person. A crime will
be a crime, whether it is in the course of ragging or whatever. On being pointed out that the
Section 509 was woman specific and what about safeguards available to boys, the representative
of Delhi Police drew attention of the Committee to the gender neutrality of Section 354A. However,
the Home Secretary differed and stated that Ragging was not covered in the Section as requirement
of sexual undertone must be there.
11. Responding to the concerns of the Members regarding Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act,
the Home Secretary clarified that the Act gave no protection to any member of the Armed Forces
if he or she commits a sexual offence. The Act provided for requirement of sanction only in case
of acts done or purported to be done in the course of discharge of their duties. Sexual offences
cannot be in the course of discharge of duty and there was unnecessary controversy by saying
that Armed Forces had been left out. He further mentioned that not in a single case, the court had
asked for sanction under Section 197 or Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 in case of
sexual offence. Responding further to the Chairman’s observation regarding non registration of FIR
in such cases, the Home Secretary stated that non-registration of FIR was another problem which
happens, not only in sexual offences but also in other offences because of  the normal tendency
of the officer-in-charge to avoid registration of FIRs to keep the crime graph low. But, in case
of sexual assault, if FIR is not registered, that police officer will be liable to criminal action. With

76
regard to issue concerning court martial, the Home Secretary submitted that the Army had an
option for trial and if the Army conducts a court martial, it will have to tell the same to the court.
However, with regard to trial of sexual offence in normal courts under the IPC or under the court
martial in the military courts, he assured to revert back on this issue.
12. On the issue of reducing the juvenile age from 18 to 16 in view of their involvement in
heinous crimes and need for differentiation in this regard, the Home Secretary opined that  a boy
of 16 years could be like an adult and commit as heinous crime as anybody could do. The
Legislative Secretary submitted that it was possible to reduce the age of juveniles under the existing
law, but a policy decision in this regard had to be taken. In some other countries like UK, the age
group between 15 and 18 is treated differently, in case they commit heinous crimes, then they are
tried by the normal courts, not by the juvenile courts.  In spite of the International Convention that
the age of the juvenile should be 18 years, these laws have been amended keeping in view the
crimes being committed by persons in the age group of 15 to 18 years.
13.0 The Chairman then mentioned about the suggestions given by Shri Naveen Jindal, a Member
of the Committee. The Home Secretary assured to consider those suggestions.
14.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
15.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.

77
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21 st February, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shrimati Kanimozhi
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Adsul
9. Shri L.K. Advani
10. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
12. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
13. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
14. Shri Naveen Jindal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
17. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
18. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Secretary
77

78
2. Shri K. Skandan, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
4. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
5. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
6. Shrimati P.K. Singh, Director
Representative of Delhi Police
Shri S.B.K. Singh, Joint Commissioner of Police, Crime
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. Surender Singh Chahar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Inder Kumar, Joint Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e., clause-by-clause consideration of the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012.
{At this stage witnesses were called in}
2.1  The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and Legislative Secretary and representatives of
Department of Legal Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and asked the Home Secretary to give
replies on the issues raised by members  during the last meeting before  taking  up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
2.2   The Chairman, then, clarified that except Sections 100 and 370 of Indian Penal Code all other
Clauses of the Bill were to be amended as per Ordinance, therefore, the Committee should take
into account the provisions of the Ordinance and recommendations of Verma Committee Report,
if required. The Chairman asked the Home Secretary about the fate of the Bill and introduction of
a Bill replacing Ordinance.
2.3 Responding to the Chairman’s query Home Secretary informed that Government will
withdraw the present Bill and it has drafted a Bill replacing an Ordinance which would be
introduced in Parliament as soon as possible, however, Government would try to  incorporate most
of the suggestions given by the committee. The Chairman suggested that the Government should
wait for the Committee report on Bill. The Home Secretary assured that he will discuss the matter
with Home Minister.
3.0 The Committee, thereafter, took up the existing provisions for  consideration in the light of
the provisions of the Ordinance promulgated by the Government and Verma Committee Report.
3.1 Section 100 of IPC
3.1.1 The Committee took up the amendment to Section 100 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC),
which is provided in the Ordinance and not there in the Bill. The Home Secretary informed the
Committee that they had discussed with the Ministry of law and came with a slightly better
formulation, which reads as under:
“After sixthly, the following shall be inserted:
An act of throwing or administering acid, which may reasonably call apprehension that
grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such act.”

79
3.1.1 The Committee decided to go ahead with the new formulation of the Ministry.
3.2 Section 166 of IPC
3.2.1 The Committee took up amendment to Section 166 A of the IPC. The Chairman informed
the Committee that the Committee may accept the Section 166A as provided in the Ordinance,
however, he suggested that the imprisonment may be made rigorous.
3.3 Section 326A of IPC
3.3.1 Section 326A deals with voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc. A Member
suggested that the fine imposed under this section shall be given to the person on whom the acid
was thrown or to whom the acid was administered i.e. the fine money has to be used for treatment
of the victim. The Committee accepted the provision of Ordinance.
3.4 Section 326B of IPC
3.4.1 In Section 326B, some Members suggested that instead of the words ‘attempts to
administer’, there should be the words ‘administers or attempts to administer’. The Home
Secretary agreed with the view of the Members.
3.5 Section 354B of IPC
3.5.1 Section 354B provides punishment of imprisonment of not less than three years, extend-
able up to seven years. Some Members felt that this punishment is insufficient and should be
increased. They also suggested that it could be made life imprisonment. The Committee, however,
decided to increase it to five years extendable upto ten years. The Committee also felt that the
victim has to be a woman and the perpetrator can be anybody. Some Members felt that in certain
occasions there may be crowd which cheers and applaud the disrobing of a woman publicly, and
in such cases, entire crowd should be held responsible. The Committee, however, felt that only
those participating in the act can be held liable and holding the entire crowd watching could be
stretching too far.
3.6 Section 354C of IPC
3.6.1 Regarding Section 354C, which provides for voyeurism, some Members felt that the
punishment of one year for the first offence is not sufficient; it should be increased.  The
Committee, however, felt that it is already one year to three years for first offence and three to
seven years for second offence,  therefore, it will not be appropriate to increase the punishment
for the first offence.  Some Members again raised the issue of making accused or perpetrator
gender specific.  The Committee, however, decided to go with the present proposition as provided
in the Bill and Ordinance.
3.7 Section 354D of IPC
3.7.1 While discussing about Section 354D, some Members expressed doubts regarding the words
‘watches’ or ‘spies’ on a person and their implication. It was felt that though the word ‘spies’ on
a person can be understood but the word ‘watches’ may have wider ramification. On being asked
the Home Secretary clarified that watching has to be designed and it must result in a fear of
violence or serious alarm or distress in mind of such person or interferes with the mental peace
of the person. The Committee, however, felt that Home Secretary should discuss the issue with
Law Ministry and take a view in the matter.

80
3.8 Sections 370 and 370A of IPC
3.8.1 While discussing about trafficking in Section 370 and Section 370A, some Members
expressed the doubt about the use of the words ‘forced labour’ or ‘services’ in the present law.
It was felt that since the law specifically belonged to criminal assault, all provisions relating to
labour, forced labour, etc., should appropriately be dealt in different laws. The Home Secretary
agreed with the view of the Committee.
3.9 Section 375 of IPC
3.9.1    While discussing about Section 375, some Members felt that the word ‘rape’ should also
be kept within the scope of sexual assault. The Home Secretary clarified that there is a change
of terminology and the offence of ‘rape’ has been made wider. Some Members also suggested that
somewhere there should be some room for wife to take up the issue of marital rape. It was also
felt that no woman takes marriage so simple that she will just go and complain blindly. Consent
in marriage cannot be treated as consent forever. Several Members of the Committee, however, felt
that the marital rape has the potential of destroying the institution of marriage. The Committee felt
that if a woman is aggrieved by the acts of her husband, there are other remedies of approaching
the court. In India, for ages, the family system has evolved and it is moving forward. The
institution of family is able to resolve the problems. It was, therefore, felt that if the marital rape
is brought under the law, the entire family system will be under great stress and the Committee
may perhaps be doing more injustice.
3.9.2 Some Members also suggested that the age mentioned in the exception to the Section may
be raised to 18 years from 16 years. The exception provides that sexual intercourse or sexual acts
by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under 16 years of age, is not sexual assault. The
Home Secretary, responding to this suggestion, stated that by doing so by one stroke, thousands
of marriages in different States would be outlawed.
3.10 Section 376 of IPC
3.10.1   While discussing Section 376, the Committee felt that in sub-Section (1) of Section 376,
the liability of the accused to pay compensation to the victim, which shall be adequate to meet at
least medical expenses incurred by the victim should also be included. The Committee, accordingly,
decided to add this in sub-Section (1) of Section 376. Some Members also mentioned that the State
needs to take care of the medical expenditure, treatment, etc. of the victim.
3.10.2 In Sub-Section 2 of Section 376, the Chairman brought to the notice of the Home Secretary
that in item (1) of sub-Section 2 of Section 376, the word ‘political’ has been deleted in the
Ordinance whereas it is there in the Bill. The Committee decided to accept the version of the Bill.
One Member felt that there should be a clause providing for punishment when a person has a
medical condition that can be transmitted through sexual intercourse and that person knowingly
commits such intercourse without use of protection devices and that act should also be brought
under aggravated crime. The Home Secretary stated that Section 270 of the IPC provides for
punishment for this though it is slightly less. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
punishment under Section 270 may be increased suitably.
Section 376 A
3.10.3 While discussing Section 376A, some Members felt that the Government will have to take
a decision regarding death penalty. It was stated that several countries have abolished the death
penalty whereas India is still continuing with it. However, the majority of the Members felt that
the issue of abolishing death penalty is totally a different matter and needs to be discussed and

81
decided separately. The Committee took note of the fact that the death penalty being proposed
under Section 376A is only in the extreme case where the victim has died or goes in a vegetative
state and under Section 376E in the case of a repeat offender. Accordingly, majority of the
Members agreed to the view of accepting present provision for death.
Section 376B
3.10.4 The Committee, then took up Section 376B i.e. Sexual assault by husband upon his wife
during separation and Section 376C relating to Sexual intercourse by a person in authority for
discussion and agreed with the provisions of the Ordinance.
3.10.4 While taking up Section 376D relating to Sexual assault by gang, where, the punishment
is the imprisonment for life thereby meaning imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, the Chairman of the Committee sought to know the reason for variation in
provision for punishment in Section 376A  where there is provision for death penalty and 376D
where punishment for imprisonment for life for the offence of sexual assault by one or more
persons. Responding to that the Home Secretary stated that for sexual assault by gang not
causing death the punishment has been kept for imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life.
3.11 Section 509 of IPC
3.11.1 The Committee then took up Section 509 for discussion. The Bill originally provides for a
fine of Rs.1,000/- besides simple imprisonment for a term up to three years but the Ordinance does
not contain the amount of fine. The Committee, however, decided that the amount should be
included in the provision and it should be increased to Rs. 2,000/-.
3.12 Section 54A of Cr.P.C.
3.12.1    The Committee then took up Section 54A of the Cr.P.C. This provision is in the
Ordinance whereas the Bill does not contain this. The Section, originally, as in the Ordinance,
provides that if a person identifying the person, arrested, is mentally or physically disabled, the
identification process may be videographed. The Committee felt that the word ‘may’ should be
changed to ‘shall’ and decided to make recommendation accordingly.
3.13 Section 154 of Cr.P.C.
3.13.1 Some Members felt that the use of words ‘as far as possible’ should not be there because
whenever a statement is taken from a woman, a woman officer should always be there. The
Committee, accordingly, decided to delete the words ‘as far as possible’. The Committee also felt
that whenever a woman police officer is not available, any woman Government officer could be
made available to record the statement. Similarly, in Clause (b) of the Second Proviso, the words
‘may be recorded’ may be changed to ‘shall be recorded’.
3.14 Section 160 Cr.P.C.
3.14.1 In this clause, Section 160 of the Cr.P.C. is proposed to be amended by providing that no
male person under the age of 18 years and above the age of 65 years or a woman shall be required
to give personal attendance. As of now, a male person below 15 years and a woman is not required
to give attendance to a police man. The Ordinance includes physically or mentally disabled person
also. The Committee also feels that the words ‘fifteen years’ as prescribed in the proviso of the
Section 160 of Cr.P.C. may be retained.

82
3.15 Section 161 Cr.P.C.
3.15.1 Section 161 of Cr.P.C. regarding the statement by a woman about alleged offence under
Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 shall be recorded as far as possible by a woman
officer. The proviso in the Bill and the Ordinance also contain the words ‘as far as possible’. The
Committee felt that the words ‘as far as possible’ may be omitted and the words ‘or in her absence
other woman Government officer’ may be added at the end.
3.16 Section 164 Cr.P.C.
3.16.1 Section 164 Cr.P.C .  provides for recording of statement of the victim for crime committed
against victim under certain Sections of the IPC along with provisos.  The Ordinance has an
amendment to Section 164 of the Criminal Procedure Code proposing that while recording of the
statement by a magistrate of temporarily, permanently physically, mentally disabled, the magistrate
shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement.
3.17 Section 198 B Cr. P.C.
3.17.1  The Ordinance also provides for insertion of a new Section, viz., Section 198B which is
not there in the Bill. Section 376B of Indian Penal Code provides for making the offence for ‘sexual
assault by a husband upon his wife during separation’ as cognizable. The Home Secretary clarified
that the Verma Commission has recommended for doing away with it on the pretext that the same
punishment should apply here that applies to a stranger having sexual relationship. However, the
Government is not doing away that provision  but the cognizance of crime would be taken on the
complaint of wife, not on the complaint by a third person.
3.18 Section 273 of Cr.P.C.
3.18.1 The proposed Amendment seeks to insert a new proviso to Section 273 of Cr.P.C. so that
court would be required to make appropriate measures to ensure that a person below the age of
18 years and who is alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault etc. is not confronted by the
accused although the right of cross examination would still be there. The Committee accepted the
proposition.
3.19 Section 327 of Cr.P.C.
3.19.1 Section 327 of Cr.P.C.  says, “trial of sexual assault or offence under section 376 shall be
conducted in camera. ” The proposed Amendment seeks to amend Section 327 of Cr.P.C.
substituting the words, figures or letters “trial of rape or an offence under Sections 376, 376A,
376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian Penal Code”, by the words, figures or letters “trial of sexual
assault or an offence under Sections 354, 376A and 376B of the Indian penal Code”. However, the
Ordinance contains three additional Sections, viz., 376C, 376D and 376E of the IPC. The
Committee acceded to the amendment.
3.20 Section 53A of the Indian Evidence Act
3.20.1    The amendment seeks to insert new Section namely, Section 53A after Section 53 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 regarding evidence of conduct or character of the victim or previous
sexual experience with any person. The Committee accepted the amendment.
3.21 Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act
3.21.1   Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 provides for presumption as to absence
of consent in certain prosecution for sexual assault. Ordinance includes additional Clause (m) and

83
has the words ‘such person’ in the place of the words ‘he or she’. The Home Secretary clarified
that it is an existing section which provides that where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved
and the question is whether it was without the consent of the one alleged to have been raped and
she states in her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall presume that
she did not consent. It shifts the burden of proof on the accused, which is normally not there in
jurisprudence but the burden of proof shifts when the victim says that her consent was not there.
Her statement by itself is taken at its face value. The Government is proposing to replace the word
‘rape’ with the word ‘sexual assault’.
3.22 Section 119 of the Indian Evidence Act
3.22.1 The Ordinance provides for substitution of Section 119 of the Indian Evidence Act which
is not there in the Bill. This replacing Section deals with witness who is unable to communicate
verbally. The Ordinance contains the words ‘may be video graphed’ but the Committee felt that
it may changed to ‘shall be video graphed’.
3.23 Section 146 of the Indian Evidence Act
3.23.1 The Committee took note of the text of the new proviso, as drafted in the Ordinance which
includes consequential changes due to addition of new Sections in IPC connected with sexual
assault. The Home Secretary clarified that  where the question of consent is an issue, it shall not
be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the victim as
to his or her general immoral character, or as to his or her previous sexual experience with any
person for proving such consent or the quality of consent. The Committee sought to know way
out in case of false accusation to which the Home Secretary acceded to examine the issue in detail.
4.0 The Chairman, then, made general observations of the Committee which inter-alia  include:-
4.1 Government must make arrangements for recruitment of women force in police to facilitate
establishment of women cells in each police station of the country and the Union Ministry of Home
Affairs must impress upon the State Governments to take suitable measures to enhance the strength
of the women police force to the level of, at least, 33 per cent of total police strength.
4.2 The registration of FIRs should be made mandatory. Any dereliction of duty on the part of
any particular officer of not registering an FIR will be punishable. The Committee sought  that
once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on to the higher police officer for information and
necessary direction in the matter ensuring time-bound investigation. The Committee further felt that
investigation should be completed within a period of 60 days.
4.3 The Government should make suitable arrangements for installation and enforcement of
Global Positioning System (GPS) in police vehicles and Surveillance Cameras at all strategic
locations. The GPS would not only enhance the functional and operational efficiency of the Police
but would also inject transparency in the system besides smooth and easy tracking of crimes in
the country.
4.4 There should be restriction upon the media showcasing women in poor light and effective
measures should be enforced to prohibit film industry from showing obscenity, vulgarity and
violence against women and pornography denigrating women folks.
4.5 Tragic events in the recent past and the continuing trend of crimes, especially rape and
gang rape have shaken the country making significant erosion of people’s faith due to delay in
investigation, prosecution, under-trial, making the people disappointed with the system. The
Committee, therefore, strongly felt that the time has come to undertake the process of introspection
and take up judicial reforms immediately. The Government must undertake policy and legislative

84
changes for re-engineering of procedure and court process. The Committee felt that there was an
urgent need to take steps towards strengthening judicial system for ensuring speedy justice for all
in the real spirit of democracy and the rule of law. The Committee viewed  that adequate
infrastructure development at subordinate as well as higher judiciary level with sufficient budgetary
provision is necessary for achieving the goal of pendency reduction.
4.6   The Committee, therefore, strongly opined  that Government must create special fast track
courts for handling cases of rape and gang rapes including domestic violence in all parts of the
country or at least one court in each district wherever there is the need.
4.7 The Committee also discussed the issue that the definition of juvenile accused has to be
revisited in view of the fact that in the recent past it has been reported that a number of crimes
are committed by the boys of the age between 16 and 18 years. However, consensus could not
emerge on the issue.
4.8 The Committee observed  that education system has far reaching and lasting impact on the
mindset of growing children and integration of social  and moral values imbibing Indian culture,
customs and traditions during the school life is necessary to establish ethical and moral
development coupled with deep regard for human values. The Committee, therefore, concluded
that the school curriculum and management, classroom atmosphere and overall education system
must aim at imbibing and integrating moral development with values of family system, respect for
women and preservation of life and peaceful environment amongst children.
4.9 Coming to compensation to victims of acid attack, the Committee was of the view that in
case the convict is not in a position to pay fine to the victim, both the Union Government and
the State Government should take steps to rescue the victim.
5.0 The Chairman directed the Secretariat to prepare draft Report on the Bill for consideration
and adoption at its next meeting on 26
th February 2013.
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 6.05 
P.M.

85
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 26 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
“C”, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shrimati Kanimozhi
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Adsul
9. Shri L.K. Advani
10. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
14. Shri Naveen Jindal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
3. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
85

86
4. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
5. Shrimati P.K. Singh, Director
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
   Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. Surender Singh Chahar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Inder Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. consideration and adoption of 165
th and 166 th Action Taken
Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in 161 st and 162 nd Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of DoNER respectively, 167 th Report on Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 and 168 th Report on the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012. The Chairman proposed that  in the first instance, the Committee
could adopt the 165
th, 166 th and 168 th Reports of the Committee and  invited Members to give this
suggestions on these Reports. The Committee then adopted the above mentioned Reports with some
minor modifications.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the 167 th Report on Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill,
2012 for consideration and adoption. He informed that the Home Secretary had been invited to give
clarification, as and when required. He also mentioned that some women’s organisations
approached him and offered some suggestions and he would discuss those suggestions while taking
up the relevant sections for final consideration and adoption. He clarified that the Committee had
discussed various issues threadbare in the earlier meetings and would not take up fresh issue for
discussion.
[At this Stage, witnesses were called in]
3A. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked the Home Secretary to respond on the
issue of making the perpetrator male only and constraints in accepting this proposition. The Home
Secretary responded that our culture was evolving on the lines of the Western culture and people
in authority, whether they are men or women, can misuse their position of authority. There had
been instances of this nature in the West but fortunately, the Government had not come across any
such instances in our country. Some Members felt that the law should be gender neutral as law
was made for posterity and there was no harm in keeping it gender neutral. After some discussion
the Committee finally concluded that perpetrator should be gender neutral.
4. The Committee therefore took up clause wise adoption of the Bill and then adoption of the
Report.
4.1 Clause 1A ( Section 100 of IPC)
(Insertion of new Clause in the Bill)
4.1.1 This Clause seeks to amend Section 100 of IPC which deals with the right of private
defence of the body. The Committee noted that the Ordinance contained an amendment to Section
100 of IPC whereas such an amendment was not there in the Bill, which was under consideration
of the Committee. The Home Secretary, clarified that they have got better formulation after
consulting the Law Ministry. The Committee agreed with the view point of the Home Secretary.
Accordingly, the following Clause was inserted in the Bill before Clause 2:–

87
“Clause 1A In the Indian Penal Code (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Penal
Code), in Section 100, after the clause sixthly, the following shall be inserted:
Seventhly- An act of throwing or administering acid which may reasonably cause
apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such act.”
4.1.2 The Clause 1A was inserted.
4.2 Clause 2 (Section 166A of IPC)
4.2.1 This clause seeks to insert a new section 166A in the Indian Penal Code regarding public
servant disobeying direction under law.
4.2.2 The Committee took note of addition of Clause (c) in the Ordinance which was missing in
the Bill and felt that the same may be added in the Bill. The Committee also felt that the provision
of simple imprisonment is not sufficient in view of the gravity of the crimes committed under
Sections 354, 354A, 354B, 354C, sub-Section (2) of Section 354D, Sections 376, 376A, 376B,
376C, 376D and 376E. The Committee, accordingly, recommended for the insertion of the word
“rigorous” punishment in the Section and crimes could also be made cognizable and non-bailable.
4.2.3 S ubject to the above recommendation, the Clause was adopted, as amended.
4.3 Clause 3 (Sections 326A and 326B of IPC)
4.3.1 This clause seeks to insert new Sections 326A and 326B to make acid attack or attempt
to throw acid specific offence. The Committee took note of the amendments made in these
Sections 326A and 326B in the Ordinance which widened the nature of the crime and also added
two explanations in Section 326B. The Committee agreed to the changes made in the Ordinance
and felt that the same may be incorporated in the Bill.
4.3.2 The Committee took note of unregulated sale of highly concentrated acid in open
market and recommended for its regulation to ensure its sale to the genuine end-users.
4.3.3 Subject to the above observation, the Clause was adopted, as amended.
4.4 Clause 4 (Section 354 IPC)
4.4.1 This clause seeks to amend section 354 to enhance the punishment for assault or criminal
force to women with intent to outrage her modesty.
4.4.2 The Committee recommended that the minimum fine of one thousand rupees should be
increased to five thousand rupees.
4.4.3 The Clause was adopted, as amended.
4.5 Clause 4A (Sections, i.e., 354A, 354B, 354C and 354D of IPC)
(Insertion of new clauses)
4.5.1 This new clause seeks to cover various aspects pertaining to sexual harassment and related
matters. The Committee noted that new Sections of  354A, 354B, 354C and 354D have been added
in the Ordinance in this regard.
4.5.2 Section 354A of the Ordinance provides for sexual harassment and punishment therefor.
Section 354B provides for assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe her.
Sections 354C and 354D deal with voyeurism and stalking respectively.
4.5.3 W ith regard to the Section 354B, the Committee felt that the punishment is not sufficient
for the crime and should be increased to five years, extendable to ten years with fine. The

88
Committee recommended for incorporation of the above said Sections in the Bill accordingly on the
suggested lines.
4.5.4 The Clause was inserted.
4.6 Clause 4B (Sections 370 and 370A of IPC)
(Insertion of new Clause)
4.6.1 This new clause seeks to substitute Section 370 of IPC (buying or disposing of any person
as a slave) with Sections 370 and 370A to deal with trafficking of persons and employing them
for exploitation. These new Sections were provided in the Ordinance, which were not there in the
Bill and the Committee felt that they be incorporated in the Bill.
4.6.2 The Committee observed that labour-related issues had been included in both the Sections
370 and 370A of the Ordinance, which were equally important. The Committee felt that since this
law being exclusively for sexual assault and related issues, labour and other related issues should
be dealt in a separate law.  The Home Secretary during the discussion agreed with the view point
of the Committee and assured to look into the matter on these lines. The Committee recommended
that both Sections 370 and 370A may be relooked in the light of the above observations.
4.6.3 The Committee also noted that forced prostitution and induced prostitution should also be
brought under the ambit of the expression ‘exploitation’ and ‘sexual exploitation’. The Committee
recommended that the Ministry of Home Affairs may look into the matter and bring both forced
prostitution and induced prostitution under the ambit of ‘exploitation’ and ‘sexual exploitation’.
4.6.4 Subject to the above observations, the Clause 4B was inserted.
4.7 Clause 5 (Sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C 376D and 376E of IPC)
4.7.1 This clause seeks to substitute Sections 375, 376, 376A and 376B by Sections 375, 376,
376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian Penal Code replacing the offence “rape” by “sexual
assault” to make the offence gender neutral and also to widen the scope of the offence.
Amendment to Section 375 proposes to raise the age for consent from 16 years to 18 years in
sexual assault as well as the age of wife from fifteen to sixteen years in the exception for sexual
assault. The Committee took note that the Ordinance made further amendments to the provisions
as contained in the Bill and also brought in some new Sections. The new Sections in Ordinance
provide for punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of the victim,
punishment for sexual assault by gang, and punishment of deaths for repeat offenders.
4.7.2 The Committee noted that the definition of ‘sexual assault’ has been revised drastically in
the Ordinance to widen the ambit of sexual assaults of various natures, which has more far
reaching implications than envisaged in Section 375 of the Bill. The Committee felt that the
provisions contained in Section 375 in the Ordinance needed to be incorporated in the Bill. The
Committee, however, felt that in the Exception provided after clause (e) of section 375 should not
cover clauses (a) & (d) of the Bill. The Committee recommended for a review in this regard while
bringing the new Bill.
4.7.3 Section 376 provides punishment for sexual assault. Sub-Section (1) of Section 376
provides punishment for sexual assault with not less than 7 years imprisonment, extendable up
to life with fine. The Committee was not in agreement with the imposition of fine for some
specified amount without mentioning about the intricacies involved in attending to the medical
needs of the victim. The Committee, therefore, recommended for paying adequate compensation
to the victim, to meet at least the medical expenses incurred by the victim in place of the word
“fine”.

89
4.7.4 The Committee also noted that the Ordinance contained ‘rigorous imprisonment’ whereas in
the Bill, it was only ‘imprisonment’. The Committee recommended that the word ‘rigorous’ may
be added before the word ‘imprisonment’ to make the punishment more tougher.
4.7.5 Sub-Section (2) of Section 376 deals with punishment for aggravated sexual assault. The
Committee noted addition of an item relating to armed forces in the Ordinance and inclusion of the
words “guardian or teacher” in Section 376(2) (e) of the Ordinance. The Committee further noted
a sub-clause dealing with gang rape has been deleted as the Ordinance has dealt with the issue of
gang rape in a separate Section comprehensively. The Committee also notes that in the Ordinance,
a new clause regarding sexual assault on a person incapable of giving consent has been added. The
Committee also noted deletion of the word ‘political’ in clause (i) of the sub-Section and
recommended for its retention.
4.7.6 The Committee further noted that the definitions of “police officer” and “armed forces”
have been added under the Explanation 1 of the Section 376(2) in the Ordinance which was not
there in the Bill. The Committee recommended for its addition. The Committee also noted that the
Explanation 2 at the end of the Section 376 (2) was redundant in view of the new Section 376D
dealing with sexual assault by gang and accordingly, recommended for its deletion.
4.7.7 Section 376A is a new Section in the Ordinance which is not there in the Bill. This Section
prescribes punishment of rigorous imprisonment not less than 20 years, extendable up to remainder
of natural life or death for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of the victim.
The Committee recommended for its insertion in the Bill before the present Section 376A of the
Bill.
4.7.8 The Committee noted that some persons convicted for rape and murder cases were given
clemency by the President of India. The Committee also noted a case wherein the accused died
well before the clemency was given. The Committee felt that application for clemency should not
be considered in rape and murder cases. The Committee also felt that mercy petitions should be
disposed of within three months and reasons for granting clemency should also be made public.
4.7.9 The Committee recommended that Sections 376A and 376B of the Bill may be re-numbered
as 376B and 376C. The re-numbered Section 376B of the Bill deals with sexual assault by husband
upon his wife during separation. The Committee made no change in this Section. The re-numbered
Section 376C of the Bill deals with sexual intercourse by a person in authority. The Committee
noted certain changes made in the Ordinance and recommended for changes accordingly. The new
sections 376D and 376E created  in the Ordinance which were not there in the Bill. Section 376D
deals with punishment for sexual assault by gang and 376E deals with punishment for repeat
offender. The Committee recommended for the addition of those Sections after the re-numbered
Section 376C.
4.7.10 Subject to above observations and recommendations, the Clause was adopted, as
amended.
4.8 Clause 6 (Section 509  of IPC)
4.8.1 This Clause seeks to amend Section 509 of IPC by enhancing the punishment from one
year to three years and fine not less than rupees one thousand for using words, gestures, acts,
etc. to insult the modesty of a woman.
4.8.2 The Committee noted that the fine prescribed under the Bill was not less than one thousand
rupees whereas the Ordinance did not mention any amount of the fine. The Committee
recommended that fine for eve teasing should be increased from one thousand rupees to two
thousand rupees to effectively tackle the problem.

90
4.8.3 The clause was adopted, as amended.
4.9 Clause 6A (Section 54A of Cr. P.C.)
(Insertion of a new Clause)
4.9.1 This Clause seeks to insert two provisos to the Section 54 A of Cr. P.C which deals with
the identification of the person arrested. The Committee felt that the facility of videography was
available in every part of the country and accordingly  recommended that the videography  may
be made mandatory.
4.9.10 The clause was inserted on the suggested lines.
4.10 Clause 7 (Section 154 of Cr. P.C)
4.10.1 This Clause seeks to insert a proviso at the end of Section 154 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1970 to provide that as far as possible information given by a woman for offence under
Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 shall be recorded by a woman police officer.
4.10.2  The Committee noted that the proviso made under Section 154 of Cr. P.C. has been
changed substantially in the Ordinance to include additional new Sections created in the Ordinance.
While agreeing to the changes, the Committee felt that the words ‘as far as possible’ would
frustrate the very purpose of this provision, and need to be omitted. Further, the Committee was
of the view that in the absence of woman police officer, other woman government officer may
be deputed for recording the information.
4.10.3 The Clause was adopted, as amended on the suggested lines.
4.11 Clause 8 (Section 160 Cr. P.C.)
4.11.1 In this clause, Section 160 of the Cr. P.C. is proposed to be amended by providing that
no male person under the age of 18 years and above the age of 65 years or a woman shall be
required to give personal attendance. As of now, a male person below 15 years and a woman is
not required to give attendance to a police man. The Ordinance includes physically or mentally
disabled person also.
4.11.2  The Committee felt   that the originally prescribed age of fifteen years in the Cr. P.C.
may be retained and  recommended that the word ‘eighteen’ may be substituted by the word
‘fifteen’ and the words ‘or a physically or mentally disabled person’ may be added after the word
‘woman’.
4.11.3 The clause was adopted, as amended.
4.12 Clause 9 (Section 161 Cr. P.C.)
4.12.1 This Clause seeks to amend Section 161 of Cr. P.C. regarding the statement by a woman
about alleged offence under Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 shall be recorded as far
as possible by a woman officer.
4.12.2 The Committee noted that the Ordinance included certain new Sections created in the
Ordinance along with Sections 354, 375, 376, 376A, 376B and 509 of IPC and be included in the
Bill also. The proviso in the Bill and the Ordinance also contain the words ‘as far as possible’.
The Committee recommended that the words ‘as far as possible’ may be omitted and the words
‘or in her absence other woman Government officer’ may be added.
4.12.3 The clause was adopted, as amended.

91
4.13 Clause 9A (Section 164 Cr. P.C.)
(Insertion of a new Clause)
4.13.1 This new Clause proposed to be inserted seeks to amend Section 164 of Cr.P. C.  on the
lines of Ordinance by proposing to insert a new Sub-section (5A) after Sub-section 5 to provide
recording of statement of the victim under certain Sections of the IPC along with provisos. The
Committee recommended that “videograph” may be made mandatory.
4.13.2 The Clause was inserted on the suggested lines.
4.14 Clause 9B (Section 198 B Cr. P.C.)
(Insertion of a new Clause)
4.14.1 This clause seeks to insert a new Section 198B on the lines of the Ordinance which has
not there in the Bill to provide for making the offence, as provided in Section 376B of Indian Penal
Code, cognizable. The Committee did not make any change in this Clause.
4.14.2 The Clause was inserted.
4.15 Clause 10 (Section 273 of Cr. P.C.)
4.15.1 This Clause seeks to insert a new proviso to Section 273 of Cr. P.C. so that court would
be required to make appropriate measures to ensure that a person below the age of 18 years and
who is alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault etc. is not confronted by the accused
although the right of cross examination would still be there. The Committee did not make any
change in this Clause.
4.15.2 The Clause was adopted.
4.16 Clause 11 (Section 327 of Cr. P.C.)
4.16.1 This Clause  seeks to amend Section 327 of Cr. P.C. substituting the words, figures or letters
“trial of rape or an offence under Sections 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian Penal
Code”, by the words, figures or letters “trial of sexual assault or an offence under Sections 354,
376A and 376B of the Indian penal Code”. The Committee noted that  the Ordinance contained three
additional Sections, viz., 376C, 376D and 376E of the IPC and recommended for their insertion.
4.16.2 The Clause was adopted, as amended.
4.17 Clause 12
4.17.1  This Clause seeks to carry out the consequential changes at the appropriate places in the
First Schedule to the Cr. P.C. under the heading “1-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL
CODE”. The Committee recommended that appropriate changes may be carried out in the Clause.
4.17.2 The clause was adopted, as amended.
4.18 Clause 13 (Section 53A of the Indian Evidence Act)
4.18.1 This Clause seeks to insert new Section namely, Section 53A after Section 53 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 regarding evidence of conduct or character of the victim or previous sexual
experience with any person. The Ordinance contains some additional Sections incorporated in this
Section which are not there originally in the Bill. The Committee agreed to the inclusion of
additional Sections in section 53A.
4.18.2 The Clause was adopted, as amended.

92
4.19 Clause 14 (Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act)
4.19.1 This Clause seeks to substitute Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which
provides for presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for sexual assault. The
Committee noted that the Ordinance included additional Clause (m) and the words ‘such person’
had been substituted with the words ‘he or she’. The Committee recommended that aforesaid
changes may be incorporated in the Bill.
4.19.2 The Clause was adopted, as amended.
4.20 Clause 14A (Section 119 of the Indian Evidence Act)
(Insertion of a new Clause)
4.20.1 The Ordinance provides for substitution of Section 119 of the Indian Evidence Act which
was not there in the Bill. This replacing Section deals with witness who is unable to communicate
verbally. The Committee recommended that videography may be made mandatory.
4.20.2 The Clause was inserted on the suggested lines.
4.21 Clause 15 (Section 146 of the Indian Evidence Act)
4.21.1 This Clause seeks to substitute the proviso under Section 146 of the Indian Evidence
regarding questions not to be put during the cross-examination of the victim, in the case of sexual
offence.
4.21.2 The Committee took note of the text of the new proviso, as drafted in the Ordinance which
includes consequential changes due to addition of new Sections in IPC connected with sexual
assault. The Ordinance also replaces the words ‘his or her’ by ‘such victim’. The Committee
agreed to the consequential changes.
4.21.3 The Clause was adopted, as amended.
4.22 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
4.22.1  Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were
of consequential/drafting nature.
5.0 The Committee adopted the Bill, as amended, and recommended for being passed.
6.0 The Chairman thereafter read out general observations and recommendations concerning to
the compensation to the victim of acid attack, better policing system, better portrayal of woman,
judicial reforms, moral education, ragging, responsibility of higher officers, and repeat offenders.
6.1 The Chairman  mentioned that he had been accommodative to the opinion of all, as far as
possible.
6.2 The Committee then took up the report for consideration and adopted and authorized its
Chairman make necessary corrections.
6.3 The Committee authorised the Chairman to cause presentation of the Reports to Parliament
on a suitable date and to decide the names of Members for presentation.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept and also to decide the names
of Members for presentations.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.

93
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
04 Dec., 2012
Bill No. 130 of 2012
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
95
Short title
and
commence-
ment.

96
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
2. After section 166 of the Indian Penal Code (hereafter in
this Chapter referred to as the Penal Code), the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“166A. Whoever, being a public servant,—
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law
which prohibits him from requiring the attendance at
any place of any person for the purpose of investigation
into an offence or any other matter, or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any
person, any other direction of the law regulating the
manner in which he shall conduct such investigation,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.”.
3. After section 326 of the Penal Code, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or
deformity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or disables any
part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt
by throwing acid on or administering acid to that person, with
the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is
likely to cause such injury or hurt, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than ten years but which may be for life and with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that any fine imposed under this section shall
be given to the person on whom acid was thrown or to
whom acid was administered.
326B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on
any person or attempts to administer acid to any person, with
the intention of causing permanent or partial damage or
deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or disability
or grievous hurt to that person shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to seven years
and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation .—For the purposes of sections 326A and
326B, “acid” includes any substance which has acidic or
corrosive character or burning nature that is capable of
causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement or
temporary or permanent disability.’.
Insertion of
new section
166A.
Public servant
disobeying
direction
under law.
Insertion of
new sections
326A and
326B.
Hurt by acid
attack.
Attempt to
throw or
administer
acid.
45 of 1860.

97
4. In section 354 of the Penal Code, for the words “shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both”, the words
“shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term of one year which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine which may not be less than one thousand rupees” shall
be substituted.
5. For sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the
Penal Code, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
‘375. A person is said to commit “sexual assault” if that
person—
(a) penetrates, for a sexual purpose, the vagina or
anus or urethra or mouth of another person with—
(i) any part of the body including the penis
of such person; or
(ii) any object manipulated by such person,
except where such penetration is carried out for
proper hygienic or medical purposes;
(b) manipulates any part of the body of another
person so as to cause penetration of the vagina or anus
or urethra or mouth of such person by any part of the
other person’s body;
(c) engages in “cunnilingus” or “fellatio”,
under the circumstances falling under any of the
following six descriptions:—
Firstly.—Against the other person’s will.
Secondly.— Without the other person’s consent.
Thirdly.— With the other person’s consent when such
consent has been obtained by putting such other person or
any person in whom such other person is interested, in fear
of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—When the person assaulted is a female, with
her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband
and that her consent is given because she believes that he is
another man to whom she is or believes to be lawfully
married.
Fifthly.—With the consent of the other person when, at
the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of
mind or intoxication or the administration by that person
Amendment
of section
354.
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections
375, 376,
376A, 376B,
376C and
376D.
Sexual assault.

98
personally or through another of any stupefying or
unwholesome substance, the other person is unable to
understand the nature and consequences of that action to
which such other person gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without the other person’s consent,
when such other person is under eighteen years of age.
Explanation I. —Penetration to any extent is
“penetration” for the purposes of this section.
Explanation II. —For the purposes of this section,
“vagina” shall also include labia majora.
Exception.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man
with his own wife, the wife not being under sixteen years of
age, is not sexual assault.
376. ( 1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by
sub-section ( 2), commits sexual assault, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than seven years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits sexual
assault—
(i) within the limits of the police station to
which such police officer is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a person in such police officer’s
custody or in the custody of a police officer
subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits sexual assault
on a person in such public servant’s custody or in the
custody of a public servant subordinate to such public
servant; or
(c) being on the management or on the staff of
a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in
force or of a women’ s or children’s institution,
commits sexual assault on any inmate of such jail,
remand home, place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of
a hospital, commits sexual assault on a person in that
hospital; or
(e) being a relative of, or a person in a position
of trust or authority towards, the person assaulted,
commits sexual assault on such person; or
Punishment
for sexual
assault.

99
(f) commits sexual assault on a woman knowing
her to be pregnant; or
(g) commits sexual assault on a person when
such person is under eighteen years of age; or
(h) being a member of a group of persons having
a common intention and in furtherance of that intention
commits sexual assault; or
(i) being in a position of economic or social or
political dominance, commits sexual assault on a person
under such dominance; or
(j) commits sexual assault on a person suffering
from mental or physical disability; or
(k) while committing sexual assault causes
grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or
endangers the life of a person; or
(l) commits persistent sexual assault,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “women’s or children’s institution” means an
institution, whether called an orphanage or a home for
neglected women or children or a widow’s home or an
institution called by any other name, which is established and
maintained for the reception and care of women or children;
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and
includes the precincts of any institution for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons
requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.
Explanation 2. — Where a person is subjected to sexual
assault by one or more persons in a group of persons acting
in furtherance of their common intention, each of the persons
in the group shall be deemed to have committed sexual assault
within the meaning of this sub-section.
376A. Whoever commits sexual assault on his own
wife, who is living separately under a decree of separation or
under any custom or usage, without her consent, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description, for a term
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
376B. Whoever,—
(a) being in a position of authority; or
Sexual assault
by husband
upon his wife
during
separation.
Sexual
intercourse by
a person in
authority.

100
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand
home or other place of custody established by or under
any law for the time being in force, or a women’s or
children’s institution; or
(d) being on the management of a hospital or
being on the staff of a hospital,
takes advantage of the position and induces or seduces any
person either in the first mentioned person’s custody or under
the first mentioned person’s charge or present in the premises
and has sexual intercourse with that person, such sexual
intercourse not amounting to the offence of sexual assault,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1. —In this section, “sexual intercourse”
shall mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( c) of
section 375.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of this section,
Explanations I and II to section 375 shall also be applicable.
Explanation 3. —“Superintendent”, in relation to a jail,
remand home or other place of custody or a women’s or
children’s institution includes a person holding any other
office in such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue
of which such person can exercise any authority or control
over its inmates.
Explanation 4. —The expressions “hospital” and
“women’s or children’s institution” shall respectively have the
same meaning as in Explanation 1 to subsection ( 2) of
section 376.’.
6. In section 509 of the Penal Code, for the words “shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both”, the words “shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and shall also be liable to fine which may not be less than one
thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS OF THE C ODE OF C RIMINAL P PROCEDURE, 1973
7. In section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Code of Criminal
Procedure), after sub-section ( 1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the information is given by the woman
against whom an offence under section 354, section 375,
Amendment
of section
509.
Amendment
of section
154.
2 of 1974.

101
section 376, section 376A, section 376B and section 509 of the
Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted,
then such information shall be recorded, as far as possible, by a
woman police officer.”.
8. In section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-
section ( 1), in the proviso, for the words “under the age of fifteen
years”, the words “under the age of eighteen years or above the age
of sixty-five years” shall be substituted.
9. In section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after
sub-section ( 3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the statement of a woman against
whom an offence under section 354, section 375,
section 376, section 376A, section 376B and section 509 of
the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or
attempted shall be recorded, as far as possible, by a woman
police officer.”.
10. In section 273 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, before
the Explanation , the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the evidence of a person below the
age of eighteen years who is alleged to have been subjected
to sexual assault or any other sexual offence, is to be
recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure
that such person is not confronted by the accused while at
the same time ensuring the right of crossexamination of the
accused.”.
11. In section 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-
section ( 2), for the words, figures and letters “trial of rape or an
offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section
376C or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code”, the words, figures
and letters "trial of sexual assault or an offence under section 376,
section 376A or section 376B of the Indian Penal Code" shall be
substituted.
12. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure,
under the heading—
“I.—O
FFENCES UNDER THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE”,—
(a) after the entries relating to section 166, the
following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“166A Public Imprison- Non- Bailable. Magistrate
servant ment for cognizable. of the first
disobeying one year, class.”;
direction or fine, or
under law. with both.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
160.
Amendment
of section
161.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
273.
Amendment
of section
327.
Amendment
of First
Schedule.

102
(b) after the entries relating to section 326, the
following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“326A Hurt Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
by thro- for not less bailable Session
wing or than ten years
admini- or imprisonment
stering for life and fine
acid. of rupees ten
lakh.
326B Attempt Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
to throw for five years bailable Session.”;
or but which may
administer extend to seven
acid. years and fine.
(c) in the entries relating to section 354, in column
3, for the words “imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both” the words “imprisonment of either description for a
term of one year which may extend to five years and fine
of rupees ten thousand” shall be substituted;
(d) for the entries relating to sections 376, 376A, 376B,
376C and 376D, the following entries shall be substituted,
namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“376 (1) Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
assault. for life or bailable. Session.
imprisonment
for not less than
seven years and
fine.
(2) Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
assault by for life or bailable. Session.
a police rigorous
officer or imprisonment
by a public for not less than
servant or ten years and
by a person fine.
being on the
management
or on the
staff of a
jail, remand
home or
other place
of custody

103
12 3 4 5 6
or women’s
or children’s
institution or
by a person
on the
management
or on the
staff of a
hospital,
and sexual
assault
committed
by a person
in a position
of trust or
authority
towards the
person
assaulted
or by a near
relative of the
person
assaulted.
376A Sexual assault Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
by the for not less than (but only on bailable. Session.
husband two years the complaint
upon his ext endable of the victim).
wife during to seven years
separation. and fine.
376B Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
intercourse for not less than bailable. Session.”;
by a person five years
in authority. ext endable
to ten years
and fine.
(e) in the entry relating to section 509, in column 3, for
the words “Simple imprisonment for one year, or fine, or
both,” the words “Simple imprisonment for three years and
fine of rupees ten thousand” shall be substituted.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENTS OF THE I NDIAN E VIDENCE A CT, 1872
13. After section 53 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Evidence Act), the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
Insertion of
new section
53A.1 of 1872.

104
“53A. In a prosecution for an offence under section
376 or section 376A or section 376B of the Indian Penal Code
or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the
question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of
the victim or of his or her previous sexual experience with
any person shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent
or the quality of consent.”.
14. For section 114A of the Evidence Act, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘114A. In a prosecution for sexual assault under clause
(a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) or clause ( e) or
clause ( g) or clause ( h) or clause ( i) or clause ( j) or clause
(k) or clause ( l) of sub-section ( 2) of section 376 of the
Indian Penal Code, where sexual intercourse by the accused
is proved and the question is whether it was without the
consent of the other person alleged to have been sexually
assaulted and such other person states in that person’s
evidence before the court that she or he did not consent, the
court shall presume that she or he did not consent.
Explanation .—In this section “sexual intercourse” shall
mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( c) of
section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.’.
15. In section 146 of the Evidence Act, for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under
section 376 or section 376A or section 376B of the Indian
Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such offence,
where the question of consent is in issue, it shall not be
permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the
cross-examination of the victim as to his or her general
immoral character, or as to his or her previous sexual
experience with any person for proving such consent or the
quality of consent.”.
Evidence of
character or
previous
sexual
experience
not relevant
in certain
cases.
Substitution of
new section
for section
114A.
45 of 1860.
Presumption
as to the
absence of
consent in
certain
prosecution
for sexual
assault.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
146.
45 of 1860.

105
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
On the basis of the recommendations of the Law Commission
of India in its One Hundred Seventy Second report on ‘Review of
Rape Laws’ as well as the recommendations of the National
Commission for Women for providing stringent punishment for the
offence of rape, a High Power Committee was constituted
consisting of the representatives of the Ministry of Women and
Child Development, Ministry of Law and Justice, National
Commission for Women, Law Commission of India and the Ministry
of Home Affairs to examine the matter considering the suggestions
of various quarters on the subject. The Committee submitted its
report along with the draft Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2011
and recommended to the Government for its enactment. The draft
Bill was further examined by the Government.
2. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 seeks to amend
the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, inter alia, so as to—
(a) substitute sections 375, 376, 376A and 376B by
replacing the existing sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C
and 376D of the Indian Penal Code, and replacing the word
‘rape’ wherever it occurs by the words ‘sexual assault’, to
make the offence of sexual assault gender neutral and also
widening the scope of the offence of sexual assault;
(b) include sections 326A and 326B in the Indian Penal
Code to make acid attack a specific offence;
(c) enhance the punishment under sections 354 and 509
of the Indian Penal Code, making the offence more stringent;
(d) amend sections 154, 160 and 161 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 for providing women and male
person under the age of eighteen years or above the age of
sixty-five years more protections;
(e) amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by way of
inserting a new section 53A wherein evidence of the character
of the victim or of his or her previous sexual experience shall
not be relevant or questioned.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
The 19 th October, 2012.
105

106
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM TJE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
(45 OF 1860)
** ** *
354. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman,
intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
** ** *
Sexual offences
375. A man is said to commit “rape” who, except in the case
hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under
circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions:—
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.—Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been
obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is
interested in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that
he is not her husband, and that her consent is given because
she believes that he is another man to whom she is or
believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.—With her consent, when, at the time of giving
such consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or
intoxication or the administration by him personally or through
another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is
unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to
whom she gives consent.
Sixthly .—With or without her consent, when she is
under sixteen years of age.
Explanation .—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual
intercourse necessary to the offence of rape.
Exception.—Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife,
the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-
section ( 2), commits rape shall be punished with imprisonment of
106
Assault or
criminal force
to Woman
with intent to
outrage her
modesty.
Rape.
Punishment
for rape.

107
either description for a term which shall not be less than seven
years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend
to ten years and shall also be liable to fine unless the woman raped
is his own wife and is not under twelve years of age, in which
case, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with
both:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons
to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which
he is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether
or not situated in the police station to which he is
appointed; or
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody
of a police officer subordinate to him; or
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his
official position and commits rape on a woman in his custody
as such public servant or in the custody of a public servant
subordinate to him; or
(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail,
remand home or other place of custody established by or
under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s
or children’s institution takes advantage of his official position
and commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home,
place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a
hospital, takes advantage of his official position and commits
rape on a woman in that hospital; or
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be
pregnant; or
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under
twelve years of age; or
(g) commits gang rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may be for life and shall also
be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons
to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment of either description for a term of less than ten years.

108
Explanation 1. —Where a woman is raped by one or more in
a group of persons acting in furtherance of their common intention,
each of the persons shall be deemed to have committed gang rape
within the meaning of this sub-section.
Explanation 2 .—“women’s or children’s institution” means an
institution, whether called an orphanage or a home for neglected
women or children or a widows’ home or by any other name,
which is established and maintained for the reception and care of
women or children.
Explanation 3. —“hospital” means the precincts of the hospital
and includes the precincts of any institution for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons requiring
medical attention or rehabilitation.
376A. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife,
who is living separately from him under a decree of separation or
under any custom or usage without her consent shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
376B. Whoever, being a public servant, takes advantage of his
official position and induces or seduces, any woman, who is in his
custody as such public servant or in the custody of a public servant
subordinate to him, to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual
intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
376C. Whoever, being the superintendent or manager of a jail,
remand home or other place of custody established by or under any
law for the time being in force or of a women’s or children’s
institution takes advantage of his official position and induces or
seduces any female inmate of such jail, remand home, place or
institution to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual
intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1 .—“superintendent” in relation to a jail, remand
home or other place of custody or a women’s or children’s
institution includes a person holding any other office in such jail,
remand home, place or institution by virtue of which he can
exercise any authority or control over its inmates.
Explanation 2 .—The expression “women’s or children’s
institution” shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to sub-
section ( 2) of section 376.
376D. Whoever, being on the management of a hospital or
being on the staff of a hospital takes advantage of his position and
has sexual intercourse with any woman in that hospital, such sexual
intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
Intercourse by
any member of
the management
or staff
of a hospital
with any
woman in that
hospital.
Intercourse by
a man with his
wife during
separation.
Intercourse
by public
servant with
woman in his
custody.
Intercourse by
superintendent
of jail, remand
home, etc.

109
Explanation .—The expression “hospital” shall have the same
meaning as in Explanation 3 to sub-section ( 2) of section 376.
** ** *
509. Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman,
utters any word, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any
object, intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that
such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes
upon the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
** ** *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE C ODE OF C RIMINAL P ROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
** ** *
CHAPTER XII
INFORMATION TO THE P OLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO I NVESTIGATE
154. (1) Every information relating to the commission of a
cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police
station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction,
and be read over to the informant; and every such information,
whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforeaid, shall be
signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be
entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the
State Government may prescribe in this behalf.
** ** *
160. (1) Any police officer, making an investigation under this
Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance before
himself of any person being within the limits of his own or any
adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise,
appears to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the
case; and such person shall attend as so required:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years
or woman shall be required to attend at any place other than the
place in which such male person or woman resides.
** ** *
161. (1) * * * * *
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement
made to him in the course of an examination under this section; and
if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the
statement of each such person whose statement he records.
Word, gesture
or act intended
to insult the
modesty of a
woman.
Information
in cognizable
cases.
Police
officer’s
power to
require
attendance of
witnesses.
Examination
of witnesses by
police.

110
** ** *
273. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence
taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken
in the presence of the accused, or, when his personal attendance is
dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader.
Explanation. —In this section, “accused” includes a person in
relation to whom any proceeding under Chapter VIII has been
commenced under this Code.
** ** *
327. (1) * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
inquiry into and trial of rape or an offence under section 376,
section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of the
Indian Penal Code shall be conducted in camera:
Provided that the presiding judge may, if he thinks fit, or on
an application made by either of the parties, allow any particular
person to have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building
used by the court.
** ** *
Evidence to be
taken in
presence of
accused.
Court to be
open.
45 of 1860.

111
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
** * * *
I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
Section Offence Pun ishment Cognizable Bailable or By what Court
or non- non-bailable triable
cognizable
1 2 3 456
** * * *
354 Assault or use of Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
criminal force to a for 2 years, or Magistrate.
woman with intent fine, or both.
to outrage her
modesty.
** * * *
376 Rape Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
life or imprisonment Bailable Session.
for ten years and
fine.
Intercourse by a man Imprisonment for Non- Bailable Ditto.
with his wife not two years or fine cognizable
being under twelve or both.
years of age.
376A Intercourse by a man Imprisonment for Ditto. Ditto. Ditto.
with his wife during two years and fine.
separation.
376B Intercourse by public Imprisonment for Cognizable Ditto. Ditto.
servant with woman five years and fine. (but no arrest
in his custody. shall be made
without a
warrant or
without an
order of a
Magistrate).
376C Intercourse by super- Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto.
intendent of jail,
remand home, etc.
376D Intercourse by manager, Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto.
etc., of a hospital with
any woman in that
hospital.
111

112
12 3 4 5 6
** * * *
509 Uttering any word or Simple Cognizable Bailable. Any
making any gesture imprisonment Magistrate.
intended to insult for 1 year, or
the modesty of a fine, or both.
woman, etc.
** * * *

113
EXTRACTS FROM TJE I NDIAN E VIDENCE A CT, 1872
(1 OF 1872)
** ** *
114A. In a prosecution for rape under clause ( a) or clause ( b)
or clause ( c) or clause ( d) or clause ( e) or clause ( g) of sub-
section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where sexual
intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it
was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped
and she states in her evidence before the Court that she did not
consent, the Court shall presume that she did not consent.
** ** *
146. When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition
to the questions hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions
which tend—
(1) to test his veracity,
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in
life, or
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character,
although the answer to such questions might tend directly or
indirectly to criminate him or might expose or tend directly or
indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture :
Provided that in a prosecution for rape or attempt to
commit rape, it shall not be permissible to put questions in the
cross-examination of the prosecutrix as to her general
immoral character.
** ** *
113
Presumption
as to absence
of consent in
certain
prosecutions
for rape.
Questions
lawful in
cross-
examination.
45 of 1860.

114
114
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of Home Affairs)

115
ANNEXURE-II
PRESS RELEASE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS INVITES SUGGESTIONS ON THE
CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 4 December
2012 and pending therein, has been referred to Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs, headed by Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu, M.P.  Rajya Sabha  for
examination and report. The Bill seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The Bill provides for:
(i) making the offence of sexual assault gender neutral and also widening the scope of
the offence of sexual assault;
(ii) making acid attack a specific offence;
(iii) making the punishment for offence more stringent;
(iv) providing women and male person under the age of eighteen years or above the age
of sixty-five years more protections; and
(v) providing that the evidence of the character of the victim or of his or her previous
sexual experience shall not be relevant or questioned.
2.  The Committee has decided to invite suggestions in the form of written memoranda from
the public/associations/women organizations/civil societies, etc, on the provisions of the Bill.
3. Those desirous of submitting written memoranda to the Committee, may send the same
to Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 142, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001 {Tele: 23035410 (O) and 23012007 (fax)} latest by
28
th January, 2013.
4. The memorandum which might be submitted to the Committee, would form part of its
records and treated as confidential and, therefore, should not be printed, circulated or publicized
by anyone, as such an act would constitute a breach of privilege of the Committee.
5. Individuals/stakeholders may obtain, on written request, a copy of the Bill, from
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Cabin ‘A’, Basement,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001 (Telephone No. 011-23034034). The electronic text
of the Bill can also be downloaded from the Rajya Sabha Website 
www.rajyasabha.nic.in. →  Bills
with Committees.
Website:- http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:- rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in
115

116
ANNEXURE-III
116
EXTRAORDINARY
 II —      1
PART-II — Section 1
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
]
No. 8] NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 03, 2013/MAGHA 14, 1934 (SAKA)
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filled as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi,  the 3rd February, 2013/Magha 14, 1934 (Saka)
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2013
No. 3 OF 2013
Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
WHEREAS a Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 was introduced in the House of the People and referred
to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Home Affairs for examination and report which is pending;

117
AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him
to take immediate action to give effect to the provisions of the said
Bill with certain modifications;
N
OW, THEREFORE , in exercise of the powers conferred by
clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the President is pleased
to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Ordinance may be called the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
2. In the Indian Penal Code (hereafter in this Chapter referred
to as the Penal Code), in section 100, in the clause Secondly, after
the words “grievous hurt”, the words “including the offence of
grievous hurt punishable under section 326A” shall be inserted.
3. After section 166 of the Penal Code, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“166A. Whoever, being a public servant,—
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law
which prohibits him from requiring the attendance at
any place of any person for the purpose of investigation
into an offence or any other matter, or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any
person, any other direction of the law regulating the
manner in which he shall conduct such investigation, or
(c) fails to record any information given to him
under sub-section ( 1) of section 154 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and in particular in relation
to cognizable offence punishable under section 354,
section 354A; section 354B, section 354C,  sub-
section ( 2) of section 354D, section 376, section 376A,
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section
376E,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine or with both.”.
4. After section 326 of the Penal Code, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 100.
Insertion of
new section
166A.
Public servant
disobeying
direction under
law.
Insertion of
new sections
326A and 326B.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

118
‘326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or
deformity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or disables, any
part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt
by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person,
or by using any other means with the intention of causing or
with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or
hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that any fine imposed under this section shall
be given to the person on whom acid was thrown or to
whom acid was administered.
326B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on
any person or attempts to administer acid to any person, or
attempts to use any other means, with the intention of
causing permanent or partial damage or deformity or bums or
maiming or disfigurement or disability or grievous hurt to that
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than five years
but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of section 326A and
this section, “acid” includes any substance which has acidic
or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of
causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement or
temporary or permanent disability.
Explanation 2.— “Permanent, or partial damage”
includes deformity, or maiming, or burning, or disfiguring, or
disabling any part or parts of the body of a person.
Explanation 3,— For the purposes of section 326A and
this section, permanent or partial damage or deformity shall
not be required to be irreversible.’.
5. in section 354 of the Penal Code, for the words “shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both”, the words
“shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term of one year which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine” shall be substituted.
6. After section 354 of the Penal Code, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘354A. ( 1) The following acts or behaviour shall
constitute the offence of sexual harassment—
(i) physical contact and advances involving
unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; or
V oluntarily
causing grievous
hurt by use of
acid, etc.
Amendment of
section 354.
Insertion of new
sections 354A,
354B, 354C and
354D.
Sexual
harassment and
punishment for
sexual
harassment.
V oluntarily
throwing or
attempting to
throw acid.

119
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) making sexually coloured remarks; or
(iv) forcibly showing pornography; or
(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-
verbal conduct of sexual nature.
(2) Any person who commits the offence specified in
clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 1) shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to five years,
or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any person who commits the offence specified in
clause ( iii) or clause ( iv) or clause ( v) of sub-section ( 1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description
that may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
354B. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any
woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or
compelling her to be naked in any public place, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than three years but which may
extend to seven years and with fine.
354C. Whoever watches, or captures the image of, a
woman engaging in a private act in circumstances where she
would usually have the expectation of not being observed
either by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest
of the perpetrator shall be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than one year, but which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a second
or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than three
years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section,
”private act” includes an act of watching carried out in a
place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be
expected to provide privacy, and where the victim’s genitals,
buttocks or breasts are exposed or covered only in
underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or the person is
doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in
public.
Explanation 2.— Where the victim consents to the
capture of images or any act, but not to their dissemination
to third persons and where such image or act is
disseminated, such dissemination shall be considered an
offence under this section.
Assault or use
of criminal
force to women
with intent to
disrobe.
V oyeurism

120
354D. ( 1) Whoever follows a person and contacts, or
attempts to contact such person to foster personal interaction
repeatedly, despite a clear indication of disinterest by such
person, or whoever monitors the use by a person of the
internet, email or any other form of electronic
communication, or watches or spies on a person in a manner
that results in a fear of violence or serious alarm or distress
in the mind of such person, or interferes with the mental
peace of such person, commits the offence of stalking:
Provided that the course of conduct will not amount to
stalking if the person who pursued it shows—
(i) that it was pursued for the purpose of
preventing or detecting crime and the person accused
of stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility
of prevention and detection of crime by the state; or
(ii) that it was pursued under any law or to
comply with any condition or requirement imposed by
any person under any law; or
(iii ) that in the particular circumstances the
pursue it of the course of conduct was reasonable.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.’.
7. For section 370 of the Penal Code, the following sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘370. ( 1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation,
(a) recruits, ( b) transports, ( c) harbours, ( d) transfers, or
(e) receives, a person or persons, by—
First.— using threats, or
Secondly.— using force, or any other form of
coercion, or
Thirdly.— by abduction, or
Fourthly.— by practising fraud, or deception, or
Fifthly.— by abuse of power, or
Sixthly.— by inducement, including the giving or
receiving of payments or benefits, in order to achieve
the consent of any person having control over the
person recruited, transported, harboured, transferred or
received, commits the offence of trafficking.
Stalking.
Substitution of
new sections
370 and 370A
for section 370.
Trafficking of
person.

121
Explanation 1.— The expression “exploitation” shall
include, prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation,
forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to
slavery, servitude, or the forced removal of organs.
Explanation 2.— The consent of the victim is
immaterial In a determination of the o ffence of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than seven years, but which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more
than one person, it shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a
minor, it shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more
than one minor at the same time, it shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
fourteen years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life.
(6) When a public servant including police officer is
involved in the trafficking of a minor then such public
servant shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural life.
(7) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking
of minors, on more than one occasion, then such person shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life.
370A. ( 1) Whoever, despite knowing, or having reason
to believe that a child has been trafficked, employs such
child in any form of labour, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to seven years, and with fine.
(2) Whoever, despite knowing or having reason to
believe that an adult has been trafficked, employs such adult
for labour, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.’.
8. For sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the
Penal Code, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
Employing of a
trafficked
person.
Substitution of
new sections for
sections 375,
376, 376A,
376B, 376C and
376D

122
‘375. A person is said to commit “sexual assault” if
that person—
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the
vagina, mouth urethra or anus of another person or
makes the person to do so with him or any other
person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of
the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra
or anus of another person or makes the person to do
so with him or any other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of another
person so as to cause penetration into the vagina, urethra,
anus or any part of body of such person or makes the
person to do so with him or any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the penis, vagina, anus,
urethra of another person or makes such person to do
so with him or any other person;
(e) touches the vagina, penis, anus or breast of
the person or makes the person touch the vagina, penis,
anus or breast of that person or any other person,
except where such penetration or touching is carried out for
proper hygienic or medical purposes under the circumstances
falling under any of the following seven descriptions:—
First.— Against the other person’s will.
Secondly. — Without the other person’s consent.
Thirdly. — With the other person’s consent when such
consent has been obtained by putting such other person or
any person in whom such other person is interested, in fear
of death or of hurt.
Fourthly. — When the person assaulted is a female,
with her consent, when the man knows that he is not her
husband and that her consent is given because she believes
that he is another man to whom she is or believes to be
lawfully married.
Fifthly. — With the consent of the other person when,
at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness
of mind or intoxication or the administration by that person
personally or through another of any stupefying or
unwholesome substance, the other person is unable to
understand the nature and consequences of that action to
which such other person gives consent.
Sixthly. — With or without the other person’s consent,
when such other person is under eighteen years of age.
Seventhly. — When the person is unable to
communicate consent.
Sexual assault.

123
Explanation 1.— Penetration to any extent is
“penetration” for the purposes of this section.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section,
“vagina” shall also include labia majora.
Explanation 3. — Consent means an unequivocal
voluntary agreement when the person by words, gestures or
any form of non-verbal communication, communicates
willingness to participate in the specific act:
Provided that, a person who does not physically resist
to the act of penetration shall not by the reason only of that
fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception.— Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man
with his own wife, the wife not being under sixteen years of
age, is not sexual assault.
376. ( 1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by
sub-section ( 2), commits sexual assault, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment of either description “for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits sexual
assault—
(i) within the limits of the police station to
which such police officer is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a person in such police officer’s
custody or in the custody of a police officer
subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits sexual assault
on a person in such public servant’s custody or in the
custody of a public servant subordinate to such public
servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces is in the
area by virtue of deployment by the Central or a State
Government, commits sexual assault; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of
a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in
force or of a women’s or children’s institution,
commits sexual assault on any inmate of such jail,
remand home, place or institution; or
Punishment for
sexual assault.

124
(e) being on the management or on the staff of
a hospital, commits sexual assault on a person in that
hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a
person in a position of trust or authority towards, the
person assaulted, commits sexual assault on such
person; or
(g) commits sexual assault on a woman knowing
her to be pregnant; or
(h) commits sexual assault on a person when
such person is under eighteen years of age; or
(i) commits sexual assault, where the person
assaulted is incapable of giving consent; or
(j) being in a position of economic or social
dominance, commits sexual assault on a person under
such dominance; or
(k) commits sexual assault on a person suffering
from mental or physical disability; or
(l) while committing sexual assault causes
grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures
endangers the life of a person; or
(m) commits persistent sexual assault,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation l.— For the purposes of this
sub-section,—
(a) “women’s or children’s institution”
means an institution, whether called an orphanage
or a home for neglected women or children or a
widow’s home or an institution called by any
other name, which is established and maintained
for the reception and care of women or children;
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the
hospital and includes the precincts of any
institution for the reception and treatment of
persons during convalescence or of persons
requiring medical attention or rehabilitation;
(c) “police officer” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to the expression “police”
under the Police Act, 1861; 5 of 1861.

125
(d) “armed forces” means the naval, military
and air forces and includes any member of the
Armed Forces constituted under any Act for the
time being in force, including the paramilitary
forces and any auxiliary forces that are under the
control of the Central Government or the State
Government.
Explanation 2.— Where a person is subjected to
sexual assault by one or more persons in a group of
persons acting in furtherance of their common
intention, each of the persons in the group shall be
deemed to have committed sexual assault within the
meaning of this sub-section.
376A. Whoever, commits  an offence punishable under
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 376 and in the
course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes
the death of the person or causes the person to be in a
persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which
shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural 1ife, or with
death.
376B. Whoever commits sexual assault on his own
wife, who is living separately under a decree of separation or
under any custom or usage, without her consent, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description, for a term
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
376C. Whoever,—
(a) being in a position of authority or in a
fiduciary relationship; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand
home or other place of custody established by or under
any law for the time being in force, or a women’s or
children’s institution; or
(d) being on the management of a hospital or
being on the staff of a hospital,
and abuses such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or
seduce any person either in the first mentioned person’s
custody or under the first mentioned person’s charge or
present in the premises and has sexual intercourse with that
person, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence
Punishment for
causing death or
resulting in
persistent
vegetative state
of the victim.
Sexual assault
by husband
upon his wife
during
separation.
Sexual
intercourse by
a person in
authority.

126
of sexual assault, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.— In this section, “sexual intercourse”
shall mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( e) of
section 375.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section,
Explanations 1 and 2 to section 375 shall also be applicable.
Explanation 3.— “Superintendent”, in relation to a jail,
remand home or other place of custody or a women’s or
children’s institution, includes a person holding any other
office in such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue
of which such person can exercise any authority or control
over its inmates.
Explanation 4.— The expressions “hospital” and
“women’s or children’s institution” shall respectively have the
same meaning as in Explanation 1 to sub-section ( 2) of
section 376.
376D. Where a person is sexually assaulted by one or
more persons constituting a group or acting in furtherance of
a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed
to have committed the offence of sexual assault, regardless
of gender and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but
which may extend to life and shall pay compensation to the
victim which shall be reasonable to meet the medical expenses
and rehabilitation of the victim.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,
imprisonment for life shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life.
376E. Whoever has been previously convicted of an
offence punishable under section 376 or section 376A or
section 376C or section 376D and is subsequently convicted
of an offence punishable under any of the said sections shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life or with death.’.
9. In section 509 of the Penal Code, for the words “shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both”, the words “shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and shall also be liable to fine” shall be substituted.
Sexual assault by
gang.
Punishment for
repeat offenders.
Amendment of
section 509.

127
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
10. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter in this
Chapter referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure), in section
54A, the following proviso shall inserted, namely:—
“Provided that, if the person identifying the person
arrested is mentally or physically disabled, such process of
identification shall take place under the supervision of a
Judicial Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to ensure
that such person identifies the person arrested using methods
that the person is comfortable with:
Provided further, that if the person identifying the
person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, the
identification process may be videographed.”.
11. In section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-
section ( 1), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the information is given by the woman
against whom an offence under section 326A, section 326B,
section 354, section 375, section 376, section 376A, section
376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E and section
509 of the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been
committed or attempted, then such information shall be
recorded, as far as possible, by a woman police officer and
such woman shall be provided legal assistance and also the
assistance of a healthcare worker or women’s organisation or
both:
Provided further that—
(a) in the event that the person against whom an
offence under section 354, section 354A, section 354B,
section 354C, section 354D, sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section ( 2) of section 376, section 376A, section 376B,
section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the
Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or
attempted is temporarily or permanently mentally or
physically disabled, then such information shall be
recorded by a police officer, at the residence of the
person seeking to report such offence or at a
convenient place of such person’s choice, in the
presence of a special educator or an interpreter, as the
case may be;
(b) the recording of such information may be
videographed.
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of
the person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate under
clause ( a) of sub-section (5A) of section 164 as soon
as possible.”.
2 of 1974. Amendment of
section 54A.
Amendment of
section 154.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

128
12. In section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-
section ( 1), in the proviso, for the words “under the age of fifteen
years or woman”, the words “under the age of eighteen years or
above the age of sixty-five years or a woman or a physically or
mentally disabled person” shall be substituted.
13. In section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-
section ( 3), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the statement of a woman
against whom an offence ‘under section 354, section 354A,
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 375,
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C,
section 376D, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal
Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be
recorded, as far as possible, by a woman police officer.”.
14. In section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after
sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(5A) (a) In cases punishable under section 354,
section 354A, section 354B, sub-section ( 2) of section 354C,
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 376, section
376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section
376E of the Indian Penal Code, the Judicial Magistrate shall
record the statement of the person against whom such
offence has been committed in the manner prescribed in sub-
section ( 5), as soon as the commission of the offence is
brought to the notice of the police:
Provided that if the person making the statement is
temporarily or permanently physically or mentally disabled, the
Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a
special educator in recording the statement:
Provided further that if the person making the statement
is temporarily or permanently physically or mentally disabled,
the statement made by the person, with the assistance of an
interpreter or special educator, may be videographed;
(b) a statement recorded under clause (a) of a person
who is temporarily or permanently physically or mentally
disabled shall be considered a statement in lieu of
examination-in-chief, as specified in section 137 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 such that the maker of the statement can
be cross-examined on such statement, without the need for
recording the same at the time of trial.
15. After section 198A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment of
section 160.
Amendment of
section 161.
Amendment of
section 164.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1872.
Insertion of new
section 198B.

129
“198B. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence
under section 376B of the Indian Penal Code where the
persons are in a marital relationship, except upon prima facie
satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a
complaint having been filed or made by the wife against the
accused husband.”.
16. In section 273 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, before
the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the evidence of a person below
the age of eighteen years who is alleged to have been
subjected to sexual assault or any other sexual offence, is to
be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to
ensure that such person is not confronted by the accused
while at the same time ensuring the right of cross examination
of tile accused.”.
17. In section 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-
section ( 2), for the words, figures and letters “trial of rape or an
offence under section 376, section 376A , section 376B, section
376C or section 376D  of the Indian Penal Code”, the words, figures
and letters “trial of sexual assault or an offence under section 376,
section 376A,  section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section
376E of the Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.
18. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, under
the heading “I.-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”,—
(a) after the entries relating to section 166, the following
entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“166A Public Imprison- Non- Bailable. Magistrate
servant ment for cognizable. of the first
disobeying one year, class.”;
direction or fine, or
under law. with both.
(b) after the entries relating to section 326, the following
entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“326A V oluntarily Im prisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
causing not less than bailable Session
grievous ten years but
hurt by which may extend
use of to imprisonment
acid, etc. for life and fine
of 10 lakh rupees.
326B V oluntarily Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
throwing for five years bailable Session.”;
or but which may
attempting extend to seven
to throw years and fine.
acid.
Amendment of
section 273.
Amendment of
section 327.
Amendment of
First Schedule.
45 of 1860.

130
(c) for the entries relating to section 354, the following entries
shall be substituted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
"354 Assault or Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Any
use of of 1 yea r bailable Magistrate.
criminal which may
force to extend to 5
woman years, and
with intent with fine.
to outrage
her modesty.
354A (1) Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Any
harassment which may bailable Magistrate.
of the extend to 5
nature of years or with
unwelcome fine or with
physical both.
contact and
advances
or a demand
or request
for sexual
favours.
(2) Sexual Imprisonment Non- Bailable Any
harassment which may cognizable Magistrate.
of the extend to 1
nature of year or with
making fine or with
sexually both.
coloured
remark or
showing
pornography
or any other
unwelcome
physical,
verbal or
non-verbal
conduct of
sexual
nature.
354B Assault or Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Any
use of of not less bailable Magistrate.
criminal than 3 years
force to but which
woman may extend to
with 7 years and
intent to with fine.
disrobe.

131
12 345 6
354C V oyeurism Imprisonment Non- Bailable Any
of not less cognizable Magistrate
than 1 year
but which
may extend to
3 years and
with fine for
first conviction.
Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Any
of not less bailable Magistrate
than 3 years
but which may
extend to 7
years and with
fine for second
or subsequent
conviction.
354D Stalking Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Any
not less than 1 bailable Magistrate”.
year but which
may extend to
3 years and with
fine.
(d) for the entries relating to section 370, the following
entries shall be substituted, namely:—
12 345 6
“370 (1) Trafficking Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
of person of not less bailable Session.
than 7 years
but which
may extend
to 10 years
and with fine.
(2) Trafficking Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
of more than of not less bailable Session.
one person than 10 years
but which
may extend to
imprisonment
for life and
with fine.
(3) Trafficking Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
of a minor of not less than bailable Session
10 years but
which may
extend to
imprisonment
for life.

132
12 3 4 5 6
(4) Trafficking Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
of more of not less bailable Session.
than one than 14 years
minor. but which
may extend to
imprisonment
for life.
(5) Public Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
servant or for life which bailable Session.
a police shall mean
officer the remainder
involved in of that
trafficking of person’s
minor. natural life.
(6) Person Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
convicted for life which bailable Session.
of offence shall mean
of trafficking the remainder
of minor on of the person’s
more than natural life.
one occasion.
370A (1) Employing Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
of a trafficked of not less bailable Session.
child. than 5 years
but which
may extend to
7 years and
with fine.
(2) Employing Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
of a trafficked of not less bailable Session.
adult person. than 3 years
but which
may extend to
7 years and
with fine.
(e) for the entries relating to section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C
and 376D the following entries shall be substituted, namely:—
12 345 6
“376 (1) Sexual Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
assault imprisonment bailable Session.
of not less
than 7 years
but which may
extend to
imprisonment
for life and
with fine.

133
12 345 6
(2) Sexual Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
assault by a imprisonment bailable Session.
police officer of not less
or a public than 10 years
servant or but which
member of may extend to
armed forces imprisonment
or a person for life and
being on the with fine.
management
or on the
staff of a
jail, remand
home or
other place
of custody
or women’s
or children’s
institution or
by a person
on the
management
or on the
staff of a
hospital, and
sexual assault
committed
by a person
in a position
of trust or
authority
towards the
person
assaulted or
by a near
relative of
the persons
assaulted.
376A Person Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
committing imprisonment bailable Session.
and offence of not less
of sexual than 20 years
assault and but which may
inflicting extend to
injury which imprisonment
causes death for life which
or causes shall mean the
the person remainder of
to be in a that person’s
persistent natural life or
vegetative with death.
state.

134
12 3 4 5 6
376B Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
assault by of not less (but o nly bailable Session.
the husband than 2 years on the
upon his but which complaint
wife during may extend of the
sepration. to 7 years victim)
and with
fine.
376C Sexual Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
intercourse imprisonement (but only bailable Session.
by a person for not less on the
in authority. than 5 years complaint
but which of the
may extend victim)
to 10 years
and with
fine.
376D Sexual Rigorous Cognizable Non- Court of
assault by imprisonment bailable Session.
gang. for not less
than 20 years
but which
may extend
to
imprisonment
for life which
shall mean the
remainder of
that person’s
natural life
and
compensation
to the victim.
376E Repeat Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
offenders. for life which bailable Session.”.
shall mean
the remainder
of that
persons’
natural life or
with death.
(f) entry relating to section 509, in column 3, for the words
“Simple imprisonment for one year, or fine, or both,”, the words
“Simple imprisonment for 3 years and with fine” shall be
substituted.

135
CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
19. After section 53 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Evidence Act), the
following section shall be inserted, namely:–
“53A. In a prosecution for an offence under section 354,
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section ( 2) of section 376, section 376A, section 376B,
section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the
Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such
offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence
of the character of the victim or of such person’s previous
sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the
issue of such consent or the quality of consent.”.
20. For section 114A of the Evidence Act, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘ll4A. In a prosecution for sexual assault under clause
(a), clause ( b), clause (c), clause ( d), clause ( e), clause ( j),
clause ( g), clause ( h), clause ( i), clause ( j), clause ( k),
clause ( l) or clause (m) of sub-section ( 2) of section 376 of
the Indian Penal Code, where sexual intercourse by the
accused is proved and the question is whether it was without
the consent of the other person alleged to have been sexually
assaulted and such other person states in that person’s
evidence before the court that such person did not consent,
the court shall presume that such person did not consent.
Explanation.— In this section “sexual intercourse” shall
mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( c) of
section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.’.
21. For section 119 of the Evidence Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“119. A witness who is unable to speak may give his
evidence in any other manner in which he can make it
intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must
be written and the signs made in open Court, evidence so
given shall be deemed to be oral evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate
verbally, the Court shall take the assistance of a special
educator or interpreter in recording the statement, and such
statement may be videographed.”.
22. In section 146 of the Evidence Act, for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted, n amely:—
Insertion of
new section
53A.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
Evidence of
character or
previous sexual
experience not
relevent in
certain cases.
Substitution of
new section for
section 114A.
Presumption as
to absence of
consent in
certain
prosecution for
sexual assault.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Substitution of
new section for
section 119.
Amendment of
section 146.
Witness unable
to communicate
verbailly.

136
“Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 376,
section 376A, section 376B, section 376C,  section 376D or
section 376E of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to
commit any such offence, where the question of consent is
an issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to
put questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to the
general immoral character, or previous sexual experience, of
such victim with any person for proving such consent or the
quality of consent.”.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.
P. K. MALHOTRA,
Secy. to the Government of India.
45 of 1860.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.