ii... __ -
I 
C.S.(H .A.)-1 
RAJYA SABHA 
r~~PAR'fMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
g.,;r.t ~DL~G COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
.. ~.,'HGF HUMAN RIGHTS COl\fMISSIONS BILL, 1993 
(Jll.resented to Rajya Sabha , on the 6tb December, 1993) 
(1-..aid in Lok Sabha on the 6th December, 1993) 
RA.JYA SABHA SECRETARI.A.T 
NE)V DELID 

CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee 
Report of the:: Committee .......................................................... .. 
Bill as introduced in the Lok Sabha 
(Appendix-!) ......................................................................... . 
Summary of oral evidence tendered before the Commiuee 
(Appendix-IJ) .... ..... ...................... ...................... .... ... ..... .... ... . 
Lise of individuals, organisations etc. from whom memoranda were 
received (Appendix-III) .......................................................... .. 
Relevant Minutes of the meetings of t11e Committee (Appendix-IV) 
(i) 
PAGE~ 
(iii)-(iv) 
1-4 
5-21 
22-31 
32-33 
34-35 
I I 

COMPOSITION OF THE COiv1MITTEE 
Jacob--Chairman 
Afiantray Devshanke r Dave 
R.K. Dhawan 
Makhan La1 Fotedar 
Gaya Singh 
Murasoli Maran 
· Ramachandran Pillai 
;. _ · Rafique Alam 
~r . Sanjaya Sinh 
.Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
Subramanian Swamy 
Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOir SABHA 
Shri Sudhir Sawant 
. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
20. Prof. M. Kamson 
2L Shri A . Venk.atesh Naik 
Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
Shri M.O.H. Farook 
Shri Narain Singh Cnaudhari 
25. Kum. Mamata Banerjee 
26. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
27. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
28. Dr. Girija Vyas 
29. Sbi Dharampal Singh M~ 
30. Maj Gen (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
31. Shrima~ Vijaya Raje Scindia 
32. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
' Nominated on the 30th August. 1993 lll the vacancy caused by the renr .. ment of Sh.n S.u-nar ~.Iu:.heT)ee from the membership 
of R:!J>'il Sabha on the 9th July, 1993. 
(iii) 

33. Shri Ram Si11gh 
3-l. Shri Shyam Lc:J K:.:ma! 
35. Shri Ram Nagina l\ri:,t,ra 
36. Shri Vinaya Katiy<tr 
37. Mahant Abedya Nalh 
38. Shn Ram Vilas Paswan 
39. Shri Rabi Ray 
40. Shri Hari KewaJ PrCC>ad 
41 . Shri Ram Sharan Yada v 
42 . Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
43. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
44 Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
.f-5. Shri B. R .. ".ja Rav i Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secreta ry 
Sh.i C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
. · 1, the Cha 
me Affairs, h 
t this Sixtl 
./The Bill 
AJ(IIl'Uo•¥•- •• and 
3rd August, 
organisations, w· 
being invited bel 
Bill. The Comn 
suggestions and ' 
·by the 17th Au, 
..;1: In pursw 
Verghese, emine 
.. _,, ___ , respecti' 
of India and Jus· 
lOth September, 
held on the 4th ( 
it may be apper 
5. In respon 
and comments et 
.on the 22nd anc 
7. The Com 
15th November, 
The Commi 
The Commit 
Commission is hi, 
~ nc::ce~s~\ry that 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I. the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
me Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Repon on its behalf, 
present this Sixth Report of the Committee relatiag to the Human Rights Commissions Bill, 
f993.JThe Bill (Appendix-!) provides for the constitution of a National Human Rights 
ission and a State Human Rights Commission in any State and for matters connected 
·rh or incidental thereto.J" 
~ 2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
referred* the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 14th May , 1993 and pending in 
t~at House, to the Committee for examination and report. / 
" 3. The Committee held eleven sittings in all (Appendix-IV). :At its first sitting held on 
the 3rd August, 1993, the Committee decided the names of some individuals/insitutions/ 
organisations, who were engaged in the protection and preservation of human rights, for 
being invited before the Committee for rendering oral evidence on the subject matter of the 
The Committee also decided that a press communique be issued inviting views, 
·ons and comments from various individuals, institut ions and organisations on the Bill 
by the 17th August , 1993. / 
/.In pursuance of the above decision, the Committee heard the views of Shri B. G. 
Verghese, eminent journalis t and Shri Soli Sorabjee, eminent jurist on the lOth and 16th 
August, respectively, · and Shri K.T.S Tulsi , Shri Altaf Ahmed, Additional Solicitors-General 
of India and Justice Rajinder Sachar, former Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court on the 
LOth September, 1993 on the various provisions of the Bill. The Committee at its meeting 
held on the 4th October, 1993, decided that a summary of the oral evidence tendered before 
. i~ may be append ed to the Repo"' (Appendix II). 
5. ln response to ihe press communique, 21 memoranda containi.rig views, suggestions 
and comments etc. on the pro visions and the various aspects of the Bill were received by the 
Committee from several individuals , organisations etc. A list of such individuals, organisa­
tions etc. is placed at Appendix Ill. 
• 6. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at its sitting held 
on the 22nd and 23rd September, 1993. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at its sitting held on the 
November, 1993. 
8. The principal changes suggested by the Committee in the Bill and the reasons 
for are set out here under:-
Clause 2 
TI1e Committee feels that definition of 'ter rorist act' in sub-clause (1) (o) i!:: not ' 
,~~~~ce:,••ary ac;d may, therefore be deleted. 
Clause 3 
The Committee:! feels that the proposed compo:>ition of the National Human Righ ts 
""""~·-- · c- ~mmi~sion is highly bureaucratised. The Commission must enjoy credibility and for that it 
" ts necessarv that person~ from other categorie:~ art! also associated with the Commission Sub-
I 
\ 

' I 
j 
I 
I 
., 
.t.. 
clause (2) (b) mc.y. therefor e, oe so amended as t~ make a provisio:. ti:e:-!L ... ~'-ia· ou of :h, 
four Members of tne Commission, a[ least two Members are pe.-sons who are or have been 
!he Judge of the Su;>reme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court. The remainL'"lg two 
M.eobe:s may be appointed from other field / category. 
Tne Committee also feels that the provision for nomination of Membe rs by the 
ChaL..-persons of the three National Commissions mentioned in Sub-clause (2) (c) should be 
omitted and instead a provision should be made that the Chairpers ons of the three 
Commissions should be deemed to be Members of the National Human Rights Commission 
for the discharge of functions specified in sub-clause (b) to G) of Clause 12. 
Clause 4 
The Committee feels that the appointment of a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or 
I 
sitting Chief Justice of a High Court ao; Chairperson or Member of the Commission should 
be made after obtaining concurrence of the Chief Justice of India. Suitable pmvision may 
accordingly be made in the clause. 
i Clause 5 
Sub-clause (2) provides for suspension of the Chairperson or any Member from office, 
by the President. The Committee feels that when a reference has been made by the-· 
President to the Supreme Court and the matter is under inquiry by the Supreme Court1 it 
may not be proper and desi:able to suspend a Chairperson or a Member from his office. A. 
report on such reference from the Supreme Court should be awaited. This is more so 
necessary to protect the Members of the Commission from frivolous complaints and also 
taking into consideration their high position and status. The Committee, therefore. 
recommends that sub-clause (2) be deleted. __ 
Sub-daase (3) (f) yrovides for removal of Chairperson or Members on the ground of 
absence from the meetings of the Commission. The Committee feels that the re=novarof 
' Chait-person or Members of ·the Commission on this ground will be too harsh a step and may , 
' not be proper. Tne Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of this sub-clause. •· 
Clause 6 T 
I The Committee sees no reason why the maximum age limi~ should be different fo{the, 
Chairperson and the Members of the Commission. It recommends that the clause rna)' ~~ 
amended so as to prescribe therein identical age limit both for the Cnairperson and_tbe 
Members. It also feels that there should be no bar on the re-appointment of Membe~-~B~-~ 
the Commission, subject to the maximum age limit and it, therefore, recommends that ~e 
clause be amended accordingly. 
,;..>r::;r 
Clause 7 ,'.'*"' ~ 
The Committee finds that there is no time-limit for filling up the vacancy in the offic~~ 
1 th: Chairperson. It, therefore, recommends that a period of six months be prescribed~~~;~ 
re0 ard. . ... ~ 
Clause 12 
~;-.~ 
-~ 
Sub-clause (b) relates to the inquiry by the Commission into the complaints of violaF~~~ 
of h21nan rights resulting from the terrorist acts and making recommendations thereon. ~" 
Committee is of the opinion that it would be better to leave this area solely to the ex:isOJJ~ _ 
law enforcing agencies, as it may not be possible for the Commission to go intozJll~~ 
complaints arising out of terrorist acts because of the obvious practical difficulties. '~·t 
therefore, recommends deletion of this sob-cia use and also recommends that. ins tea~~--. 
suitable provision be made to provide for review by the Commission of the factors, inclu~nt 
acts of terrorism, that izlhibit the enjoyment of human rights and recommend appropnat·;. 
rei:Jedial measures. ~ -~ 

> ., 
3 
b-Clause (d) relates to the visit by the Commission to a jail with the prior approval of 
State Govern ment. The Committ ee feels that seeking prior approval will be a 
uming process and may sometimes defeat the very purpose of visiting a jail to study 
conditions of the inmates. The Committee also feels that besides jail, other 
n centres, where persons are detained for the purpose of reformation , treatment, 
ay also be brought within th.e purview of the Commission. The Committee , therefore 
,. 1 ..... u .... v that the Commission may visit any jail or detention centre under the control of 
Government with prior intimation to that Government. The clause may be amended 
Clause 18 
word "prima facie" occurring in sub-clause (1), is not necessary. The Committee , 
, recommends deletion of this word. 
Committee also recommends -that in sub-clause (2), the words "orde rs or writs" be 
after the word "direc tions" to bring the provisions in conformity with the powers of 
upreme Court and the High Courts as enshrined in the Constitution . 
e Committee feels that the period of three months for forwarding the comments on 
port, by the concerned Government or the authority to the Commission, prescribed in 
use (5)(b), is on the high side. It, therefore , recommends that this period be redu ced 
month and the sub-clause be amended accordingly .. 
Clause 19 
Clause 19 deals with the procedure with respect to armed forces .The Committee feels 
it would be in the fitness of things that the Commission is informed , within a reasonable 
od, say, six weeks or such· further time as the Commission may allow, about the action 
on its recommendations , The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause be 
ed suitably. 
The Committee further recommends that with respect to the para-military forces, such 
the Border SecUrity Force (BSF), Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) , Indo-Tibetan 
r Police (ITBP), etc. also, the Government should separately examine the feasibility of 
ucing legal procedures of court martial and other disciplinary measures as are 
le to the defence forces-the army, the navy and the air force-in view of the 
procedure being made applicable to the para-military forces in the Bill. 
Clause 21 
The clause provides for the constitution of State Human Rights Commissions in the 
The Committee is of the opinion that necessary provisions in regard to the 
, appointment and removal of the Chairperson and the Members , their power s 
, on the lines of National Human Rights Commission , may also be made in respect of 
State Human Rights Commissions and recommends that the clause be amended suitably. 
Committee also feels that suitable arrangements should be made with regard to the 
Clause 1 
The Committee reco mmends deletion of the proviso to sub-ciause (2) so as to provide for \ 
restricted application of the provisions of the Bill to the State of Jammu and Kashmir as \ 
other changes suggested in the Bill are of consequential or drafting nature. 
lO. At its sitting held on the 4th October , 1993, the Committee took note of the 
prn -:~ ... :~..J.t:un , ... r :.tr. O~Ih.'- .._ ~) tbc Pr..:sidcr:t or. :~,::: =:Sth Septc.mbc.-, 1993, tu pru> iJ ... 
for the ~o mtirmion nf ::1 N::~rinnm l-l+Hnan Ri oJ;r;; Cnmmi~:~: irm .l:;t<H"" ~"""' ''" Q ;..,.ht 

4 
Commissions in States and Human Right\ Co•rts. The Committe< also noted that almost 
the amendments suggested by it on the various clauses of the Bill had been incorporated 
the Ordinance. The Committee discussed at length the position arising out of tli( 
promulgatton of the Ordinance donng the pendency of the Btl! wJth the Committee aqJ 
decided that it should go ahead with the presentation of its Report on the Bill to !!l 
1 Parliament, dospite the promulgation of the OrdinanCe. ~ 
NEW DELHI,· 
--------
NOVEMBER 25, 1993 
~ 
~' M.M. 1AC0lf
3 
CHAIRMAN~ DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY"~ 
STANDING C0MMI1TE£ ON HOME AFFA!Ru 
~. 
I 

APPENDIX-I 
( See Para 1 of the Report) 
As INTRODUCED ll" LOK SABHA 
ON HTH MAY, 1993 
Bill No. 65 of 1993 
THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONS BILL, 1993 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Human RightS Commission and a 
State Human Rig~ts Commission in any State and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliam ent in the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the ,Human Rights Commissions Act, 1993. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: 
Provided that it shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir only in so far as 
it pertains to the matten relatab le to any of the entries enumera ted in List I or 
List m in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as applicable to that State. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
·2. (I) In this Act , unless the ~ontext otherwise requires ,-
(a) "armed forces" means the naval, military and air forces anCi 
includes any other armed forces of the Union; 
(b) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission; 
(c) "Commission" means the National Human Rights Commission 
constituted under section 3; 
(d) "Committee" means the Committee reterred to in sub-section (1) 
of section 4; 
(e) "human rights" means the rights relating to life, liberty, equality 
and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied 
in the International Covenants and are enforceable by courts in India; 
25 (f) "International Covenants " means the Interndtional CovenanLS on 
Civil and Political Rights ar.d the lntemational Covemnts of Economic , 
Social and Cultural Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations on the 16th December, 1966; 
Short 
title, ex· 
tent and 
com­
mence­
ment. 
Defini­
tions. 

U>n-
stitution 
of a 
National 
I 
Human I, 
RightS 
Commis-
sion. 
6 
(g) "Member " means a Member of the Commission and include!:> the 
Chairperson, but does not include ex-officio Member referred to in 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(h) "National Commission for Minorities" means the National 
Commission for Minorities constituted under section 3 of the National 5 
Commission for Minorities Act , 1992; 19 of 1992. 
(i) "National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes" means the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes referred to in articl _e 338 of the Constitution; 
(j) "National Commission for Women" means the National Commis ­
sion for Women constituted under section 3 of the National Commission 
for Women Act, 1990; 
(k) "notification " means a no tification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(l) "prescribed " means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(m) "public servant" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code; · 
(n) "State Commission" means a State Human Rights Commission 
constituted under section 21; 
10 
20 or 1900. 
15 
( o) "terrorist act" shaH have the meaning as assigned to it in section 20 
3 of the Terrorist and D isruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987; 
(2) Any reference in this Act to a law , which is not in force in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall in relation to that State be construed 
as a reference to a c;orresponding law, if any, in force in that State . 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL H UMAN RlGHJS COMMISSION 
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a body to be known 
as a National Hum an Rights Commission to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act. 
25 
(2) The Commissio n shall consist of- 30 
(a) a Chairperson who is, or has been, a Jud ge of the Supreme 
Court; 
(b) four members to be appointed from amongst persons having 
1 knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to human 
J righ~: ~ 
! Provided that out of the four members at least three members shall 
I be persons having experience in-• I 
(i) general administrati o n at the level of Secretary to the 
Government of Indi a or an equiv alent post for at least one year ; 
(ii) police administration at the leve l o f Secretary tO the 40 
Government of India or an equivalent post for at least one year ; 
and 
(ui) l ~ g~ affa i1!:> at rhe level <'f ~t'r r e··~~: •, ~~-'" G,o,.;wmcnt 
u1 mut .. 1n the Mmt::.try ot Law o r who is. or h:t<.. h.--... ~ I. _J 
" u : ... ~. r . 
4 
J 

0 
5 
,­. .) 
~0 
7 
(c) Chairperson, or any member nominated by the Chairperso~ , of 
the! National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tnbes, 
the National Commission for Women and the National Cornmision for 
Minorities , who shall be Members, ex-officio. 
· 5 (3) There shall be a Secretary-General who shall be the Chief 
Executive Officer of the Commission and shall exercise such powers ~nd 
discharge such functions of the Commi~ion as it may delegate to htm . 
( 4) The Headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi and the 
Commission may , with the previous approval of the Central Govern­
ment , establish offices at other · places in India. 
4. (1) The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by 
the President by warrant under his band and seal: 
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section sb~l . be 
made after obtaining the recommendations of a Coiillllittee cooststmg 
of-
(a) the Prime Minister-Chairperson; 
(b) Speaker of the House of the People-Mernber; 
(c) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 
Government of India-Member; 
(d) Leader of the Opposition in the House of the Peo­
ple-Member; 
(e) Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States 
-Member; 
(f) Deputy Chairman of the Council of States-Member. 
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member 'Shall ~e i~valid 
merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constltutlon of 
the Committee. 
5. (1) Subject tp the provisions of sub-section (3), the Chairperso .n 
or _any other Member of the Commission shall only be rero.oved fr~m his 
off1ce by order of the President on the ground of proved ro1sbeh~v10ur or 
inca~acity after the Supreme Court, on reference being rnade to tt by the 
Prestdeot , has, on inquiry held in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in that behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the 
Chairperson or such other member , as the case may be, ought 00 any 
such ground te -be removed . 
(2) The President mav suspend from office the Cbairpersodn or anhy · · rna e to t e othe r member tn respect of whom a reference has been h d · · · t as passe Supreme Court under sub-section (1) unttl the Prestden f 
order s on receipt of the report of the Supr eme Court o n suc.h re erence. 
n, tV\\ Hh ... randiM anvthtng ir. ~ub-~e~.:tion (! ), the.! Pre sident . ~hall 
b\. order remu\.e trum ottice the.' l ho.~lrp~.-r::.v ll u l .!lt.' ... . ~: _ .... Mem be r If tht: 
- _ .. , . be'.-
Appoint­
ment of 
Chair­
person 
and 
other 
Mem­
bers. 
Removal 
and sus­
pension 
of a 
Member 
of the 
Commis­
ston. 

Term of 
office ot 
Mem­
bers. 
Mc::mbc::r 
to act a:. 
Chair ­
person 
or to 
(b) engage!) dunng hi!) term ot of nee m any patd empl oyment 
outside the duties of his office; or 
(c) is. unfit to continue in ofiice by rea~on of infirmity of mine! 
or body: or 
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared b] a competent 5 
court; or 
(e) is convicted and sentenced to 1mprisonment for an offenct! 
which in the opinion of the Presidenr involves moral turpitude; Or a 
(f) is, in the case of a Member without obtaming leave of 
absence from the Chairpe rson and in the ca~e of the Chairperson 10 
without obta ming leave of absence from the President, ab!:>ent from 1 
three consecutive meetings of the Commtssioo. ·1 
6. (1) A person appointed as Chairperson shall hold office for a term ~ 
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until be 
attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 15 · 
(2) A person appointed as a Member shall hold office for a term of 
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he 
attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. 
(3) On ceasing to hold office, a Chairperson or a Member shall be 
ineligible for further employment under the Government of Indi a or 
under the Government of a State. 
7. {1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the Chairperson by reason of his death , resignation or otherwise, the 
President may, by notification, authorise one of the Members to act as 
the Chairperson until the appointment of a new Chairperson to fill such 
dl~- vacancy. 
charge 
his func-
tions in 
ce rtatn 
circum -
!tta nce~. 
Tc::1 m:. I 
and con-I 
ditiO OS 
of Mem- I 
bers. I 
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing 
to absence on leave or otherwise , such one of the Members as the 
Preside nt may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge 
the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson 
resumes his duties. 
8. The salaries and allowances payable to , and other terms and 
conditio ns of service (including pension, gratuity and other retir ement 
benefits) of, the Members shall be such as may be prescribed: 
I Provided that neither the sala ry and allowances nor the other terms 
Vacan-
cie!>. 
etc nor 
tO JnV:JJj. 
dare the 
proceed­
i n g~ ol 
the 
Commt:.­
'-i•ln 
I 
and conditions of service of a Memb er shall be varied to bis disadvantage 
after his appointment. 
- - 9. No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be qu~tioned or 
shall be invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or 
.defect m the constitution of tbe Commission . ~0 
~ 
l 

nt 
d 
lt 
e 
r 
f 
5 
) 
9 
10. (1) Th~ Commtssion shall meet at such timt:: and place a~ the 
Chrurpcrson may think fit. 
(2) The Comrni~ion shaU regulate it~ own procedure. 
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenti­
cated by the Secretary-Ge neral or any other officer of the Commis sion 
duly authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf. 
Proct:­
dure to 
be reg­
ulated 
by the 
Commis­
sion. 
11. (1) The Central Government shall make available to the Commis- Officers 
sioo- and 
(a) an officer of the rank of the Secretary to the Government 
of India who shall be the Secretary-General of the Commission; 
and 
(b) such police and investigative staff under an officer not 
below the rank of a Dire ctor General of Police and such other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of the functions of the Commission. 
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Govern­
ment in this behalf, the Commiss ion may appoint such other administra­
tive, technical and scientific staff as it may consider necessary. 
(3) The salaries, aUowances and conditions of service of the officers 
20 and other staff appointed under sub-section (2) shall be -such as may be 
prescribed. 
25 
3() 
35 
CHAPTER Ill 
fUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION 
12. The Commission shaJI perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely:-
(a) inquire , suo motu or on a petition presented to it by a victim or 
any person on his behalf, into complaint of,-
--(i) violation of human rights or abetment thereof; or 
(ii) negligence in the prevention of such violation, by a public 
servant; 
{b) inquired , suo-motu or on a pt!tition presented to it, into any 
comp laint of violation or deprivation of rights of any individual or group 
of individuals relating to life. liberty and dignity resulting from the 
terrorist acts committed by any section of the people. and make 
aooroonate ret:ommend~ rinn.: rher"'"P. 
other 
staff of 
me 
Commis-
sion. 
Func­
tions of 
the 
Commis­
sion. 
·-· 

r' 
Powers 
relating 
to in­
quiries. 
10 
(d) visit, with the prior approval of the State Government, any jail 
to study the living conditions of the inmates and make recommendations 
thereon; 
(e) review the safeguards provided by o"r under the Constitution or 
any law for the time being in force for the protection of human rights 5 
and reco.m.r.p.end measures for their effective implementation; 
(f) study treaties and other international instruments on 'human 
rights and make recommendations for their effective implementation; 
(g) undertake and promote resea rch in the field of human rights; 
(h) spread human righ~' literacy among various sections of society 10 
and promote awareness, of the safeguards available for the protection of 
these rights , through publications , the media , seminars and other 
available means; 
(i) encourage the efforts of non-gover:nmental organisations and 
institutions working in the field of human rlghts; 15 
(j) such other function~ as it may consider necessary for the 
protectioo of human rights . 
13. (1) The Commission shall while inquiring into complaints under 
I 
- •i this Act have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in particular in respect of the following 
matters , namely:-
20 - 5of~; 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and production of any document ; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
.documents; 
(f) any other matte!" which may be prescribed . 
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person, subject 
to any privilege which may be claimed by that ·person under any law for 
the time being in force , to furnish information on such points or matters 
as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant to, 
the subject matter of the inquiry and any person so required shall be 
deemed to be legally bound to furnish such information within the 
meaning of section 176 and section 177 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(3) The Cbmmission or any other officer, not below the rank of a 
Gazetted Officer, specially authorised in this behalf by the Commissi on 
may enter any building or place wher e Commission has reason to believe 
that any document relating to the subject matter of the iaquiry may be 
found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or .copie s 
therefrom subjec t to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of 
Cwn.i11c:~: FruLcUU J.::. i.;/:3 in ;:,v i..tl a;:, 1L muy be applu.:alJk. 
-~ 
·' i I 
:] 
25 ~ 
~, 
-~ 
,, 
- .:I • -

11 
( 4) The Commimon shall be deemed to be a civil court and when 
any offence ~ is dc:;cribed in section 175, section 178, section 179, 
section 180 o section 228 of the.Indian Penal Code is committed in the 
view or presence of the Comrnission, the Commission may, after 
recording th • facts constituting the offence and the statement of the 
ac(.;used ns provided for in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
forward the .::ase to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and 
Lhe Magistrale to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear 
the complaint against the accused as if the case has been forwarded to 
him under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(5) Every proceeding before the Commjssion shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for 
the purposes of section 196, of the Indian Pena l Code and the 
Commission shaU be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XX"VI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
14. <I) The Commission may for the purpose of conducting any lnvesti­
investigation pertaining to the inquiry utilise the services of any officer or gation. 
investigatio n agency of the Central Gove rnment or any State Govern-
ment with the concurrence of the Central Government or the State 
Goveromt::nt as the case may be. 
(2) The State Commission may, for the purpose of conducting ar.y 
invest igation pertaining to the inquiry, utilise the services of any officer 
or investigation agency of the State Government with the concurrence of 
that Government. 
(3) For the purpose of investigating into any matter pertaining to the 
inquiry, any officer or agency whose services are utilised under sub-
section (1) may, subject to the direction and control of the Commis­
sion,-
(a) summon and enfo rce the attendance of any person and 
30 examine him; 
(b) require the discovery and production of any document; 
and 
(c) requis ition any pubtic record or copy thereof from any 
office. 
35 t 4) The provisions of section 15 shalJ apply in relation to any 
statement made by a person before any officer or agency whose services 
are utilised under sub-section . (I) as they apply in relation to any 
statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the 
Commission. 
40 (5) The officer or agency whose service;) are utilised under sub-
section (I) shall inve&rigate into any matter pertaining to tht: inquiry and 
submit a report thereon to the Commission within such period as may be 
specific::d by the Commission in this behalf . 
(6) The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctne::,s of the 
~5 facts stated and the conclusion. if any, arrived at in the report submiued 
w it under sub-section (5) and £or this purpose the Commission may 
make such inquiry (including the examination of the person or person::, 
who conducted or assisted in the investigation) as it thinks fit. 

State 
ment 
ID3rle b) 
r:n:..>:lS 
tc tne 
r:otrunil>­
~cn. 
Per~Oh) 
likely to 
be pre· 
judicia l!)' 
aff~e<ed 
to be 
heard 
Inquiry 
into 
com­
plaints. 
Step:. 
after 
inqu1ry. 
·, 
li:. !. .. , ..; ~~~L!' =~- 'f:!~:._e OJ 4 p¢ ~...;n l!l tne C~U:-S~ t::f :!Jvtng !!~!tCCl:CC 
t.:c:o:..: :t·-: .O::r..·~.:.-L!)ivn shall ~ub;~c~ h~m to vf bf! .:-:e..! against h.i.;1; iL; 
a.~y ~ 1ll c~ ':-.~n··i:!~ ~4 s~c;;~tling ~xc::p a P!"O.:ccut!0n fo: ~-viug fals~ 
evid~.r..;:": :·t ~·~1: it~te n!!n!: 
~<ZJ ii} IL1.de :.~< re:f!Y tv tht" question which he is rtqu ired by the 
Co~tinissicr: ~o answer; or 
( b 1 is r~ie·:ant to the subjt:ct matter of the inquiry. 
J~. H, at wy ~tag~ of the inquiry, the Commission,-
(a; coru;idez-.s it nece:iSd.f)' to inqui!e into tte condtict of any 10 
perso-: or 
t b) is of th.: upinion rb.;.• th~ rt!zmral.icn ~f UD.J pe::h)n is lil!..;!y 
to be prejudicially ~ffecte d by the inquirj , 
it sb311 give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the 
mquiry and to produce evidence in his defence: 15 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply where the credit of 
a witness is being impeached. 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCEDURE 
17. The Commission while inquiring into the complaints of viola- 20 
tions of human rights, may-
(i) call for information or report from the Central Govern­
ment or any State Government or any other authority or organisa­
tion subordinate thereto \vithin such time as may be specified by it: 
Provided that- 25 
(a) if the information or report is not received within the 
time stipulated by the Commission, it may proceed to inquire 
into the complaint on its own; 
(b) if, on receipt of information or report, the Commis­
sion is satisfied either that no further inquiry is required or 30 
that the required action has been iniciated or taken by the 
concerned Government or authority, it may not proceed with 
the complaint and inform the complainant accordingly. 
(ii) without prejudice to anything contained in clause (i). if it 
considers necessary, having regard to the nacure of the complaint, 35 
initiate an inquiry. 
13. The Commission may take any of the foUowmg steps UFOD the 
completion of an inquiry held under this Act, namely:-
(1) where the inquiry disdoses , prima facie, the Commissio.r: 
of violation of human rights, it may recommend to the concerned o~.J 
<?overnment or authority the init~ation of proceedings for prosecu-
l.tu ... u .. .:: ............. VlL .... ! .l\..t.h.Jl! .... ~ t.l.lC \.....UtlUlll.).:>!J._. •-"·_.., '-c~l] a L•'• ....;.~~ -· _ 
che concerned person or persons; 

1:) 
(2) apon:.ti'-=1 LOc ~uprcru .. Coti.rt vr tht: Higb Cul!l' conLancd 
tL)r su...:b du ecLions as that Lot..rt tna)' d.t:t:rn nccc~~a. y 
(3) recvmmt:nd to the <.:oncem~d Government C! autr.cnty for 
the grant of such immec1late interim rellef to the vJct!m or the 
members of his family as the Commbsicn may consider ner;e-.sary; 
(4) subject to the provisic,ns of sub-section (5) provide copy of 
the findings of the rnquiry report to the petitioner or his represen­
tative; 
(5) (a) the Comm1ssion shall send a copy of its inquiry repon: 
togeth er with i[S recomm endatio ns to the concerned Government 
or autho rity; 
(b) the concerned Government or authority shall, within a 
period of three months . or such further time as the Commission 
may allow, forward its comments on the rep ort, including the 
action taken or prop(...s~J to be taken thereon, to the Commission; 
t~S) the Cummi::-~ior shall publish its inquiry rep ort together 
with the commem~ 0t the concerned Government or authority, if 
any, and t":.e action taken or propo:;ed to be taken by the 
concen.~d Guvernment or authority on the recommendation~ of 
the Commission. 
19. Notwnhstanding a.nything contained in this Act , while dealing 
with complaints of violatio n of human right s by members of the armed 
forces, the Cornmissit>.l shall adopt the following procedure, namely:-
(1) it may, e1ther on its own motion or on receipt of a 
25 peritio:1 -;eck a report from the Central Government ; 
( 2) uft- , ,, :-.;<.:cipt of the report, it may either not proceed 
with coupi<..:HI u, a::. Lhe -;a.se may be, make its recommendations 
to that Gcv~rn.nem. 
Proce­
dure 
with re­
spect to 
armed 
forces. 
20. The procedure for submission of annual report rela ting to the Annual 
30 functions and other activities of the Commission shall be as follows:- report. 
(1) the CommissiOn shall submit an annual report and may at 
any time submit special reports on any matter which, in its 
opinion, is of such urgency or importance that it should not be 
deferred till submission of the annual report; 
35 (2) the Central Government and the Govern..rnent of each 
Srate, as the case may be, shall callse the annual and special 
reports of tbe Commission to be laid on the Table of each House 
of Parliam-ent or the State Legislature rcspectivdy, a~ the case may 
be. along \vith a memorandum of action taken or proposed to b~ 
40 taken on th'! recomrnendati(,ns a~· the Commission and the r(;;asons 
for noo-acc.:pt::tnce of the r~cornmcndations if any . 
CHAPTEI< V 
S rArE HLt-.L~~" F..lGH rs Cor.P.IJ!>~iCJ~, 
Zl. ( 1 j 4. S!ate Governmt!nl m;.l:•. b~ notif~la..ion. c ..... •.d .• utc <t Statt: Star..: 
·!·5 :-tu:;1 _.. R~g'. ,. c.-o,~:nli!Si~n and th~tt:!t!.t:U!"! tnr: provision~ of thi~ Act !-futnan 
•• J -
• • ... I ... . 
' CtliL!l:-osJO •. . 

'. >! 
I , 
14 
(3) Every Stare Commission shall in4uire intv VIolation of human 
righ ts only in respect of matters relatable to any of the entries 
enumerated in List II and List Ill in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution: 
Provided that if any such matter is already being inquired into by 5 
the National Commission , the State Commission shall not inquire into 
the said matter. 
( 4) The term of office and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and other members of the State Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government concerned. 10. 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
22. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropnatton 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way 
of grants such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit 15 Govern- for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
Grants 
by the 
Central 
ment. 
Ac-
COUnt) 
and 
audit. 
Matt.:rs 
oo1 sub­
JeCt tO 
JUrhdi~:-
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for 
performing the functions under this Act , and such sums shall be trea ted 
as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1). 
23. (J) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other 20 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such 
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified 
by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall 
be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor:General and any person appointed 
25 -
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission 
under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority 30 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-Gener al 
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, 
in particular , shaJl have the right to demand the production of books , 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Commission. 35 
( 4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptrolle r 
and Auditor-GeneraJ or any other person appointed by htm in thts 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
~- annually to the Central G ove rnment by the Commission and the Central 
Government shalJ cause the audit rep o rt to be laid. as soon as may be .tO 
possible after it is received, before each House of Parij amenr. 
CHAPTER VII 
M!SCELLANEUL 'S 
2-'. {1) Tht! Commission shall not inquire imo anv mattt!r which t::. 
pending before a State Commjssion or any othe/ Commisswn duly ~5 
constituted under any law for th~ time bl!in~ in forrr> 
'2 T: .... CJlllltll~::..\.>11 ::.li.tll nor 111qll1r·.: tntn Jn: mauer ... tft~.:r tbl! 
expiry of on~! vear fn""' rh, r~~- · 

5 
15 
25. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government, Commission or any Member thereof or any person acting 
under the direction either of the Central Government or of the 
Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or any order 
made there-under or in respect of the publication by or under the 
authority of the Central Government or the Commission of any report , 
paper or proceedings. 
26. Every Member of the Commission and every Officer appointed 
10 or authorised by the Commission to exercise functions under this Act 
shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code. 
27. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out of the provisions of this Act. 
15 (2) In particular and without prejudi ce to the generality of the fore-
going power such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters , namely:-
Protec­
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Mem­
bers to 
be 
public 
servants. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
(a) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Members under section 8; 
20 (b) the conditions subject to which other administrative, technical 
and scientific staff may be appointed by the Commission and the 
salaries and allowances of officers and other employees unaer 
section 11; and 
(c) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
25 (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the ' expiry of the 
session immediately foUowing the session or the successive sessions 
30 aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the ruJe should not be made , the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modi£ied form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
35 under that rule. 
28. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make s!_lch provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as appear it to be necessary or expedien t for removing the 
40 difficulty; 
Provided that no ~uch order ~hall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencemem of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
after it is made. bt: laid before each House of Parliament. 
Power to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 

~-f ,".TE!•,.t£1-n OF OBJ ECfS AND REASONS 
!ildi&: j:; It ;.,.sr~; . 
k. :;:!ladciial t:o•Jet:..c•!' · 
.A£remtly of cb;! Um: 
in the ::for ~said 'C:c'lt;; · 
.. • : nt\:1 U(....io~.al Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and th 
..• · .... l'lOmic, S·.~c ial and Cultural Rights , adopted by the Gene~ 
• ·c •:-:: '·~ ·.~'!~ !~J. Decembe r, 1966. The human rights embodied 
•: . .·; ·,!;·;. •.. · ~t .ant~aHy protected by the Constitution. 
2. Howev~;:, ;here hi..i3 !;i;en growing concern in the country and abroad about · 
r~1ating to humr.l.:\ li.~.b;.s. H;tving regard to this, changing social realities and the 
r.:rends in the nature of '~Tirr··:: anJ violen ce, Government bas been reviewing the exist~g '. 
laws , procedures and t.y:;t~r. of admini~>tration of justice, with a view to bringing about~ 
:$f"":Her acccun•abi!iry and tra;· .. p;.rrency in tbem , and devising efficient and effective method(., 
o{ d:!3iing with the situa:.ion . 
3 Vv'i,kta \ .:!m~ .ji_, ussions were ~elG <~t various fora such as the Chief Ministe~; .. ~­
Co'lfuenck! on Hi.!m·~ -. Fight seminars o rganired in various parts of the country and·-
" 1~ :t.ings '1:ith b:.tier:, d -,~ riut.~ po!tt1..:al parties. Ta.king into account the views expressed · ,., .. , •.. " ____ _ 
~b ~:.~ <iisaJ.ssio.oB. the pres~r.r Bill is brought ~fore Parliament. 
"·. I'lte salient features of the Bill are:-
(1) A Human Rights Commission will be set up at the National level consisting of 6. 
m~mbers to be appointed by the President. The Chairperson of the Commission will 
be a person Y.'ho is or has been a 1 udge of the Supreme Court. '""'*'~~~ 
(2) Chairpersons of the National Commissions for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. Women and Minorities, or their nominees, will be 'ex offido memebrs of the ., : 
Commission. 
(3) The Commission will be a fact-finding body with powers to conduct inquiry in!o •. 7. 
complaints of violation of human rights .. 
( 4) The Commission will be assisted by investigating agencies of the Central and State 
Governments. 
~· 
(5) The Commiss10n may make recommendations for the effective implementation of · 
the existing laws and treaties on human rights. 
(6) The Commission may undertake research in the field of human rights and take · 
measures to promote awareness of human rights among all sections of society. 
(7~ Provision is also made for the constitution of State Human Rights Commissions. 
5. Tne Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
reco 
m'e. 
serv 
becc 

17 
NOTES ON CLAUSES 
Clause 2 provides for the definitiom of the expressions used in l.tit:: Bill. 
Clause 3 provides for the constitution of the Nationa l Human Right ~ Commi ssion with 
quarter at Delhi and establishment of its offices at othe r places in India. 
Clause 4 provides for the appointment of Chairpersor. and other Members o.u 
recommendation of a Committee. 
Clause 5 empowers the President tc remove or suspend a Member of the Comm ission 
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity on a report of the Supreme Court. 
Clauses 6, 7, 8 contain provisions regarding term of office of Members, carrying on of 
the work of the Commission in the absence of Chairperson a!'!d terms and conditions of their 
Clause 9 provides that procee<.llngb of the Commission would not be invalid merely 
because of existence of a vacancy in the Commission. 
Clause 10 provid.!s for the Com.J.lli])sion's power to regula te itS own procedure. 
Clause 11 provides for tht uffict!rs and other employees of the Commission. 
Clause 12 provides for the (unctions of the Commission in consonance with the schcmt: 
·of the Bill as the Commis sio n is expected to function as a watch dog for the effective 
implementation of human nghts as guaranteed by the Constitution and embodied in the 
International Covenants. 
Clauses 13 and ;._) coufer necessary powers relating to enquiries and 
Clause 15 provides fur 1mmucity from legal proceedings fpr evidence given by persons 
b~fore the Commission except for giving false evidence. 
Clause 16 provides for opportunity of being heard to person~ likely to be prejudicially 
affected by inquiry conducted by the Com..'llissiou. 
Clauses 17 and 18 provide for the procedure to be followed by the Commission while 
inquiring into complaints of violations of human rights and empower the Commission to call 
for information and take steps upon completion of the inquiry . 
Clause 19 seeks to provide a special proct!dur e rt.g.<:nding violations of human right s by 
members of armed forces. ,_ 
Clause 20 provides for the procedure for submi~s ion of annual n:porrs for pro tccn un of 
human rights and the; measures taken by the Centr a! Guv'!rn .n t:nt or the Stene Goverumcm. 
Clause 21 provides for establishmen t c! cr Slat!! Hum an Rlgnt~ Co!n.<ni.s:siou , if lhc Sr:H.: 
Government so wishes. 
Clauses 22 and 23 provid e for makin g of grants 1.:; ~lir.: Ccl~ t ~·i3.l G v;::::rn.lll..:.l.l: to L~ ;;: 
Commi5sion and maintenance of accot..:nts by tt-.e C ~1 t:i::..; . .: ~ .c at!d; _ 1g of 'ech c:.cc'-' -.. c:: 
I •• - I #" - • • 
U .. \ \i~ C \,...U .... J.j-Jl .. L...~- · -11 .... .. ......_ __ .~, . · ....... '-' .. . . " .. -..a. ..... . - ... - ... 

18 
Clause 24 provides for the jurisdiction of the Commission vis-a-vis 
State Commissions or any other Commission. 
Clause 25 provide for protection of action taken in good faith. 
Clause 26 seeks to declare the Chairperson, Members and employees 
of the Commission to be public servants. 
Clause 27 empowers the CemraJ Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 28 makes a provision for removal of difficulties. 
c 
ClausE 
Chair[ 
of rup 
theM 
initial 
be ap) 
ex pan. 
2. 
oatun 

19 
FiNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clau~t 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Human Righu, Commission. 
8 and 11 of the Bill provide for the salaries and allowances payable to the 
o, Members and the Officers and other staff of the Commission. A token amount 
0c.;rupees one lakb has been provided for in the Budget Estimates for the year 1993-94 of 
~e Ministry of Home Affairs for setting up of the Commission. The expenditure during the 
ili!tial year of the constitution of the Co~ssion on account of these clauses is estimated to 
'bi'approximately Rupees two crores which will mainly be of a recurring nature. With the 
e{pansion of its activities, the expenditure is likely to increase in subsequent years. 
~ 2. Tbe BiU will not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring 
,_ 

20 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry­
provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may be made , inter 
to the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the 
and Members , the other administrative technical and scientific staff appointed· 
Commission, Officers and employees made available to the Commission by G 
The matters in respect of which the rules may be made, are matte rs of p 
administrative detail. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a ... v'u"'' 
character. 
provid< 
.· Righ 
there 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
e for the constitution of a National Human Rights Commission and a State Human 
Commission in any State and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
tC'L. - : <' R r h mon n Min i.~cer of H ome Affairs) 

APPENDIX~II 
(See para 4 of the Report ) 
Summary of the oral evidence tendere d before the commiUee. 
I . Summary of the oraJ evidence tendered by Shri B.G. Verghese, emine nt j ournalist on 
lOth August, 1993. 
1. Compositio n of the Commission (Cla use 3): 
Looking at the salient aspects of the Human Rights Commissions Bill, 1993, 
credibility of the Commission is very important. The Commission, however, seems to --- come as 
overweighed in faYour of people who have an official, bureaucratic background. There is ··~··· ·.,.,~ ..... - J··'Would c< 
particular virtue in that. It serves no purpose whatsoever. You need people of ~"': broad n 
but human rights are very wide. If you say somebody has been Secretary to Government In "' rather t 
a particular Department, whether it be Police or Home, that does nor vest that person W"ftb undermi 
any greater understanding, feeling or knowledge of human rights than any other pubh? The 
person with equal experience in some other field. In fact, human rights violations do not "prior a 
takes place in the Secretariat; not normally, may be some do! They take place in the fi~ig. should \ 
and the people who are more closely associated with the field are more sensitive to human because 
rights issues than people who are cocooned for many years. Knowledge of govern withholc 
knowledge of police administration , knowledge of general administration , knowledge summer 
intelligence organs and so on and so forth is important. But the people in public life., · a jail w 
academicians, trade unionists, businessmen, women activists, journalists and political perso_i1s rights v 
would be equally sensitive and knowledgeable about administration and the law becaus.e and sur 
these are not closed entities but interactive. But the whole approach is so heavi!f Govern 
governmentaJised that it gives an impression that the Government is afraid of open exposu~~ affect t 
and is loading the Commission with people having a government background. Unless the Tho 
composition of the Commission is much more open and liberal , it will be regarded as a body rights r 
lacking in credibility and the first impressions are imponant. The members of the catego · ·.~ of nati< 
described , like Secretaries to the Government , may be individually and collective[~ a treat) 
outstanding persons. But, if the wrong impression gets around , they are handicapped. And if -Thridly 
by any chance any one or atl of them tend to be carried away by bureaucratic thinking, th~n . to the 
the Commission will for ever carry the imprimature of being a Government body. That, · Intema 
would be unfortunate , because this is no cosmetic apparatus. Something we are setting up as· when 1 
part of the institution that we have developed to safeguard and improve democratic the H1.. 
~~man~. ~~' 
2. Appointment of Chairpe rson and other Members (Cla use 4): the prE 
vario u~ 
The Appointing Committee comprises of the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the Lok 
d have ' Sabha, the Minister of Home Affairs, the Leader s of the Opposition in the two Houses an 
the Deputy Chairman of the Raj ya Sabha. This is again overloaded and duplicates certain 4. lnv1 
categories. There is no reason for such large numbers The purity of s election is not 0 
enhanced, but probably would be impeded by large numbers beyond a certain optimal point. 
Three persons o n the Appointing Committee would be more than adequate. A three· 
member body with t he Home Minister from t he Government, the Leader of the Opposition 
from either House and a Presiding Officer of either H ouse would suffice. So you have three 
members-t he Home Minister , the Speake r and the Leade r of the Oppos ition in the Rajya 
S.Jbh:l. If ii IS the othe r \v<J\ abour if r)-.r> J t>'ld,:or nf tl; 0 ('\t; .. u :t:v, j i.~ ,;,.; Lv: ... .)cl ,J t l..l i) J 
22 
ser, tct 
GO\\![ 
Comrr 
then t 
hum..tl 
lc :.lC 

.,J. 
"' -• "'1--J , 
23 
ber, then let the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha be the third member. So you have one 
•rP.sltUlL'f; Officer, one Leader of the Opposition from the other House and one Member of 
Government; the Minister in charge of the Department dealing with human rights. 
Functions of the Commission (Ciause 12): 
It will be difficult for the Commission to inquire into the acts of violation of civil rights 
militant and other groups. How the Commission will proceed about it? If a Commission 
this nature, a high-power body like this, cannot deliver on what are prescribed as its 
tory functions , it ·loses credibility. How do you enquire into what the Hizbul 
0~!"1\I.LUJ•:UU.'"'""""' is doing , or any group in the North East like the NSCN or the Kuki Nagas. 
do you investigate that? They are unseen. They flee across the border. They have not 
_, .... ,lr ... "u,m addresses where you can find them. They will not be amenable to your summons and 
as witnesses or obey the procedures of a civil court. If they were to do that, they 
not be in the militant camp. Therefore, the Commissions action should be limited to a 
review of terriorist I militant activity and include them in its special I annual report 
r than undertake specific investigation as this would be infructuous and would 
the credibility of the Commission as a whole. 
There is a reference under clause 12( d) about the Commission visiting jails with the 
approval of the State Government". In this case , prior approval is not necessary. It 
. should be with prior information to the State Government and not with its prior approval 
because if a State Government has something to hide and does not give approval or 
withholds its approval for six months, you can not do anything. The Commission that can 
summon witnesses or documents and has other powers of a civil court should be able to visit 
a jail with prior information to the State Government. Jails are also places where human 
rights violations might take place. These are matters that are to be looked into and a quick 
.·.and surprise visit to the jails would be called for, rather than going on writing to the State 
Government asking for their prior approval to visit a jail. Any delay in this regard would 
affect both the status of the Commission and the utility of the inspections. 
The Commission's power to study treaties and other international instruments on human 
rights mentioned in clasue 12(f) sho uld enabale it to recommend measures for upgradatioo 
of national laws in line with the international covenants ratified by India. Secondly, we sign 
a treaty but do not ratify it. It took us years to ratify the Convention on Rights of the child. 
Tbridly, in respect of civil and political rights, each Government is bound to make a report 
to the Human Rights Committee of the UN every three, four or five years. The 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was introduced in 1966. It is not known 
when India signed and ratified it but since then we have submitted only two reports. Here 
the Human Rights Coiili!l.ission could take some interest. The presentation of the report is 
being done by the Attorney General. The Human Rights Commission should have a say in 
the preparation of the report because under this Bill it is required to monitor the working of 
various international statutes and so on. If that is so, the Human Rights Commission shou ld 
have a say in the drafting of the report. -. 4. Investigation (Cla use 14): 
Clause 14(1) says that the Commission may, for purposes of investigation , utilise the 
services of any officer or investigation agency of the Central Government or any State 
Government with the concurrence of the Government concerned. That is appropriate. The 
Commi tte e sho uld not have a separate investigation agency of its own. Duplication would 
Lhen mean that the Comm1ssion is loaded with the entire and exclusive respo nsibility of 
human rights as the Central and State Governments would then say that they have nothing 
to do with it. The primary responsibiljty is of the State to deal with human rights problems and, 
, I 
{ 
I 
I I 

14 
therefore, if you divide this responsibility by having a separate agency, it will be dilutmg the ' 
<;tate's primary role of defending human rights. Here, it is suggested that there should a 
wing, particularly at the Centre , may be in the CBI, which should be dedicated to 
rights work because it is sufficiently large. This calls for a diffe rent kind of specialisation, a.,· 
kind of legal background of interpretation, of understanding of human psychol ogy . 
It is also desi rable that prosecution should not )'e a part of the role of the Commission. 
lt is not a prose cuting body. It is an investigating 'body. Its role ends there. As part of the ': 
CBl, there should be a public prosecutor so that automatically Human Rights Commission 
matters are taken forward for prosecution. This is an important aspect. Otherwise , there will 
be a hiatus between the submission of the report and prosecution. 
Clause 14(3) states that "for the purpose of investigating into any matter pertaining to · 
the inquiry , any officer or agency whose services are utilised under sub-sec tion (1) may,· ' 
subject to the direction and control of the Commission ... " This needs to be strengthened 
looking at the kind of problem s that have arisen with the Election Commission. The 
'direction and control' to the Chief Election Commissioner's mind means something more ·· 
than what mean s to the Governme nt and you should not get that kind of impasse here. 
5. Steps after Inquiry (Clause 18): 
The period of three months for forwarding the comments on the report by the 
concerned Gove rnment or authority to the Commission prescribed in sub-clause S(b) is ~ 
unfortunate. It should be reduced to one month. 
According to sub-clause (6) , the Commission shall publish its inquiry report together 
with the comments of the Government thereof. This provision will unnecessarily delay the 
things. The Commission will be 'a fact finding body'. Once you have got the facts, what are 
you waiting for? Action taken by the Government is separate. By waiting for that , you 
dilute the facts. These should, therefore, be separated. 
6. Proced ure with respect to armed forces (Clause 19): 
Whether it is the Army, Navy or the Air force or the BSF, the ~my Act, the Navy 
Act or the Air Force Act is there and the BSF has a similar Act. They have procedures of 
courts of inquiry and court martial which deal with cases in a summary fashion. That should 
not be disturbed. But what is recommended here would not be adeq uat e and falls short of 
the requirement. The BSF, the CRPF, the Armed Police, the Assam Rifles , the NSG , the 
National Rifles etc. are involved in aid of civil power and law and order duties in a variet.Y 
of circumstances. Let these forces go through the Cou rt Martial procedure. Once that lS 
complete, the y must statutorily report the findings, especially where it involves a civil person 
or a civil authority, in aid of civil power. The Commission should then be able to look at 
that report and say "this punishment is not adequate or is excessive" for whatever reasons. 
The Commission should make its recommendation and send it back to the same originating 
authority for review and if that -authority re-endorse s the same decision, then it should be 
binding. This procedure would offer the Commission an opportunity to suggest a review , but 
without undermining the desciplinary authority of the Army, Navy, Air Force etc. for, if one 
does that, that would be very danger o us from various other point s of view. 
II. Summ ary of the oral evidence tendered by Shri Soli Sorabjee, emi nent jurist, on the 
16th August, 1993 
There are two things which we should keep in mind. First is the credibtlity of the 
Comm ission and seco nd is its effectivene~" On rh,. ,..,.,~:h:•·· •.. -~! .. ::; ..: .......... Hu uaa we 
• 1 ' • 
r n,..,.,r·"·::: :. "'"" .11::.u U11 .. dfJputnttn.:; proce~':). 
l. cornposi1 
A5 far 
including tt 
to it. Out 1 
e~perience 
an equivak 
able, t?~Y 
cornJlllSSlO 
2. Appoint 
The a 
don't hav€ 
court, bu1 
you ha~e 
find thls 
process tt 
have a r 
appoi.ntin• 
3. JDvesti 
The 
tbere is ~ 
hand s of 
the Com 
going to 
power _tc 
cosroenc 
seriOUS i 
that it s 
that an) 
prosecu · 
4. Stalt: 
Lo 
M,emb~ 
corotlll 
work i 
CoJJUD.. 
s. Pro 
Tl 
'[here 
that tl 
sec uri 
wron g 
what 
you d 
keep 
fo rce ~ 

25 
·· 1. Composition of the Commission (Clause 3): 
As far as the composition of the Commission is concerned, there will be five members 
including the Chairperson. One will be a Judge of the Supreme Court. I have no objection 
to it. Out of the remaining four members, at least three members shall be persons having 
experience in general administration at the level of Secretary to the Government of India or 
an equivalent post for at least one year. It is not that they are not intelligent, they are not 
·ab le, they are not versatile. But if you have the credibility, you must have on this 
Commission a person who is, or has been, Judge of a High Court or a distinguished jurist. 
2. Appointment of Chairp erson and other M embers (Clause 4): 
The appointment process, quite frankly, is unsatisfactory. You have everyone but you 
don't have the Chief Justice of India. You are going to appoint a Judge of the Supreme 
Court, but the Chief Justice is not there. It is very good that you have the Prime Minister, 
you have the Speaker and you have the Leader of the Oppositio n. It is br:ad-based. But I 
find this ommission very glaring. Again, why don't you have here in the appo intment 
- process the representative of Bar Association or the Bar Council of India? You can also 
have a representative of the NGOs; if not in the composition, then at least in the 
appointment process so that this Commission may command confidence and cred ibility. 
3. Investigation (Clause 14): 
The point which requires consideration is how the investigations are to be done because 
lhere is a perception that there has been an increase in the violation of human rights at the 
hands of the police. It may be right or it may be wrong; it may be exaggera ted even. But if 
the Commission does not have its own independent investigating machinery, you are not 
going to get any results. It must have an independent machinery and it must also have the 
power to initiate prosecutions. This is beca use we should not make the Commission just 
cosmetic . We are not concerned with what the Amnesty says or anyone else says. If we are 
serious about it, we will have to make it effective and the other aspect of effectiveness is 
that it should have the power to initiate proceedings for prosecution. This is not to suggest 
that any special power be given to the Commission, but they should have their own staff to 
prosecute through the mechanism of the existing law. 
4. State Human Righ ts Commission {Clause 21): 
Look at the State Commissions. There is no security of tenure of Chairpe rson and the 
Members. Who appoints them and who dismisses them? If you want to have a State 
Commission, there should be security of tenure of the members. Only then they can do their 
work independently. Here also, we should have the same principle of the National 
Commission . The composition must be of the same quality and character. 
S. Procedure with respect to armed forces (Clause 19): 
There is no doubt that armed forces are performing the task under difficult situations. 
There is no doubt that many things about their actions may be exaggerated, but if you say 
that the Commission is not going to have a look at many of the violations reported of the 
security forces , then one- of the important concerns is not met. It is true that if there are 
wrong allegations or exaggerated allegations, it can have a demoralising effect on them, but 
what happens when there is a case of utmost cruelty and you do not want to take it up. If 
you don't include the armed forces, you will give ao impression that you are just wanting to 
keep them outside the purview of the Commission. It will be in the interest of the armed 
forces if the complaints of alleged human right violations against them are also inquired into 
I I 
I 

26 
by this High-power Commission, which will go into them with a sense of obJectivity, 
und erstanding the position of the armed forces, and come to a conclusion. When the 
Commission concludes that there is no violation of human rights , it will increase the stature 
of the army and it will enhance their image. 
6. Matters not subject to jurisdict ion of the Commiss ion (Clause 24): 
According to sub-clause (1), the Commission shall not inquire into any matter which is 
pending before a State Commission. Here, if there is a clash between the National 
Commission and the State Commission, the views of the former should prevail. If necessary, 
constitution can be suitably amended so that the National Commission can have overriding 
power. 
According to sub-clause (2), the Commission shall not inquire into any matter after the 
expiry of one year from the date on which the act constituting violation of human rights is 
alleged to have been committed. Here, one year's limitation should not be there. Even in 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, you have a limitation of 3 years. Sometimes the violation 
comes to notice after one year. There is also no power of condonation. 
ill. Summary of the oral evidence tendered by Shri K.T.S. TnJsi, Additional SQlicitor­
GeneraJ of India on the lOth September, 1993 
1. Functions of the Commission (Clause 12): 
The functions of the Commission should not overlap or impinge upon the functions of 
the investigative agencies on the one hand and those of the courts on the other. The role of 
the Commission should, therefore, be confined to those which do not conflict with the role 
of the investigative agencies and the courts. Violation of human rights is normall y a 
cog nisa ble offence under the Ind ian Penal Code. It would also be a gross negligence not 
being able to take preventive measures. It would be actionable under the Criminal Law. The 
dividing line between the jurisdiction of the courts and the jurisdiction of the Human R ights 
Commission seems to be getting blurred. Unless we define the jurisdiction to be such as it 
does not impinge upon the statutory functions of the courts, there is going to be a greater 
confusion and duplication where the victims or the complainants would pursue rem edy in 
one or the other or both. If in each case it is going to 1esult in a parallel inquiry , it may 
eventually result in more harassment of the complainant because he has got other bodies as 
well to cope with and he does not know when he is going to get the desired justice. 
Therefore, the complainant must know clearly that up to this level the remedy is with the 
police, after a certain level the remedy is with the Commissio n and thereafter the remed y is 
perhaps with the courts. If the Commission is confined to post-investigative activity and pre­
adjudicatory activity, the Commission would be able to play a meaningful rol e. The 
significant role which the Commission can play afte r the investigation and before the trial 
begins is that of grant of sanction under section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is 
the sole prerogative of the concerned Government to either grant sanction or to withhold it 
to prosecute judges and public servants. The concerned Government acts in the best public 
interest in granting or withholding the sanction. If the grant or withholding of sanction is 
brought within !:lie purview of the Commission, it would avoid overlappit"lg or conflict 
between the functions of the Commission on the one band and the investigative and 
adjudicatory machinery on the other. 
Sub-clause (b) permits investigation to be carried out in regard to the terrorist offences 
and, therefore, impinges upon the statutory duty of the police to investigate. This is going to 
result in parallel investigations and delay the trial. This provision, therefore, needs to be 
deleted. 

te 
IS 
n 
n 
·f 
·f 
.. 
v 
r 
f. 
'27 
According to ~ub-clau~t: (c). the Commis~ion shall intervene in any proceeding involving 
anv allegation of violation of human rights pending before a court with the approval of such 
co~rt. Are we going to make the Commission an addttional court or super-court? This is 
liJ..elv to be challenged as unconstitutional. This is also likely ro constitute interference in the 
t'ssemial judicial process. Therefore, intervention in the marters pending in a court may not 
be brought within the purview of the Commission. 
GEl\TERAL 
There is no system by which we can afford suitable protection to the witnesses. There is 
an elaborate system in the United States where the witnesses are granted protection by 
gtving them a false identity , by sending them to unknown places changing their name s and 
qualifications, giving them !he same certificate in education whatever education they might 
have acquired, giving the same amount of land. If somebody is owning a small shop, 
Government will buy a small shop at the same level. He will have the birth certificate of the 
same date in a different name. Even the judges are not disclosed their original names. They 
can at least depose fearlessly. We need to strengthen that system. In this Bill, Parliament 
can provide a system by which we can embolden our witnesses and take care. We should go 
w any extent. We should not spare any amount of pain for being able to ensure that persons 
guilty of dastardly crimes are punished in accordance with the law. We must restore the 
majesty of law, the fear of law wb.icb is dwindling. This function can well be assigned to an 
independent tribunal like the Human Rights Commission, which will go, in whatever manner 
it chooses, into the desirability of affording protection to the witnesses and then pass an 
order which remains secret. That order may not even be produced in any court because the 
identity of the witnesses is tndy to be a secret for the rest of his life. It is a function which 
should be shifted from the local investigation or the local orosecution and assigned to the 
Commission. 
IV. Summary of oral evidence tendered by Shri Altaf Ahmed , Additional SoUcitor-GeneraJ of 
India on the lOth September, 1993 
The Bill, as its Statement of Objects and Reaso ns indicates, constitutes a response to 
the need for upholding human rights in the context of change in social realities and emerging 
trends in the nature of crime and violence so as to devise efficient and effective method of 
dealing with the situation involving violation of human rights. As part of the Nation's resolve 
to uphold human rights, the present Bill should provide for efforts to inculcate awareness, 
strengthen the investigative mechanism and render assistance for the enforcement of human 
rights, I have examined various provisions of the Bill and wish to make a few suggestions 
which, to my mind, are essential for the constitution of an effective forum to help uphold 
human rights. 
1. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members (Clause 4): 
Sub-clause (1) provides that the appointment of Chair-per son and four members shall be 
made by the President on the recommendation of a Committee consisting of the persons 
mentioned therei'n. In order to realize the purpose of seeking recommendation from a broad 
and largely representative body contemplated under sub-cla use (1), sub-clause (2) may be 
amended to provide for a minimum quorum. 
' . 
2. Removal and suspension of a Member of the Commission (Clause 5) : 
There is only a technical sugge~tion with regard to sub-clause (1). Kindly note the word 
·reported'. lt seems lo be redundant and needs to be deleted. 
Sub-clause (2) provides for the suspension of the Chairperson or the members of the 
~ 
.I 
I I 

28 
<tomrnission by the President. When a complaint is made against a member and the 
Supreme Court is deliberating upon it, the President should not act on his own and suspend 
Vhe Member until ·a reference to that effect is made by the Supreme Court itself. This is 
necessary so as to protect the Members of the Commission from frivolous complaints. I feel 
we could instead say that the Supreme Court will not assign him any work because the idea 
is that be should not be allowed to function. 
3. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances 
(Clause 7}: 
The clause is unexceptional save the language of sub-clause (2), which may be corrected 
by substituting the words 'such one of the members ' by the words 'such member'. 
4.Functions , Powers and procedure of the Commission (Clauses 12 to 18): 
Chapters III and IV of the Bill incorporate important provisions in clauses 12 to 18 
regarding the functions, powers and procedure of the Commission. Depending upon the 
nature and gravity of the act, the violation of human rights may bring into focus any one or 
all the three areas of law, namely civil, criminal and public law. The society as well as the 
victims of human rights violations should be able to effectively make use of the fruits of the 
labour of the Commission. I would, therefore, suggest that the investigation into offences 
conducted at the instance of the Commission and the consequent reports sho.uld be regarded 
as reports within the meaning of section 173(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure to be 
filed before the court through the Secretary-General of the Commission so that the court 
may take cognizance of the offence and proceed according to law. For this purpose, the 
relevant provisions of Chapter Xll of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be deemed to 
be made applicable to the investigations into offences at the instance of the Commission 
either by an investigation agency under clause 14(1) and (2) or by an investigating agency 
made available in terms of clause 11(1) of the Bill. The idea is that this Commission should 
become a part of the system of administration of justice so that the work of this Commission 
can be of actual use for the society and the victims of human rights violations. I feel that the 
work of this Commission can be useful in the three areas of law. Wherever there is violation 
of human rights, the three areas of Jaw at once come into picture. The Supreme Court has 
also now held that apart from the criminal and civil li~bilities , whenever there is an injury 
caused due to human rights violations, the Public Law springs into action and the courts can 
award even compensation. 
The Bill also states that the investigating officers to be associated with the work of the 
Commission should not be below the rank of the Directer-General of Police. So, the 
investigations tO be carried on by the police officers, not below the rank of D. G., should be 
capable of being made use of in the Court and these should be regarded as police reports 
under section 173 (2) of the Code of Cri.mina1 Procedure. The Court can then proceed in 
accordance with the law. Similarly, in the field of Civil Law, I feel that the evidence which is 
collected by the Commission in exercise of the powers under clause 13 should be made 
admissible before a court for any action under Civil or Public Law. Under this clause, the 
Commission has vast powers. 
' -I make this suggestion because this Commission is conceived of only as an investigation 
body. That is why, I did not want that the work of this Commission would not be capable of 
being used and it would, like all similar bodies, only produce reports which would contain 
recommendations, which would lie in the shelves, to he read or not to be read, and if read, 
may be or may not be acted upon. Since we are engaged in a very serious exercise of j 
reinforcing our resolve to uphold human rights, I examined the whole thing from the 
perspective of our freedom struggle through which we went and which was nothing but a 

29 
e for upholding certain basic human rights. Our Constitution provides for all these 
rights. Our law courts are there to enforce these human rights. We are only making 
fbe enforcement machinery for protection of these human rights which we recognised in the 
·very fundamental charter of the governance of our country, i.e. our Const itution. We are 
onlY reiLerating our resolve and making it more effective and that is why I suggested that the 
"<lfll~,,,::;a work of the Comm ission must be capable of being ~sed in the courts of civil, criminal and 
public Jaw jurisdictions. Clause 18 sho uld, therefore, be suitably amended providing therein 
tbat the investigat ion by the Commission shall be regarded as an investigation conducted 
under section 173(2) of the Code of Crimina l Proced ure . because unless this is done the 
jnvestigation into an offence will be incapable of being u sed in law. 
nission 
agencY'·· 
should: "of 
nission·. 
1at the; 
>lation 
trt has :i>·: 
injury-'1 
tscan 
1tain 
·ead, 
e of 
the 
ut a 
v. su·mmary of oral evidence tendered by Justice Rajinder Sachar, former Chief Justice of 
Delhi High Court on the lOth September, 1993. 
J. Definitions (Clause 2): 
Human Rights have bee n defined in clause 2(e). But the difficulty is that you have 
defined the inte rnational covenant s into two covenan ts. Other covenan ts like the 
International Cove nant regarding Tort ure etc. are also ther e. I suggest that all the 
international covenan ts should be automatically a part of this definition because if ther e are 
any interna tional covenants about tortur e, we canno t s ay that that is not a human right 
violation. 
Second ly, you h ave defined the ' terr orist act ' as an act defined under the Terrori st and 
Disruptive Activities (Preventi on) Act, 1987. Clause 12(b) also talks of a c omplain t being 
made for violation of human rights resulting from terrorist acts and it being inquir ed into oy 
·the Cornm.ission. The suggestion that the Human Right s Commi ssion should investigate into 
the terrorist acts, is a little odd and laugh able. What is it tha,t you w ant the Human Righ ts 
Commission to inquir e into ? It is an illegal act ; it is an unlawfb.l act. The State bas the full 
right to inquire into the a ct and punish thellh ! La murd er is commi tted , you d on't appoi nt a 
Commission t o find out whether this man should be puni shed or not. And whom does it 
call? Do you call the militant s throu gh a newspaper a-O,xerti sement saying , "Will you please 
come and say why y ou killed this man ?" We can inquir e into a violation by the Stat e 
because the State machinery is answerabl e. We can find out why the Police at a parti cular 
time gave t he order and what the situation was. But ir is impossible to inquir e into the 
~ human rights violations by the terrorists . You- are trying to · equate the killings by the 
militants with the killin gs by the State. There is a world of difference . The State , under n o 
circumstances, can cross the limits of law. They cannot become a terrorist. That is one of 
our biggest obj ections to it. 
2. Constitution of a National Human Rights Commission (Clause 3): 
If you turn to this clause, you will find that four member s are to be appoin ted from 
amongst h aving kno wledge or practical experience of matter s relating to human rights 
provided that o ut of f o ur members, at least thr ee members shall be-a Secretary to th e 
Govern ment, a Directo r-General of the Police, a Secretary of the Legal Departm ent. You 
are putting the Judge of the Suprem e Court or a Judge of the High Court on an equal 
footing with the lAS administrators- ! h ave nothing agains t them- or the Direc tor-General 
of Police. They may be for bette r than many of the politicians or m any of us o utside. Yo u 
are making it mandatory that out of five peo ple, three peo ple sho uld compulsorily be from 
the Government. And you are suggesting that peop le will accept that. You have put people 
of 'human rights experience'. Who can find it o ut? There is no meas ure to say that 'X' is 
having experience or not. They will comple tely erode the credib ility of the Commission. 

30 
3. Appo intment of Chairpers on and othe r Member3 (Clause 4): 
The Appomting Committee shall comprise of the Prime Minister. the Speakt!r th"' 
Minister in-charge of Home , the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People' the 
Leader of the Opposition in the C?uncil o~ ~tares_; ~d the ~eputy Cha~rroan of the Co~nci~ r 
of States. There are two very senous omlSSJOns 1n 1t. One ts the nommee of or the Chi f 
Justice of India himself. It may be the Chief Justice of India himself or a Supreme Co~ ' :" 
Judge or a person dealin g with judicial matters. Secondly, [ feel that the Press which · >·~ <.' 
obviously very much concerned with exposing, propounding or indicating the human righ~ .,; 
violations- and the human right violations would really be not known unless the Press ctoci · 
it- should have a say. The Editors Guild or any press forum which is acceptable to the· ti~- ~ 
juroalists, should be there. Then, I see no reason why the Minister in-charge of Home. · 
should be there when the Prime Minister is there. I think, he shou ld not be there at ali'. • 
4. Removal and suspe nsion of a member of the Commission (Clause 5): ::-
Clause 5 deals with removal and suspension of the Chairperson or a member of th~ 
Commission on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. It is all right. 1£ is like the 
Chai rman of the Public Service Commission being removed on reference to the Supreme 
Court. But if you see clause 5(3), it permits the President to remove a person if he feels that 
person is no( fit to continue in office due to various reasons. I am not objecting to the 
substantive part of it. What I am objecting to is the provision giving the power to the 
President. I think this power should vest with the Supreme Court rather than with the 
President. 
5. Term of office (Clause 6): 
Clause 6 specifies age-group of the Chairman and the t"'lembers. 1 don 't see why the age 
group should be different for the Chairperson and the Members. Incidentally, I may also 
suggest that there is no proyision here which we have in some of the Acts that these persons 
will not be eligible for re-appointment. I think that is important because 5 years is a pretty 
long period. I think, the question of re-appointment must be completely ruled out, both 
honorary as well as under governmental obligation. 
6. Functions of the Commission (Clause 12): 
Sub-clause (d) deals with the provision relating to visit of the Commission to jails with 
prior approval of the State Government. A D istrict Judge in Delhi has the undisputed power 
to visit any jail without permission, and that is true of a District Judge every where, and 
here you want this Commission presided over by a Supreme Court Judge to obtain 
permission of the State Governmenr! Inspection of the jails is the minimum that a person 
can do. I think tbis provision should be there to visit any jail without having to obtain perior 
approval of the Sta te Government. 
7. Inv estigation (Clause 14): 
Clause 14 has another defect. You are not giving the Commission their own staff. What 
you say is that the Commission may, for the purpose of condL!cting an investigation 
pertaining LO an inquir y, uLilise the services of any officers of the investigation agency w1th 
the concurrence of the Central Government or the State Government. What do you think of 
the Human Rights Commission to be? A wmg of the C.B.l.? A wing of the Vigilance 
Commission? They are an independent body. Gi\ e them their O\\ n investigation staff. They 
should not have to depend upon others for their staff requirements . r do not doubt rhe bona 
fides of the Go.,.ernment. I do not say tha t they will not make the bt!st people availablt: to 
the Comnw.sion What I ~a\ is thaL they should inden endenth h·~·,.. rJ.,o;,. "' - • s:. f~r . . . 
'" . '" ~ ''=''l; •• ,,. i uc:> )uuu!u nvi h,t\c: LL \\ nr<! to th.:- Horne r..!ini~tr) Lo spare ,, pa;-l!cular 
of he 
'fhel 
carr 
!JlUS 
8. s 
Con 
[ore 
cou 
po"" 
roos 
all. 
bas 
adjl 
be 
con 
Jud 
Cot 
reo 
the 
9. 
per 
for 
be 
inq 
ch< 
Nc 
by 
pn 
a t 
eit 
no 
pr• 

e 
e 
I 
f 
31 
otficer tor conducting tnvestlga tion. I suggest that the staff must be tOtally independent. 
There should be no inter-se change from the Home Ministry to the Human Rights 
Commission or from the Human Rights Commission to the Home Ministry. The Commission 
must be given powers to appoint their staff and it should not be left to the Government. 
S. Steps after Inquiry (Clause 18): 
The powers given to the Commission under this claul)e is like the one given to any other 
Commission. Every litigant can approach the Supreme Court. But as you know, unlike the 
foreign courts, our Supreme Court has gone much further. Anybody can move the Supreme 
Court for human rights violations and get reljef. Now, what is not adequate here is the 
power of the Commission to award compensation on violation of human rights. This is the 
most important part and without this power it will be nothing and will serve no purpose at 
all. You give powers to the Commission to adjudicate and award compensation. Parliament 
has already passed laws like the MRTP Act, the Consumer Act. They have the authority to 
adjudicate and award compensation. There is no doubt that the Consumer Act has proved to 
be very effecdve. This Commission also should have the power to adjudicate and award 
compensation. You are having a very high-powered Commiss ion with a Supreme Coun 
Judge as their Chairman. There is no reason why you should deny the right to this 
Commission to award compensation, because if you do not do that, they will merely be a 
recommendatory body. What do they do? Therefore, I think this power must be provided to 
the Commission. · 
9. Procedure with respect to armed forces (Clause 19): 
The clause says that no action will be taken with rega rd to the armed forces. To a lay 
person, armed forces normally mean the navy, the army and the air force. Now armed 
forces include the BSF and the CRPF also. The BSF Act and the CRPF Act define them to 
be armed forces. By such exclusion what are you going to give to the Commission? Only to 
inquire into some lathi charge by a policeman and nothing else! You cannot inquire into the 
charges against the BSF or the CRPF. You know the situatio n in Punjab, in Kashmir, in the 
North-East or anywhere else. So, if the Commission is ooJy to inquire into some violations 
by the police, it is a mockery because major part of these violations are taking place 
preci~t::ly by these institutions and if they are not subject to a review by the Comm ission, it is 
a complete mockery. You say that if a complaint is received by the Commission , they will 
either decide nor to proceed with it or make a recommendation to the Government. This is 
not proper. The Commission cannot even award compensation or relief. At least you 
provide for publishing their report for use by the Members of Parliament and the Press. 
'-
I I 

1 10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
APPEND IX-III 
(See Para 5 of the Report) 
List of Individuals, Associations, etc. from whom Memo randa, Suggestions etc. were 
received by the Committee. 
Shri K.L. Sharma, Member, Rajya Sabha 
Prof. Penn a Lakshmikanth Rao. National University of Singapore, Faculty of Law, 
10, Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 0511. 
Shri K. Yikram Rao. President, Indi an Fede ration of Worlcing Journalists, Post Box 
No. 571, F-101, M.S. Apartments, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi-110001. 
Sbri Yashpal Chhibbar , General Secretary , People's Union for Civil Libert ies, 81, 
Sahayoga Apartments, Mayur Yihar-I , Delbi-110091. 
Shri Tamin Ansari, President , Human Rights (India), 944, Golwad, Khadi 
Ahmedabad-!. 
Prof. H.C . Dholakia, Dean , Faculty of Law, M .S. University of Baroda. 
Shri Jaubhai Patel, President-Int ernatio nal Div ., Gujarat State Consumers Prot ection 
Centre , G.S.C.P.C Secretariat, Bombay . 
Shri Sarfraz Ahmed Siddiquee , General Secretar y, All India Muslim Rights 
Protectio n Council, 301, Madhipur Colony , New Delhi . 
Shri Jagdish Bhardwaje, AIDS Anti -Discrimination Movement for the protection of 
Human Rights of persons with H.I. Y./ AIDS , Post Box No. 5308, Delhi-11005 3. 
Shri H .F. Ramd as, C/o Jessu Tea Stall, Opp . Geeta Bhavan, Yamun a Bazar , Delbi-
110006. 
Shri Rajee v Dhavan, Director, Public Interest Legal Support and Research Cent re, 
A-131, New Friends Colony, New Delhi- 110065. 
Prof . M.C. Mathew, People 's Union for Civil Liberties , Kottayam , ( Kerala). 
Asia and Pacific Region Research Department , Amnesty Intern ational, International 
Secretariat, 1, Easto n Street, London. 
Shaik Kareemulla, President, Gudur Division Disabled Welfare Council, 4170-
Mosque Street, Gudur, Distt. NeUore (Andhra Prade sh). 
Shri Rai Sudhir Prasad, President, Indian Academy of Forensic Medicine, Doctors 
Colony, Luby Circular Road, Dhan bad-826001. 
Shri M.P. RajagqQalan, 2511-Kalyan House, Balaji Naga r (W), Ambanur- 600053. 
Dr. Jose P. Yerghese, National Centre for Protection of Human Rights , B-2/63 . 
Safdarjur.g Enclave, New Delhi-29. 
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, 330, Seventh Avenue , lOth Aoor . New 
York-10001. 
Prof. K.V Garg, Rajasthan Universit), Jaipur. 
32 
"1 
I 

33 
Shri Ram Sharan Yadav , Member, Lok Sabba. 
Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya, Member , Rajya Sabha. 
II 

I 
· j 
APPENDIX-IV 
(See Para 3 of the Report) 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
XI 
.ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 9.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd August, 1993 in Committee 
Room 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi_. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Gaya Singh 
4. Shri Rafique Alam 
5. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
6. Shri Krishan La! Sharma 
7. Shri Madhavsinb Solanki 
8. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
9. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
10. Dr. C. Silvera 
11. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
15. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
16. Shri Narain Singh Chaudbari 
17. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Ram Singh 
19. Shri Shyam Lal Ka.rnaJ 
20. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
21. Shri Rabi Ray 
22. Shri Ram Shafan Yadav 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Sho vana Narayan, Dirt'ctor 
Shri Tapan Cha tte rjee , Unde r Secretar¥ 
:;h,·i .)L. J i11JcJ l\.. Uf1l<tf , \...Offil1llllt:e (Jftic er 
Represen 
Shri 
Shri 
Sbri 
2. 1 
consul tal 
Bill, 19~ 
troduc 
report. 
3 . . 
7. 
8. 

35 
Representatives of the Ministry of HoUle Affairs 
Shri N.N. Vohra , Secretary 
Shri Madhukar Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Shri S. Balakrishnan, Adviser 
2. The Chairman informed the members that Hoo'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in 
con ~ ultation with Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha bas referred the Human Rights Commissions 
·s1U, 1993 and the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Bill, 1992 as 
''introduced in the Lok Sabba and pending there, to the Committee for examination and 
a brief introductory observation by the Chairman, the Committee held 
preliminary discussion on the provisions of the Human Rights Commissions Bill , 1993. 
4. The Chairman and members suggested the names of some individuals, institutions 
and organisations who were engaged in the protection and presevatioo of Human Rights, for 
betng called before the Committee for giving oral evidence. The Chairman requested the 
members to send their suggestions in this regard to the Secretariat. The Committee then 
decided that a Press Communique be issued, inviting suggestions, comments and memoranda 
on the Bill from citizens , organisations and institutions, latest by the 17th August, 1993. 
5. Thereafter , the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs made a presentation on the 
provis1ons of the Bill. Members sought clarifications thereon. The Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry replied thereto. 
6. the Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry to submit a detailed note 
on the functioning of Human Rights Commissions in other countries and the jurisdiction of 
the Commissions on the armed forces and the para-military forces. The Chairman further 
directed the representatives to furnish any other information/material which may be relevant 
the subject matter of the Bill. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 A .M. 
I 
I I 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 9.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the lOth Augu~t, 1993 in Committee Room 
63, First· Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi. 
"" '"·"··-· ··--ERS P.RESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob -- Chairm£Jn 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Sbri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
3. Sbri Subramanian Swamy 
4. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
5. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
6. Prof. M. Kamson 
7. Sbri Shancaram Potdukhe 
8. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
9. Dr. Girija Vyas 
10. Shri Ram Singh 
11. Shri Ram Nagina M1shra 
t2. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
13. Shri Rabi Ray 
14. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
15. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRET ARlA T 
Shrimati Sht n ~ Nura}an Director 
Shri Tapan Cnatterj•;e, Uuder Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar , Commi ttee Officer 
Shri B.G. Verghese 
2. ** . .. 
3. ... .... 
4. ** 
• M 
•• 
** .... 
5. The Committee, thereafter, heard the ora l evidence of Shri B.G. Verghese on the 
Human Rights Commissions- Bill. 1993. Member~ sought clarifications thereon, to which the 
witness replied. 
6. A verbatim record of the:: ural evideact: was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 P.M . 
.. Rebtc to other matters. 

XUl 
TEITRTEENTH ~ETING 
Tbe Committee mer ar 7.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16th Augusr, 1993 in Committee 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJY A SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhat ia 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
..... Shri Gaya Singb 
5. Sh.ri Murasoli Maran 
6. Sbri Rafique Alam 
7. Shri Subram anian Swamy 
LOK SABRA 
8. Dr. C. Silvera 
9. Shri Kirip Cbaliha 
10. Shri Gurucbaran Singh Galib 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri M.O.H . Farook 
13. Shrimati Bibbu Kuman Devi 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 16. Sbri Guman Mal Lodha 
17. Shri Shyam LaJ Kamal 
18. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
19. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
20. Shri Bbubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
SECRET ARlAT 
Sbrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar , Committee Officer 
WITNESS 
Shri Soli Sorabjee 
2. ** 
3. ** "'* 
4. *"' ** 
5. ** *'" 
6. ** ** 
** 
** 
7. After a brief discussion on the Human Rights Commissions Bill, 1993, the ComlllJ 
·~ Relate to orher matrer s. 

39 
heard the oral evidence of Shri Soli Sorabjee on tht Bill. Members sought clarifications 
thereon. to which the witness replied. 
8. A verbatim record of the oral evidence was kept. 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 8.30 P.M. 

XIV 
l'OUR'fEK\J TH M.KETI.Nt; 
fh: ( vmm.lltc::e m~:.l e1t 3.UO P.M. on Wedresday, the HHh Augu~l. 1!:1Y3 111 
Room ·A', Ground I•loor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
lVK€M~ F.RS PRESEN T 
1. Shri M.M . Ji.iw b -- Cfwirrncm 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Gay a ~mgh 
3. Shri Rafi4ue Alam 
4. Shri Krishan LaJ Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
5. Sbri Kirip Chalilu1 
6. Shri Gu rucharan Singh G<ilib 
7. Prof. M. Kamson 
8. ~lHi Shantaram Putdukhc:: 
9. Shri M.O.H. f aroo k 
10. Shri Narain Smgh Chaudhari 
I J. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Dev1 
12. Dr. Girija Vy<~~ 
13. Shri Ram Smglt 
14. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
15. Shri Ram Vila:::. Paswl.ln 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRET ARL-\. T 
Sbrimat i Shovaoa Narayar., Dtrc::ctor 
Shri Tapan ChanerJee, Under Secreta ry 
Sbri Surinder Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. ** 
.,.~ 
3. "'* >I< C. 
4. ** • 
~ 
·. 
*' 
*:;: 
·.,: :'. 
5. 1 hi:! Conumtt ~t. thc:!fcutrc.-. lLdJ iurth er dbt;u!>~iuf' vn the Hum<JU 1{ gl:t. \.'o,r~tni!>sio ns 
l:Sill. 1993, and decided ro take uo ct.tus·~ - IJv·d:.tuse ..:or.sidera~ion ot tne Is:JJ in tr::. n~xt 
mct!Ling.. Tne Committr:!~ directed tl~:::: re prese~JtaliH:~ of the Mini~tnes of Hom>! Affa•rs a11d 
Law. Ju:-tlce and Company . .:l.ff:::.ir::. m;:.y be iP .. !t.:.:! w b~ pre~em in t ldt m.;etin::· 
6. The Commill~t.! ihl!n dc:~:dcJ t0 :v.:eL a. ~.!;(J . \.~.1. cud ug~m 'll J.IJO P ~vi . 
• ht•rvln:., the lYti: P.. ugu.:.L E'IJ3. 
pam:11flt.:fi t 
p,1r1tamc~n 
1. Snr~ 
kAJYA S 
2. Sari 
-:; Shr 
4. Shr 
5. Shr 
Lf* f>P.J 
(;. ::;hi 
1 r.·n 
0 <::h· ..... l 
j Sh -
jlj !'lh 
~ , ... Sh 
~~ Sh 
['1 -'· Sb 
L , . .... 5\ 
15. St 
itJ St 
17. 
(;I 
"'' 

•nS 
''(( 
rtJ 
)!1 
1:;::: I Ul- ·.u~t:..;: ru~- !!un1 Cj_{Ji) A .M. to lU jl) A.M. in Collim:,'ttl! KOQiO o..:S. first fil•o>·, 
pan :.!!fl.;;ill H.:.~:.<.: _u.a rrow 3.Gu F .• L m A.3v P .• ~r1. iJ1 Committee Room ·D' Grou11ci floor 
Pi!rl';i!Jl:!~!~ neuse Am1e.,e, N~.;'' Del!:!, on the !9th August , 1993. 
M£1\ill!'i-tS 1!J.IJ£SEMT 
Snri lvl.lv1. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
., Shri Anam:ay Dc'/$b:lnk~r Dave 
· Shn Gaya S,ngh 
:+. Sl1ri Rafiqu:: PJ<>.m 
) . Shn Krisban La! Slu.u ma 
SJ~.BnA 
t Shri Gu • ..!cnarau Singh Gallb 
?.v~- M. Kamson 
G. Shri ~IH:tltalill!l rotuukhe 
<;~. Shr. t-.larain Singl1 Chaudhari 
1 '.J h·iaj. Geu. (Ri;;td.) Bhuwa11 Chandra K.hand\!ri 
i!. Shri Guman Mai Lodha 
L 
[-. 
15. 
i.G. 
17. 
Sli: tbm ~ir:~t 
S<i' ·.; 'j ;.Lr'J L::!l Ka;11al 
"1 ... 1r::' :\~::.:.\~ .). v 1na·-·~ 
Shr. gam "...} tt~-~·"- !;a:.w;.m 
~hri Rabl :-.. .. , ~ 
Slwi H~~·n '-··i. c· ... 
Sil!w~at; Snuv..,Ha !._:.:rc.iy".~, Direi..'C· 
Shri Tapan Charteqce, Under SL·cretary 
Shri Sunnaer Kumar, Com.tmttee Officc:r 
k.cpres~ntatives of the Ministr y 
1 Snri S. BalaJrrishuan 
of Home Affairs 
- AUYl:-.~r 
- Juin: ~t:.:letary 
2. Stlf. Maci. c•!<cr Gupt::. 
. f.)!' S.K. cos::: -
~ Sui M.M Jha Joiat 'f,_.:g1~\l'<ll ' tt·r::· ,. 
Oer.r~•) Rt:6:=..uru· •_:e•.· .. <.H 
' Sbri s p ~narn1a: 
~· 
~.::_..---~l1~~ht.:.: ·.~r .. ~\: .i:'1i'!:..o:t:y or :,f:.\)~ .}':.!s:.u::: m:t: Ct:.::.f?;;Oc,. ?~E'~'!lr S i.L~·~.~l::..~h':! 
D<o~~r :m~:!L} 
Dr l'u~~t":!.- '1ngf~ 
':.t"'r= Z.S. ::'t,~.z: 

2. The Committee resumed discussion on the Human Rights Commissions Bill, 1993. The 
Members sought clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry of Home Aff:i.irs on 
the various clauses of the Bill. The Chairman requested Members to send their sugges<ions, 
if any, on rhe BilL to the Secretariat. 
3. •* •• 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
1 

~',\';"·i!t..•7iJ.· , 
'CC".•:;·,,..:.., .;.;o• l' 
t 
XVI 
SIXTEEI\TH ~lE ETL"i G 
The Commmee mt:l at 7.00 P.:V1 on Tuesday, the 24h Augu)t. 1993 m Committee 
Room 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
~ l EMBERS PRESEN T 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chamnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal fotedar 
5. Shri Gaya Singh 
6. Shri Rafique Alam 
7. D r. Sanjaya Sinh 
8. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
9. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
LOK SA.BHA 
10. Prof. M. Kamso o 
11. Shri A. Venkatesh Na ik 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Sbri Narain Singh Chuudhari 
14. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari D evi 
15. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
16. Shri Guman Mal Lodba 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Ram N agina Mi~hra 
19. Shri Ram Vilas Paswao 
20. Shri Rabi Ray 
21. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
22. Shri Saifuddi!' Choudhury 
23. Shri Bhubaneshwar P rasad Mehta 
SEC RETARIAT 
Shrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar. Committee Officer 
Rcpresl:!ntative of th6-l\lini str) of Home Affairs 
Shri MadhuJ...ar Gupta. Joint Secrdary 
Rep r e~l:!nta tivt:s of th e Ministr) of Law, justice and Company Affair ~ 
l. ::,hn B.R. Atre, Joinl Secretar:;. <-'- Legi~lative Coun~t:l 
., Dr. ~anjay Singh, Assistant Lcg1slative Counsel 

XVlll 
*EiGHTEENT H rvlEETlNG 
The CommiHet md at 5.00 P.M. on Friday, the lOth Septembt!r, l993 in Commi ttee 
p.oorn 'A', Ground Floor, Parli ament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
~iBERS PRESENT 
1. Sbri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RA]Y A SA.BHA 
2. Sbri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Gay a Singh 
4. Sbri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Rafiqu e A1arn 
6. Shri Krish an Lal Sharma 
7 Shri Madh avsinb Solanki 
8. Shri Shar.ti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
9. Sbri Sudhir Sawant 
10. Shri Kirip Cbaliha 
11. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
12. Prof. M. Ka.msoo 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Kum. Mamata Banerjee 
15. Shrimati Bibbu Kumari Devi 
16. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
17. Dr. Girija Vyas 
18. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwao Chandra Khanduri 
19. Shri R am Singh 
20. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
21. Sbri Ram Nagina Mishra 
22. Shri Rabi Ray 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
24. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
25. Shri Bhu baoeshwar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tap an Chatterjee , Unde r Secr etary 
Sbri Surinder Kum ar, Committee Officer 
Shri C.B. R ai, f_ommittee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri A.T.S . Tulsi , Addttional Soli<.:ilor-General of Lr1dia 
2. ~hri Alta! Ahmed, Addttion:ll Solid tor-General of india 
3. Justice Rujinder Sachar 
':>.li.nutes of tl:.e Seventeenth meetin:s c! ~ ~ relate to cd!ef mntt.:n. 
,, .. _ 

'3.-- -
bi 
XVIll 
"'EIGHTEENTH MEETl~G 
The Commlttec met at 5.00 P.M. on Friday, the lOth September , 1993 in Committee 
'"'..l'':ili::~ ,_Room 'A', Ground Floor , Parliament Hou~e Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Gaya Singh 
4. Shri Ramachandran PilJai 
5. Shri Rafique Alam 
6. Shri Krishan LaJ Sharma 
7 Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
8. Shri Shar.ti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sudbir Sawant 
10. Shri Kirip Cbaliba 
11. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Kum. Mamata Banerjee 
15. Sbrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
16. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
17. Dr. Girija Vyas 
18. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Kbanduri 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
21. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
22. Shri Rabi Ray 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
1
1 
24. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
25. Shri Bhubanesbwar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETA RIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar , Committee Officer 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer , _ 
WITNESSES 
1. Shn A.T.S . Tulst , Addtttonal Solicttor-Genera J of India 
? Shri Altaf Ahmc.:d, Additional Solicitor-General uf India 
.::J . J u~tice Rajinder Sach ar 
•,..,finutes of tl:..: Seventeenth meetin~ cf t!!c Com.miaee relate to ot..."e: matter:;. 
45 

46 
Representatives of the 1\'Unistry of Home Affair s 
Shri S. Balakrishnan. Advisor 
Shri A.K . Srivastava , Deputy Secretary 
Representative s of the Ministry of La w, Justice and Company Affairs 
Shri B.R. Atre, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
Sbri A.K. Yishwanatban, Additional Legislative Coun:,el 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Sbri Ram achandran Pillai, who has been 
nominated to the Committee. 
3. The Committee held further discussion on the Human Rights Commissions Bill, 1993 
and heard the oral evidence of the above-me ntion ed witnesses on the Bill. Members sought 
clarifications thereon, to which the witnesses replied. 
A ver batim record of the o ral evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee decided to take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its 
next series of meetings. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 7.30 P.M. to meet again on the 22nd and 23rd 
September, 1993. 
i I 

X1X 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday , the 22nd September , 1993 in 
ft~~i-11,• . Committee Room 63, First Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi. 
1. Shri M.M . Jacob - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Sbri Gaya Singh 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
8. Shri Shanti Tya~ 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. C. Silvera 
10. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
11. Shri K.irip Chaliha 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri A. Venkatesh Nailc 
15. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
16. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
17. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
18. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
19. Maj . Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Kbanduri 
20. Sbri Guman Mal Lodha 
21. Shri Ram Singh 
22. Sbri Ram Na~a Misbra 
23. Shri Rabi Ray 
24. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B.G . Gujar, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee , Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar , Committee Officer 
. ., 

48 
Representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs: 
Shri Mad hukar Gupta , Joint Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs: 
Shri B.R. Atre, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
Shri A.K. Visbwanathan , Additional Legislative Counsel 
2. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Human 
Commissions Bill, 1993. 
Clause 2 
The clause was adopted subject to following amendments: 
Sub-clause (1) (a): The Committee considered the definitio n of "armed forces'' at 
and held over its decision thereon. 
Sub-clause {l) (e) and (f): The Committee discussed at length the definitions '-VJ.JluuJu~;;u 
in these clauses and amendments suggested thereto. The Committee held over 
consideration of the same. 
Sub-clause (1) (o) was omitted. 
Clause 3 
The Committee felt that sub clause (2) (b) should be so amended as to make' 
provision therein that out of the 4 members of the Commission at least 2 members should 
persons who are or have been the Chief Justice of a High Court and the remaining two 
positions may be left open for other persons. ' 
The Committee was of the opinio n that in sub-clause (2) (c) the provision 
nomination of members by Chairpersons of other Commissions should be deleted and 
instead a provision shou ld be made that the Chairpersons of the three Commissio~ 
mentioned therein sho uld be deemed to be members of the Hum an Rights Commission 
the discharge of functions under sub-clauses (b) to U) of clause 12. 
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted. 
Clause 4 
After a detailed discussion on the clause, the decision dter eon was held over. 
Clause 5 
The clause was adopted subje ct to the following amendments: 
Sub-clause (2) was omitted . 
Sub-clause (3) (f) was omitted. 
Clause 6 
The clause was adopted subject to the following amendments. 
In Sub-clause (1), after the word "Chairperson " , the words " or as member" shall be 
inserted. 
Sub-clause (2) was omitted . 
The Committ ee also suggested that. provision should be mad e for r eap pointment of 
The Co 
.:funit for filli 
months 
Subject 
The eli 
TheC 
(i) S1 
cl 
ir 
n 
(ii) 11 
tt 
The ( 
The c 
The< 
(i) : 
(ii) 
(iii) 

49 
Clause 7 
The Committee recomm~nded that provision should be made for prescribing the time 
.b."!.\l:..s;.,.~• Jimit for filling the vacancy occurring in the office of the Chairperson. It was felt that within 
,5Jx months the vacancy should be filled. 
Subject to above, the clause was adopted. 
Clauses 8, 9, 10 and 11 
The clauses were adopted without any change . 
Clause 12 
The Clause was adopte d subject to the following amendments: 
(i) Sub clause {b) was omitted. The CorrurUttee recommended that a separate sub 
clause may be inserted to provide for review by the Commission of factors, 
including acts of terrorism that inhibit the enjoyment of human rights and 
recommend app ropriate remedial measures. 
(ii) In sub clause (d) for the words "the prior approval of' the words "prior intimation 
to" shall be substituted. 
The Committee recommended that provision should be made for visit of the 
~Commission to detent ion places and Remand Homes, Children Home s, etc. where person s 
are detained or lodged for purposes of treatm ent, reformation and protection. 
Clauses 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 
The clauses were adopted without any change. 
Oause 18 
The clause was adopted subject to the following amendments: 
(i) In sub clause (1), the words "Prima facie" shall be deleted. 
(ii) In sub clause (2) afte r the words "direction" the words "orders or writs" shall be 
inserted. 
(iii) In sub clause (5) (b) for the words " three months" the words "one month " shall 
be substituted . 
The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M . to meet again at ·11.00 A.M . on Thursda y, 
the 23rd September, 1993. 
I I 

·. XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday , the 23rd September, 
Committee Room 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M. M. Jacob--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Sbri Makhao Lal Fotedar 
3. Shri Gaya Singh 
4. Shri Rafique AJam 
5. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Dr. C. Silvera 
7. Shri Sudhjr Sawant 
8. Sbri Kirip Chaliha 
9. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
H). Prof. M. Kamson 
11. Shri A . Venkatesh Naik 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M .O.H. Farook 
14. Shri Narain Singh Chaudbari 
15. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
16. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Maj. Gen . (Retd .) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri Ram Nagina Mjshra 
21. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
22. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
24. Shri Prem Chan d Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B.G . Gujar , Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Committee Officer 
Representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs: 
Shri Madhukar Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Representative of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Compan) Affairs: 
Shri B.R . Atre, Joint Secretary and Leg islative Counsel 
2. The Committee res um ed clause-by-clause con~ideratJon of the Human 
'ill 
c 
d 
tb 
w. 
a 
sit 
Ch 
Co 
tbt 
(i 
(ii 
La 
tl:e 

51 
· . .-. 
Commissions Bill, 1993. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the held over clauses. 
Clause 2 (1) (a) 
After further discussion the Committee agreed that the clause be retained without any 
change. 
Clause 2 (e) & (f) 
The Committee discussed at length the feasibility of enumerating specific rights under 
the definition of "human rights". The _consensus, however , was to retain the provisions 
without any change. 
1. Clause 4 
The Committee was of the view that provision should be made for consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India/obtaining his concurrence in respect of appointments .of (former or) 
sitting judges of the Supreme Court/Chief Justices of High Courts as chairperson or 
members of the Commission. 
Clause 19 
The Committee recommended that:-
(i) Government should separately examine the feasibility of introducing legal 
procedures of court martial, and other disciplinary measures as applicable in respect of 
Anned Forces, for para-military forces such as B.S.F. , I.T.B.P., C.R.P.F., etc. in 
view of the special procedure being made applicable to them in the clause. 
(ii) A provision should be added in the clause that the Central Government will 
inform the Commission about the action taken on its recommendations within six 
weeks, or such further time as the Commission may allow. 
Clause 20 
The clause was adopted without any change. 
Clause 21 
The Committee recomme nded that substantive prov1s10ns may be incorporated in 
Chapter-V in respect of constitution, powers, functions etc. of the State Human Rights 
Commissions on similar Lines, as laid down for the National Human Rights Commsision and 
the clause may be modified accordingly. 
Clauses 22 to 28 
The clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title 
(i) Clause 1 was adopted subject to the deletion of the proviso to sub clause (2) thereof. 
(ii) The enacting~fonnula and the title were adopted. 
4. The Committee directed that representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and 
Law, Justice and Company Affairs should formulate concrete amendments to give effect to 
t~e decisions/recommendations of the Committee on various clauses of the bill and submit 
the same to the Committee: 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 P.M. 
I 
·I 

XXI 
TWENTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M . on Monday, the 4th October , 
Room 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Rafique Alam 
9. Mufti Mohd . Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABRA 
13. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
14. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
15. Prof. M. Kamson 
16. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
17. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
18. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
19. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
20. Shri Dhanu skodj Athithan 
21. Dr. Girija Vyas 
22. Maj. Gen . ( Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
23. Shri Ram Singh 
24. Shri Shyam _LaJ Kamal 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
27. Shri Ram Vilas Pas wan 
28. Shri Rabi Ray 
29. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
30. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
31. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
32. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
33. Shri B. Raj..1 Ravi \"l!rmc.l 
wl 
0 
al 
Sl 

ttee 
53 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B . Rai, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman apprised the Committee that an O rdi nance has been promulgated for 
the constitution of a Nation<!! Human Rights Commission, State Hurnan Rights Commissions 
in States and Hum an Right s CourtS . He inform ed the Committ ee that almost all ; the 
ame ndments suggested by it on the various clauses of the Human .Rights COlprnissi9ns Bill, 
1993 have been incorpo rated in the Ordinanc e. 
!' ' ! 
3. Ther eafter, the Members expressed their views op the issuance of the Ordinance 
while the Bill was under consideration of the Committee. After some deliberation , the 
Committee was of the view that despite the promulga tion of the Ordinance , it should go 
ahea d with the prese ntation of its Report on the subject. The Committee decided that a 
. summary of the o ral evidence tendered before it may be appended to the Report . 
4. •• • • •• 
5. • • •• •• 
6. The Commi tte<:: then adjourned at 5.15 P.M . 
I 
I 'i I I 1 
' /1 
II 
i/ 
I 
I 

i XXll 
TWENTY -SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday , the 25th November, 1993 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament H ouse Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(. 'Shri M.M Jacob---Chairman . 
RAJYA SABHA 
! 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
~ . . Shri Makb ao Lal Fotedar 
4. Sbri Gaya Singh 
5. Sbri Rafiqu e Alam 
6. Shri Krishao Lal SQarma 
7. Shri Madhavsinb Solanki 
8. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
10. Shri Kirip , Chaliha 
11. Prof. M . Kamson 
12. Sbri Sha!ltaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
14. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
15. Dr. Girija Vyas 
16. Shri Dhararnpal Singh Malik 
17. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri R am Nagina Mishra 
:.!1. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
2~. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
SECRET ARlA T 
Sbri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. The Co.mmirte~ took up consideration of 1ts dr::J.ft Sixth Report on the Hu;nan FJgbts 
Coffirrussioos Bill, 1993. After s.:>rne dis..::ussi.:>n. the Corr.miHee adopted the Re7o-t ',lith 
rr.jnor changes. Tb~ C0mrr.itt:~ Ci:!cided that in view of the promulgation of the cr~i:nar:ce, 
the Bill, as amended by the: Con::::J!tt..!c ned not be appended to the P.~:;c:t 
.'-
t., . 

55 
... _ ~: _: _ .. ::c Lecided to pre~em the R.:?Crt in me Rajya Sabh~ aad to t:1y t.ae 
.. • .:..: T~b • .: of the Lo!< Sabha simulw.neousl) Oil the 3rd December, 1993. The 
':.t.:_ r:..!~~c nscd the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Krish.an Lal Sharma or Shri 
;.-.~t:<: !0 present the Report in the Rajya S:lbha. Tne Committee also authotisl!d 
5t.J2.: s~ .. ant and in his absence, Maj. G<:!n. (Reed.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri or 
·~~~\1!,'E,.:...-. !:.:";:·h'-= i_uman Devi, to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabh2 . 
... 
•• •• 
E-::: :::.:rll.:."ll:ttee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
--
I' I 
~ ,, 
I· 

..... 
. • I 
· .. 
·.~ 
\ . 
' ' . , . 
I 
I 
ERRAT~ 
to the 
C.S.(H.A.)-1 
Sixth Report of the Q:>mmi ttee on Home J..f!airs 
:~ 
.l ige 7 ,._ ·. 
·o< ,. ... 8 . !lge 
.. '- : .. ;, 
-.. 3.ge 16 
1ge 22 
.-.:· · ... ;.I iie 25 ... · ·-.-~.- ·?···1 s.ge 28 
::_. ·~~. ::.1.~·-·1· g 29 .. ·.· :···:· s. e 
... · .. s.ge 35 
'· ---< • I 
------
on Contents Page, against 1 tem No. VI, 
for 1 34-35' read ' 34-55'. 
in line-42, ~ 'of' read ~or' 
1n line-14, for •be' read 'he• 
1n para 4-(1), 11ne-1, .!.Q.r 'f' ~. 'five' and 
in para 4-(2), line-2, m 'meu(eaer te5}.d 'member' 
in line-15, for 'takes' ~ 'take' 
1n para 2, line-5, .f2.I 'ommiss1on' read •omission' 
last para in l.ine-1, .Ig£_ 1 investigation' read 
' 1nve s tiga ting' 
last para, 1n line-2, add •persons• after 'amongst• 
. 
in l.ine-11, : for 1 .Turnal1sts 1 read •J"ournaJ.ists• 
and in point no.6, l.ine-6, for 1per1or.t read 
' prior' 
1n para 4, line-2, m 'presevation' ~ 
' preservation ' 
.. . . . . . . . ~ . 
1993 1 AGR<\.HA Y A. 'lA. 1915 (SAKA) 
-,.... 
. - A 
I' 
.I 
iE 
·~ I·; 
.. .. 
,I; ,, 
> 
. 
t 