PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 103
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5  DECEMBER, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES 
OF THE JUDICIAL OFFICERS OF 
THE UNION TERRITORIES BILL, 2003

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES
OF THE JUDICIAL OFFICERS OF
THE UNION TERRITORIES BILL, 2003
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5 TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 5 TH DECEMBER, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
CS(H.A.)-197

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—6
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. 7—22
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 23 —64
I. The Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of the Union
Territories Bill, 2003 ............................................................................................... 25—31
II. A comparative chart showing pay scales recommended by Fifth National
Judicial Pay Commission, those granted by the Union Government as an
interim measure and also those proposed in the Bill along with Special
Judicial Allowance. .................................................................................................. 32—37
III. A statement showing the break up (UT-wise) of Judicial Officers who
would be benefited by the proposed legislation ................................................ 38
IV . Memorandum dated 11 August, 2003 submitted by the All India Judges
Association ................................................................................................................ 39—41
V . Affidavit Evidence dated 3 September, 2003 submitted by Shri Justice
C. Sri Ramulu, Chairman, All India Judges Association .................................. 42—45
VI. Written Submissions dated 3 September, 2003 by Shri C.K. Chaturvedi,
Working President, All India Judges Association ............................................... 46—48
VII. Additional Memorandum dated 9 September, 2003 submitted by the All
India Judges Association ........................................................................................ 49—56
VIII. Comments received from the Department of Justice on the Memoranda
and Affidavit Evidence submitted by the All India Judges Association ......... 57—62
IX. Amendments suggested by Shri Anadi Sahu, M.P. and comments received
from the Department of Justice thereon ............................................................. 63—64

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Motilal V ora
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri Lalu Prasad
10. Shri Drupad Borgohain
11. Shri Ram Jethmalani
∉ 12. Shri Pramod Mahajan
#13. Shri A. V ijayaraghavan
*14. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
15. Shri Adhi Sankar
16. Begum Noor Bano
17. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
18. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
19. Shri M.O.H. Farook
20. Shri Rajen Gohain
21. Shri Vinay Katiyar
22. Shri K. Karunakaran
23. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
24. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
26. Shri P.H. Pandian
27. Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
28. Shri Subodh Roy
29. Shri Anadi Sahu
30. Shri P.A. Sangma
(i)
∉  Nominated w.e.f.  27th February, 2003.
# Nominated w.e.f.  5th May, 2003.
* Nominated w.e.f.  27th July, 2003.

(ii)
31. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
32. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
33. Shri Manabendra Shah
34. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
35. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
36. Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
37. Sardar Buta Singh
38. Shri Ramjilal Suman
39. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
40. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
41. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
42. Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
£43. Dr .(Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
ν44. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
£ Nominated w.e.f.  27th February, 2003.
ν Nominated w.e.f.  7th April, 2003.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred-third Report of the Committee on the Salaries and Allowances of the
Judicial Officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003.
•
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the
Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 9 May, 2003 and pending therein, to the Committee for
examination and report.
3.0 The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings held on 23 June, 3 and 15 September
and 13 October, 2003.
3.1 In its sitting held on 23 June, 2003 the Committee heard Home Secretary (Secretary,
Department of Justice).
3.2 The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the All India Judges Association,
Hyderabad in its sitting held on 3 September, 2003.
3.3 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on
15 September, 2003.
3.4 The Committee considered the draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its sitting
held on 13 October, 2003.
4. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following papers/
documents:—
(i) Background note on the Bill received from the Department of Justice (Ministry of
Law and Justice);
(ii) Status note on implementation of recommendations of the First National Judicial Pay
Commission (popularly known as Shetty Commission) received from Department of
Justice;
(iii) Status note on action taken in respect of pay and allowances of Judicial Officers and
Staff of Subordinate Courts in each State received from the Department of Justice;
(iv) Comments of Department of Justice on amendments to the Bill moved by Shri Anadi
Sahu, M.P.
(v) Memorandum received from All India Judges Association, Hyderabad and comments
thereon furnished by Department of Justice;
(vi) Comments of Department of Justice on oral submissions made by the Chairman,
All India Judges Association, Hyderabad before the Committee on 3 September, 2003;
• Bill Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 9 May, 2003.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, No. 40687 dated 23 May, 2003.

(vii) Comments of Department of Justice on oral submissions made by the Working
President, All India Judges Association, Hyderabad; and
(viii) Comments of Department of Justice on additional memorandum received from All
India Judges Association, Hyderabad.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13 October, 2003. Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
(Annexure-I) intends to prescribe scales of pay for the Judicial Officers in the Union Territories
and also to introduce a Special Judicial Allowance (SJA) @ 10 per cent of the Basic Pay as
compensation for their duties which involve essential work such as reading, referencing, dictating
judgements and preparing for cases, etc. beyond normal working hours of Courts.
2.0 In the backdrop of the proposed legislation, there lie circumstances, which led to several
attempts by the Union Government to regulate service conditions of Judicial Officers of UTs.
2.1 It goes back to the Writ Petition (Civil) No.1022 of 1989 filed by the All India Judges’
Association before the Supreme Court of India under Article 32 of the Constitution seeking reliefs
so as to improve the conditions of service of Subordinate Judicial Officers all over the country.
2.2 In the case of All India Judges Association versus Union of India and others (AIR 1992 SC
165) the Supreme Court on 13 November, 1991 d irected the Union Government to evolve an
appropriate National Policy in regard to the service conditions of the Judicial Officers. In pursuance
of the directions of the Supreme Court, while disposing Review Petition filed by the Union
Government, on 24 August, 1993 (AIR 1993 SC 2493), the Union Government by Resolution dated
21 March, 1996 constituted the First National Judicial Pay Commission (FNJPC) under the
Chairmanship of Justice K. Jagannath Shetty for the Sub- ordinate Judiciary all over the country
with the following terms of reference:—
(a) To evolve the principles which should govern the structure of pay and other
emoluments of Judicial Officers belonging to the Subordinate Judiciary all over the
country;
(b) To examine the present structure of emoluments and conditions of service of Judicial
officers in the States and UTs taking into account the total packet of benefits
available to them and make suitable recommendations having regard, among other
relevant factors, to the existing relativities in the pay structure between the officers
belonging to subordinate judicial service vis-a-vis other civil servants.
(c) To examine and recommend in respect of minimum qualifications, age of
recruitment, method of recruitment etc., for Judicial Officers. In this context, the
relevant provisions of the Constitution and direction of the Supreme Court in All
India Judges’ Association Case and in other cases may be kept in view.
(d) To examine the work methods and work environment as also the variety of
allowances and benefits in kind that are available to Judicial Officers in addition to
pay and to suggest rationalisation and simplification thereof with a view to promoting
efficiency in Judicial Administration, optimising the size of the Judiciary etc.
2.3 As the Fifth Central Pay Commission did not consider the issue of revised salary structure
and allowances of subordinate judiciary, the Union Government added a term of reference on
16 December, 1997 to consider pay package and grant interim relief pending recommendations of
the FNJPC, on the condition that the interim relief so recommended was to be adjusted against the
pay package admissible to the judicial officers as contained in the final recommendation of the
FNJPC. The FNJPC through its Interim Report dated 31 January, 1998 granted Interim Relief to
the Judicial Officers of States and Union Territories. The FNJPC submitted its Report (three
volumes) to the Government on 11 November, 1999.

2
3. The FNJPC has made wide-ranging recommendations covering salary structure, emoluments
and other conditions of service of judicial of ficers throughout the country. Those recommendations
were considered and partially implemented by the Union Government on 11 October, 2001 in
respect of judicial officers of Union Territories for which the Union Government is administratively
responsible, by granting pay scales keeping in view traditional relativities and parity between pay
scales of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) with that of subordinate judiciary
3.1 The Supreme Court in its judgement of 21 March, 2002 in All India Judges Association case
(2002 (4) SCC 247) directed that the pay scales recommended by the First National Judicial Pay
Commission should be accepted in toto . The Court observed that considering the years of service
the judicial officers put in at different stages, the pay scales recommended by the Commission
should be wholly accepted, regardless of the IAS scales. The Court, however, rejected the
recommendation that the Union Government should bear fifty per cent of the expenditure since the
responsibility of the subordinate judiciary, except for that of the Union Territories, was exclusively
with the States. Further, the Supreme Court in its order dated 25 November, 2002 reiterated that
the higher pay scales of the officers of subordinate judiciary must be implemented, on or before
1 April, 2003.
3.2 After considering the judgement of the Supreme Court, the Union Cabinet on 31 March, 2003
decided to bring legislation under Article 309 of the Constitution to regulate the salary and service
conditions of the Judicial Officers in Union Territories. The Cabinet also decided to introduce a
Special Judicial Allowance at the rate of 10 per cent of the basic pay to the judicial officers of
Union Territories as compensation for their duties which involve essential work beyond normal
working hours of Courts, which was communicated to the Supreme Court through an affidavit of
the Department of Justice on 8 May, 2003.
3.3 A comparison amongst pay scales recomended by the FNJPC, pay scales granted by the
Union Government as interim measure and those proposed in the Bill alongwith Special Judicial
Allowance are shown in the Annexure-II.
3.4 In the meanwhile, the High Powered Committee for assessing the fiscal situation of the
States, which met on 9 August, 2002 under the Chairmanship of Union Minister of Finance and
Company Affairs expressed the apprehension that in addition to the direct impact due to revision
of pay scales and sanction of allowances recommended by the FNJPC, there would be considerable
impact on the States’ Finances as existing parities would get disturbed and the employees would
also demand extension of allowances similar to what was provided to the Judicial Offices. The
High Powered Committee pleaded that the Union Government should keep in view the States’
concern while taking a decision on the application of pay scales of Judicial Officers in the Union
Territories. Thereafter, in the meeting convened by the Ministry of Finance on 7 September, 2002,
the State Finance Ministers expressed serious difficulties regarding the constitutional, financial and
administrative issues involved in implementing the Supreme Court’s judgement of 21 March, 2002
in the All India Judges Association case relating to pay scales and other service conditions of the
subordinate judiciary. It was resolved that States will take appropriate action in the State
Legislatures through resolution or any other alternative legislative measure. A meeting of Chief
Ministers of States and the Prime Minister held on 18 October, 2002, also ratified this decision.
3.5. However, many State Governments complied with the directions of the Supreme Court of
21 March, 2002 and orders of 25 November, 2002 and 9 May, 2003 in All India Judges Association
case in respect of pay scales by means of executive orders. The Table showing the list of States,
which have implemented the recommendations of the FNJPC in respect of pay scales of Judicial
Officers, may be seen at Annexure VII.
3.6 The total number of Judicial Officers who would be benefitted by the proposed legislation
are 3437. The detailed breakup of the beneficiaries (UT-wise) is given at Annexure-III.

3
4. The Home Secretary in his presentation before the Committee on 23 June, 2003 had stated
that the proposed Bill, if enacted by the Parliament, would ensure:—
(i) that existing traditional relativities with similar central cadres are not disturbed;
(ii) supremacy of the Parliament/Legislature; and
(iii) will act as a role model for other States to follow the legislation if they so choose.
5.0 The All India Judges Association, Hyderabad had submitted a memorandum dated
11 August, 2003 (Annexure IV) to the Committee on the issues pertaining to the Bill and requested
that Shri Justice C. Sri Ramulu (Retd. Judge, Andhra Pradesh High Court) and Shri C.K.
Chaturvedi (Additional District and Sessions Judge, Delhi), Chairman and Working President of the
Association, respectively, may be provided an opportunity of giving oral evidence before the
Committee on the Bill. The Committee acceded to their request and heard their views on the Bill
in its meeting held on 3 September, 2003. The Association also submitted their written Affidavit
Evidence (Annexures V and VI) to the Committee in the said meeting. During the meeting, the
Committee sought some clarification on the points arising out of their evidence and requested them
to send their written responses. In pursuance of the Committee’s direction, the Association
submitted an additional Memorandum dated 9 September, 2003 (Annexure VII).  The Memoranda
dated 11 August and 9 September, 2003 and Affidavit Evidence dated 3 September, 2003 were
forwarded to the Department of Justice for their comments.
5.1 The Association inter alia raised the following main points:—
(i) The proposed Bill is in gross violation of the Judgements of the Supreme Court. The
Association is of the view that the Union Government has no right to introduce the
Bill to set at naught the legal effect of three judgments of Supreme Court to which
the Union of India is a party. The Government must implement in letter and spirit
the recommendations of the FNJPC and orders of the Supreme Court thereon
recommending pay structure of Subordinate Judiciary on an uniform pattern all over
the country.
(ii) The Government of India cannot itself take the place of expert body and frame its
own pay scales when the terms of reference of the FNJPC was to evolve the
uniform salary structure for the Judicial Officers of the entire country. Since the
proposed pay scales for the Judicial Officers of the Union Territories are contrary
to the pay structure recommended by the FNJPC and accepted by the State
Governments, it would create anomaly thereby causing disparities in the pay scales
of Judicial Officers in the States and Union Territories.
(iii) It was apprehended that the proposed legislation may pave the way for the States
to introduce similar type of legislation which would be against the recommendations
of the FNJPC and the orders of the Supreme Court. As such Himachal Pradesh is
waiting for such an opportunity.
5.2 Replying to the queries posed by the Committee, the All India Judges Association further
submitted the following points:—
(i) Comparison of pay scales should not be between the judiciary and the executive. It
can be better understood keeping in view the identifiable grades and levels of
responsibility and promotional avenues in the judicial service only.
(ii) The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill admitting the onerous nature of
responsibilities assigned to the Judicial Officers, makes an attempt to treat an officer
doing judicial and non-judicial work on equal footing.

4
(iii) There is no enabling provision in the Bill to enable the Government to revise in future
the salaries based on recommendations of FNJPC.
(iv) The Bill has been introduced at a time when the matter is still pending in Supreme
Court in respect of some clarifications on Assured Career Progression Scheme and
other allowances, which are awaited from Union of India.
5.3 The Association, therefore, requested the Committee to consider removing the disparities by
recommending to the Union of India to implement the recommendations of FNJPC in letter and
spirit and uniformly.
5.4 The Department of Justice offered their comments (Annexure VIII) on the points raised
by the All India Judges Association as under:—
(i) The Bill maintains traditional parity and relativities in the pay scales between the
executive and the judiciary. The SJA proposed in the Bill is to compensate the
onerous duties performed by the judicial officers.
(ii) As regards uniformity of pay scales all over India the proposed legislation will serve
the purpose in respect of UTs for which the Central Government is administratively
responsible, under Article 309 of the Constitution read with Entry 11A of Concurrent
List.
(iii) The legislative Entry relating to appointment of subordinate courts is traceable to
entry 41 of List II, State List read with Articles 229 (2), 233 and 234 of the
Constitution. Accordingly, it may not be constitutionally feasible for the Union
Government to bring legislation to effect uniform pay scales in terms of the
directions of the Supreme Court in its Judgment of 21st March, 2002. However, the
Union Parliament is competent to make such law for the Union Territories.
(iv) States are free to implement the recommendations of FNJPC. As States are also
parties to the All India Judges’ Association Case, they are free to file their own
affidavits independently. Even one of the recommendations of the FNJPC i.e. the
Union Government should bear fifty per cent of the expenditure on subordinate
judiciary in the States has been rejected by the Supreme Court eventually.
(v) In regard to the questioning of expertise of the Ministry of Law and Justice in
framing pay scales, the Department of Justice has clarified that the Bill has been
formulated on the basis of a Cabinet decision, with inputs from the Ministry of
Finance which is the repository, of knowledge in fiscal matters and inputs from the
Law Ministry which has expertise and possess requisite qualifications and
competence to draft legislative bills.
(vi) Pay Commissions’ reports are only recommendatory in nature. The Government
reserves the right of accepting or rejecting such recommendation(s) either fully or
partially.
5.5 The Committee having noted the submissions of All India Judges Association and
responses of Department of Justice thereon, is of the considered view that the Cabinet is
the appropriate authority to take an overall view on the recommendations of the FNJPC.
Thereafter the Parliament/State Legislatures are the competent bodies to legislate in the
matter.
5.6 The Committee wishes to affirm that in terms of Articles 125, 221 and 309 (read with
Entry 11A of Concurrent List) of the Constitution, Parliament is supreme to make laws in
regard to the salaries and conditions of service of Judges of the Supreme Court, High

5
Courts and Sub-ordinate Judiciary of UTs. Under the Constitution, Parliament enjoys
exclusive powers in financial matters and no money could be spent from and out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, without its authorisation.
5.7 The Committee endorses the legislative route, which has been adopted by the Union
Government to vindicate the principle of parliamentary supremacy in authorisation of
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for the services of the Union.
6.0 The following paragraphs contain the observations/recommendations of the Committee with
regard to the clauses of the Bill.
Clause 2
6.1.0 Clause 2 provides for the definition of Judicial Officers, Schedule and Union Territories
used in the Bill.
6.1.1 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3
6.2.0 Clause 3 provides for the Salaries and Special Judicial Allowance (SJA) for the Judicial
Officers in the Union Territories. The details of pay scales are given in the Schedule to the Bill.
6.2.1 An amendment (Annexure IX) was moved to the proviso to sub-clause (2) for lowering
SJA to the extent that the SJA together with basic pay shall not exceed Rs.400/ - per mensem of
the highest scale of that post.
6.2.2 The Government’s view was that the proposed amendment might lead to a situation where
a person reaching the maximum of the pay scale in a particular grade may draw less than which
he was drawing before.
6.2.3 The Committee agrees with the explanation of the Government. The clause is
adopted without any change.
Clause 4
6.3.0 Clause 4 provides that subject to the provisions of clause 3, the rules and orders applicable
to judicial officers, immediately before the commencement of this legislation, shall continue to
regulate the condition of service of the judicial officers (other than SJA) unless otherwise provided
by rules made under this law.
6.3.1 An amendment (Annexure-IX) was moved for deleting the bracketed words “other than
special judicial allowance” appearing in the clause.
6.3.2 The Government accepted the amendment with modifications proposed in the marginal
heading as follows
“Rules and orders relating to conditions of service of judicial officers to continue to apply”.
6.3.3 The clause is adopted subject to the marginal heading being suitably modified.
Clause 5
6.4.0 Clause 5 provides for empowering the Union Government to make rules and orders
regulating the conditions of service and allowances (other than SJA), leave and pension of the
Judicial Officers in the UTs.

6
6.4.1 Clause is adopted without any change.
The Schedule
[See clauses 2(b) and 3 (1) of the Bill]
6.5.0 The Schedule provides for revised pay scales of judicial officers.
6.5.1 An amendment was moved in the Schedule that the scales at serials 2 and 3 be clubbed
together and it should be a running scale for Civil Judge and Senior Civil Judges and that there
should be no separate pay scale for Senior Civil Judge. The running scale should be Rs.10650-
16500/-
6.5.2 The Department has opined that clubbing the pay scales of Civil Judge (STS) and Senior
Civil Judge will disturb the existing hierarchy, as Senior Civil Judge is the promotion post of Civil
Judge (STS). Clubbing of these two pay scales will not only curtail the promotion avenues for Civil
Judges (STS) but also diminish the status of Senior Civil Judges, who are senior most judges in
the Lower Judicial Service. The Department has stated that the proposed amendment may not be
accepted.
6.5.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Government and agrees to the reasons
adduced.
6.5.4 The schedule is adopted without any change.
Financial Memorandum
6.6.0 Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill states that the recurring expenditure of about
Rs.76.56 lakhs per annum and non-recurring expenditure of Rs.5.16 crores towards payment of
arrears from the First day of July, 1996 would be charged from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6.6.1 It has been pointed out  to the Committee that under the scheme of the Constitution
such type of expenditure, except in respect of Supreme Court, should not be put under the
category ‘charged’ and instead should be under the category ‘voted’.
6.6.2 The Department of Justice conceded to the point raised and submitted that necessary
amendment in the Financial Memorandum would be carried out.
6.6.3 The Committee recommends that the Government may carry out  necessary
amendment in the Financial Memorandum to rectify the mistake.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title
6.7 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted without any change.
7. The Committee recommends that the Bill as amended may be passed.

7
MINUTES

XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 23 June, 2003 in Committee Room A, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shrimati Ambika Soni
5. Shri B.P. Singhal
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Drupad Borgohain
LOK SABHA
8. Begum Noor Bano
9. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook
11. Shri Rajen Gohain
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14. Shri Anadi Sahu
15. Shri P.A. Sangma
16. Shri Manabendra Shah
17. Shri Ramjilal Suman
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
19. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
20. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
9

10
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE DEPARTMENT  OF JUSTICE, MINISTRY OF LAW
AND JUSTICE
1. Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary (Secretary Justice)
2. Shri Devdas Chhotray, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Anurag Bhalla, Under Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and observed that the Committee had
been meeting after a long time after its visit to Pondicherry.
2.1 He informed that the Committee had sent agenda for forthcoming meetings. He informed
that the Secretary (Personnel) had sought further extension of time to depose before the Committee
on the subject matter related to Central Secretarial Service which had been under the consideration
of the Committee for quite a long time.
2.2 The Chairman added that a large number of legislations had been referred to the Committee
for its consideration but the Committee would first consider the Bill relating to Pay and Allowances
of the Subordinate Judiciary in the Union Territories. Another Bill, namely, the Citizenship
(Amendment), Bill 2003 was timebound whereas other Bills had no such time limit.
3. Thereafter, Chairman welcomed Home Secretary cum Secretary (Justice) and his colleagues
and requested him to make presentation on the Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of
the Union Territories Bill, 2003.
4.0 The Home Secretary (Secretary Justice) stated before the Committee that the First National
Judicial Pay Commission (Shetty Commission) was constituted in 1996 to recommend uniformity
in the salary structure, emoluments and the service conditions of the judges of sub-ordinate
judiciary throughout the country.
4.1 The Home Secretary further stated that the Cabinet meeting held on 16 August, 2001
decided to implement the FNJPC’s recommendations only in respect of the judicial officers of the
UTs. The pay scales of officers of subordinate judiciary were adopted keeping in view uniformity
and parity with that of IAS. The Cabinet had also decided a Special Judicial Allowance at the rate
of 10% of the basic pay to the Judicial Officers in the UTs as compensation for their duties which
involved essential work beyond normal working hours of courts. The Supreme Court in its
judgment of March 21, 2002 in All India Judges Association case, directed that the pay scales
recommended by the Shetty Commission should be accepted in toto . On 25 November, 2002, the
Supreme Court directed that higher pay scales to the Officers of subordinate judiciary must
be given effect to on or before April 1, 2003. The Cabinet decided to bring up legislation under
Article 309 of the Constitution to regulate the salary and service conditions of the Judicial Officers
in Union Territories in the backdrop of judgement delivered by the Supreme Court.
4.2 He also submitted that the Central Government had filed an interlocutory application for
seeking modification in several areas such as (i) scheme for Assured Career Progression
(ii) increase in judge strength (iii) commutation of pension up to 50% of last pay (iv) domestic
help allowance after retirement (v) sumptuary allowance (vi) medical facilities and (vii) date from
which such demand would be payable.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman sought several clarifications which inter alia included State
Governments’ burden after implementation of these recommendations; expenditure incurred out of
the Consolidated Fund of India, Special Judicial Allowance, appointment of judges based on the
population, etc.

11
6.0 One Member expressed unhappiness over the issue pertaining to the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Report of the Shetty Commission and stated that the Report of
Shetty Commission should have been placed before the Parliament for discussion but unfortunately
a different route had been adopted for implementation of the recommendations. He asserted the
supremacy of the Parliament in determining the salaries of the Judges of the Supreme Court, High
Courts and Judicial Officers of the Union Territories. Similarly the State should have their own
legislation for determining the service conditions of the Judicial Officers of the States subordinate
Courts.
6.1 Another Member objected to the provision made in the Bill in respect of Special judicial
Allowance to Judicial Officers for the work beyond normal office hours on the ground that there
were many service e.g. police who had been doing work beyond normal office hours and moreover
this type of decision could open a Pandora’s box. That Member wanted to know how many States
had already implemented the recommendations of the Commission. He was of the opinion that
every subordinate Court had not the same burden of work load, as work load in Delhi Courts was
not compare with that of courts in Pondicherry.
6.2 One Member expressed unhappiness over the manner in which the Supreme Court had been
handling the issue. He stated that such type of decision by the judiciary would impose financial
burden on small states forcing them to implement the  recommendation of the Shetty Commission.
That Member was also in opposition to the payment of Special Judicial Allowance. In that context,
he referred to the schedule appended to the Bill and drew the attention of the Committee to the
pay scale of the Selection Grade District Judge which was almost equivalent to the pay scale of
Chief Secretary. He also questioned the justification of the pay scale of Senior Civil Judge. He was
also in total disagreement with the creation of 20% posts of Selection Grade District Judge. He
was of the opinion that creation of posts in Union Territory should be commensurate with the
cases pending before the Courts.
6.3 One Member expressed concern over the huge pendency of cases before the judiciary. He
also expressed unhappiness over the encroachment of Judiciary by stepping into the field which
was ordinarily considered to be the domain of the Executive. He suggested to have a full discussion
on the matters related to the Judiciary.
6.4 While associating with the concern expressed by the Members over the issue of judicial
encroachment, another Member requested the Ministry to devise a system to thwart the
confrontation among the three wings of the Government viz. Executive, Legislature and Judiciary.
Another Member was of the view that the judicial activism has assumed such an alarming shape
that this issue must be settled within reasonable time.
7. After further discussions on the subject the Chairman was of the view that the Bill passed
by the Parliament will prevail so far the pay scales of the judicial Officer of Union Territory were
concerned but for the States, it was within their legislative competence of states.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.34 
P.M.

12
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 3 September, 2003 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri B.P. Singhal
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
5. Shri Pramod Mahajan
6. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
7. Begum Noor Bano
8. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook
10. Shri Rajen Gohain
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
13. Sadar Simranjit Singh Mann
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15. Shri Subodh Roy
16. Shri Anadi Sahu
17. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
18. Shri Ramjilal Suman
19. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
20. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
21. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Justice Shri C. Sriramalu, Chairman, All India Judges Association
Shri C.K. Chaturvedi, Working President, All India Judges Association
12

13
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised Members
that the Committee would have oral evidence of the Representatives of All India Judges Association
on the Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003.
3. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed Justice Shri C. Sriramalu, Chairman, All India Judges
Association and Shri C.K. Chaturvedi, Working President, All India Judges Association and asked
to present their views on the above mentioned Bill. Some clarifications were sought by the
Chairperson and Members, which were responded to by the witnesses, accordingly.
3.1 The witnesses then withdrew.
4. The Chairman then informed the Members about other agenda of the meeting i.e. Ninety-
Seventh Amendment Bill and the Anti-Defection Law. The Chairman suggested that the Members
who had not spoken on the above subjects may send their written view.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee, then, adjourned at 1.32 
P.M. to meet again on the following day to discuss
the Illegal Migrants (Determination through Tribunal) Act, 1983.

14
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 15 September, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain
7. Shri Pramod Mahajan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Adhi Sankar
9. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook
11. Shri Rajen Gohain
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15. Shri Subodh Roy
16. Shri P.A. Sangma
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
18. Shri Manabendra Shah
19. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
20. Shri Ramjilal Suman
21. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
22. Dr.(Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
23. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
14

15
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Justice
Shri Devdas Chhotray, Additional Secretary
Shri Tabom Bam, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
Shri B.P. Mishra, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Sushma Nath, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Legislative Department
Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Representative of Legal Affairs
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised Members of the Committee of the reference of three
more Bills to the Committee for examination and report namely, the State of Delhi Bill, 2003, the
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution (One Hundred and Second
Amendment) Bill, 2003. He the senior officers of Department of Justice, Legislative Department of
Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Finance and their colleagues.
3. Thereafter, briefly recapitulated the provisions of the Salaries and Allowances of Judicial
Officers of Union Territories (Amendment) Bill, 2003. He also referred to the amendments moved
by a Member on the said Bill.
4. The Committee, then, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
4.1.0 Clause 2 provided for the definition of ‘Judicial Officers’, ‘Schedule and Union Territories’
used in the Bill.
4.1.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 3
4.2.0 Clause 3 provided for the Salaries and Special Judicial Allowance (SJA) for the Judicial
Officers in the Union Territories. The details of pay scales were given in the Schedule to the Bill.
4.2.1 An amendment was moved to the proviso to sub-clause (2) for lowering SJA to the extent
that the SJA together with basic pay shall not exceed Rs. 400/- per mensem of the highest scale
of that post.
4.2.2 The Government’s view was that the proposed amendment might lead to a situation where
a person reaching the maximum of the pay scale in a particular grade may draw less than which
he was drawing before.
4.2.3 The Committee agreed with the explanation of the Government. The clause was adopted
without any change.
Clause 4
4.3.0 Clause 4 provided that subject to the provisions of clause 3, the rules and orders applicable

16
to judicial officers, immediately before the commencement of this legislation, shall continue to
regulate the condition of service of the judicial officers (other than SJA) unless otherwise provided
by rules made under this law.
4.3.1 An amendment was moved for deleting the bracketed words “other than special judicial
allowance” appearing in the clause.
4.3.2 The Government accepted the amendment with modifications proposed in the marginal
heading as follows
“Rules and orders relating to conditions of service of judicial officers to continue to apply”.
4.3.3 The clause was adopted subject to the marginal heading being suitably modified.
Clause 5
4.4.0 Clause 5 provided for empowering the Union Government to make rules and orders
regulating the conditions of service and allowances (other than SJA), leave and pension of the
Judicial Officers in the UTs.
4.4.1 Clause was adopted without any change
The Schedule
4.5.0 The Schedule provided for revised pay scales of judicial officers.
4.5.1 An amendment was moved to the Schedule that the scales at serials 2 and 3 be clubbed
together and it should be a running scale for Civil Judge and Senior Civil Judges and that there
should be no separate pay scale for Senior Civil Judge. The running scale should be Rs.10650-
16500/-.
4.5.2 The Ministry had opined that clubbing the pay scales of Civil Judge (STS) and Senior Civil
Judge would disturb the existing hierarchy, as Senior Civil Judge is the promotion post of Civil
Judge (STS). Clubbing of these two pay scales will not only curtail the promotion avenues for Civil
Judges (STS) but also diminish the status of Senior Civil Judges, who are senior most judges in
the Lower Judicial Service. The Department pleaded that the proposed amendment may not be
accepted.
4.5.3 The Committee noted the stand of the Government and agreed to the reasons adduced.
4.5.4 The schedule was adopted without any change.
Financial Memorandum
4.6.0 Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill stated that the recurring expenditure of about
Rs.76.56 lakh per annum and non-recurring expenditure of Rs.5.16 crore towards payment of
arrears from the first day of July 1996 would be charged from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4.6.1 It was pointed out to the Committee that under the scheme of the Constitution such type
of expenditure, except in respect of Supreme Court, should not be put under the category
‘charged’ and instead should be ‘voted’.
4.6.2 The Department of Justice conceded to the point raised and submitted that necessary
amendment in the Financial Memorandum would be carried out.
4.6.3 The Committee recommended that the Government may carry out necessary amendment in
the Financial Memorandum to rectify the mistake.

17
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
4.7 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change.
5. The Committee recommended that the Bill as amended may be passed.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and
Justice and made general observations on the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003.
A Member sought clarification as to whether the concept of ‘smaller State’ in the legislation
included Union Territories. He further expressed that the words ‘Union Territories with legislatures’
should specifically be mentioned in the Bill.
7. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Constitution
(Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003.
Clause 2
8.0 Clause 2 sought to amend Article 75 of the Constitution with a view to prescribing the size
of Council of Ministers including Prime Minister to the maximum of ten per cent of total numbers
of Members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and disqualification of a Member disqualified on ground
of defection to be appointed as Minister from the date of his/her being disqualified till the date of
expiration of his/her term of office or till the date of his/her contesting an election to Lok Sabha/
Rajya Sabha or Legislature of State, whichever was earlier.
8.1 The Committee was unanimously of the view that the size of Council of Ministers should
be prescribed at fifteen per cent of the total number of Members of the Lower House of
Parliament/State Legislature to ensure uniformity of law in the country.
8.2 The Committee recommended that the words ‘ten per cent’ and ‘both Houses of Parliament’
in the seventh and eighth lines of page 1 of the Bill be substituted by the words ‘fifteen per cent’
and ‘House of the People’, respectively.
8.3 The Committee also recommended that in lines 13 to 15 of page 1 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “where he contests any
election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he
is declared elected, whichever is earlier”, so that the disqualification in view of defection under para
2 of Tenth Schedule was removed only when he/she wins an election to any House of Parliament.
8.4 The Clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 3
9.0 Clause 3 sought to amend Article 164 of the Constitution with a view to prescribing the
size of Council of Ministers, including Chief Minister to the maximum of ten per cent of total
number of Members of the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council of that State, if it was
bicameral legislature or ten per cent of total number of Members of the Legislative Assembly only,
if it was a unicameral legislature and disqualification of a Member to be appointed as Minister from
the date of his/her being disqualified, till the date of expiration of his term of his office or till the
date of his/her contesting an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State,
whichever was earlier, if he/she was disqualified on ground of defection.
9.1 The Committee was unanimously of the view that the size of Council of Ministers, including
Chief Minister should be prescribed at fifteen per cent of the total number of Members of the

18
Legislative Assembly of that State and the minimum number of Ministers in smaller States should
be twelve instead of seven as provided in the Bill.
9.2 The Committee recommended that the  words ‘ten per cent’ in the third line and ‘seven’ in
the eighth line of page 2 of the Bill be substituted by the words ‘fifteen per cent’ and ‘twelve’
respectively. The Committee also recommended, deletion of the words beginning with ‘or in case of
a State’ and ending with ‘both Houses of the Legislature of that State’ in lines 5 and 6 of page 2.
9.3 The Committee also recommended that in lines 14 to 16 of page 2 of the Bill, the words
beginning with “till” and ending with “earlier” be substituted by the words “or where he contests
any election to the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the Legislature of a State
having Legislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiry of such period, till the date on
which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier” so that the disqualification in view of defection
under para 2 of Tenth Schedule was removed only when he/she wins an election to the Legislature
of a State.
9.4 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 4
10.0 Clause 4 inserted new Article 361B after Article 361A of the Constitution extending
disqualification of defector for being appointed to remunerative political post for duration of the
period commencing from the date of his/her disqualification till the date on which the term of his/
her office would expire or till the date on which he/she contested an election to any House of
Parliament or Legislature of a State, whichever was earlier.
10.1 The Committee recommended that in line 24 of page 2 of the Bill, the words “and is
declared elected” be inserted after the words “contests an election to a House” so that the
disqualification in view of defection under para 2 of Tenth Schedule was removed only when he/
she wins an election to any House of Parliament or Legislature of a State.
10.2 The Committee endorsed the definition of ‘remunerative political post’ proposed by
Legislative Department by way of addition to the ‘Explanation’ to the Clause, in the following
manner, namely:—
Explanation:— For the purposes of this article,—
(a) xxx xxx xxx
(b) The expression “remunerative political post” means any office—
(i) under the Central Government or the State Government where the salary or
remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be; or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially owned
by the Central Government or the State Government and the salary or
remuneration for such office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature’.
10.3 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 5
11.0 Clause 5 sought to delete paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule regarding ‘split’ of political
parties.

19
11.1 Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
12. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change.
13. The Committee recommended that the Bill as reported by it be passed.
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
15. The Committee adjourned at 5.14 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 16 September, 2003.

20
XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 13 October, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
LOK SABHA
6. Shri K. Karunakaran
7. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
8. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
9. Shri Subodh Roy
10. Shri Anadi Sahu
11. Shri Manabendra Shah
12. Shri Ramjilal Suman
13. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
14. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
15. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Shri J.P. Rajkhowa, Chief  Secretary , Government of Assam
2. Shri S. Manoharan, Principal Resident Commissioner, Government of Assam
3. Shri Rajiv Yadav, Resident Commissioner, Go vernment of Assam
2. The Chairman while welcoming the Members to the meeting briefed them about the
schedule of upcoming meetings and the agenda to be taken up therein such as the consideration
of the Constitution (One-hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003; in-house discussion on the Citizenship
(Amendment) Bill, 2003; adoption of the draft Report on the Constitution (Ninety-seventh
Amendment) Bill, 2003 and discussion on the State of Delhi Bill, 2003. The Chairman then,
20

21
proposed the schedule of meetings and the agenda which was approved by the Committee. He then
informed the Members of the scheduled meeting with Mr. William Atkin, a Member of the Scottish
Parliament. Referring to some other Bills under consideration of the Committee such as the Illegal
Migrants Laws (Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2003, the Contempt of Court (Amendment)
Bill, 2003, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution (Ninety-eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2003, the Chairman stated that disposal of those Bills and the remaining items
of work would take time because the Committee had decided to complete consideration of a
number of Bills before the Winter Session of Parliament.
3. As regards the Constitution (Ninety-eighth Amendment) Bill, 2003, the Members expressed
their views over the issue of appointment of Judges, which was also echoed in the earlier meetings
of the Committee. A Member felt that the subject should be taken up with urgency as judicial
activism was infringing the general will of the people upon the authority of the Parliament. Another
Member felt that the Cabinet represented the general will of the people and hence the Government
should take steps to restore its authority in judicial appointments rather than setting up a
Commission for that.
4. The Chairman then referred to the emerging consensus on certain issues in the Committee
on the appointment of judges of Supreme Court and High Courts. He also referred to Dr. L.M.
Singhivi’s suggestion to hear some of the eminent jurists in the matter. The Chairman directed the
Secretariat to examine the suggestion and obtain his orders for calling the experts as witnesses.
5. The Committee then took up the draft report on the Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial
Offices of the Union Territories Bill, 2003 for consideration and adoption.
5.1 The Committee adopted the same without any amendment.
6. The Chairman while touching upon the Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and Amending)
Bill, 2003 drew attention of the Committee to the change in the stand of the Government of Assam
on the Bill due to the change in the Government of the State. He welcomed the Chief Secretary,
Government of Assam along with his colleagues to the meeting of the Committee for giving their
evidence on the Bill. He apprised them of the procedure followed in the meetings of the Committee.
7. The Chief Secretary in his presentation referred to the Memorandum of the Government of
Assam on the Bill. He dwelt upon the various aspects of the IMDT Act and laid emphasis on its
relevance in the existing circumstances, for the protection of genuine citizens as well as checking
illegal infiltration. He asserted that the need was to implement the Act in right earnest. He requested
the Committee to impress upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to strengthen vigil across the border,
floodlighting of the border roads, creation of no-man’s land on the international border, issuance
of the multipurpose identity cards in all the border areas, computerization of national register of
citizens scheme, creation and deployment of River Police Battalions on the Indo-Bangladesh Border.
He also demanded that more posts of Foreign Reporting Registration Officer (FRRO) should be
sanctioned on top priority basis by the Ministry of Home Affairs. He pleaded for more funds for
the State for reconstruction of border pillars which had been damaged. He felt that the Bangladesh
border with West Bengal should also be fenced on priority to check infiltration. Besides, he
suggested for shifting of Indians living between border pillars and Indian fences so that they did
not intermix with Bangladeshi infiltrators. He also spoke of the need for better coordination of the
State Police with the BSF. Lastly, he suggested for satellite surveillance of the borders,
improvement in communication facilities, etc.
8. The Chairman wanted to know from the Chief Secretary/Government of Assam as to how
many people lived and were required to be shifted from the border pillar areas; whether there was
any infiltration in the area when those pillars were constructed; whether adequate land was available

22
for their rehabilitation; whether the State Government made any survey and assessment about the
land requirement; what was the response of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the issue of
strengthening coordination between Assam Police and BSF and whether the State Government had
taken up the issue of floodlighting and fencing with the Ministry of Home Affairs.
8.1 The Chairman requested the Chief Secretary to suggest some other legal instrumentality, if
possible, in case the Union Government decided to repeal the IMDT Act. He requested the Chief
Secretary to send the written replies to the queries within three weeks.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

23
ANNEXURES

25
ANNEXURE-II
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
9 MAY , 2003
Bill No. 37 of 2003
THE SALARIES AND  ALLOWANCES OF THE JUDICIAL
OFFICERS OF THE UNION TERRITORIES BILL, 2003
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of the salaries and allowances of the
judicial officers in the Union territories and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of
the Judicial Officers of the Union Territories Act, 2003.
(2) It extends to all the Union territories.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day
of July, 1996.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “judicial officers” means the Members of the Judicial
Service in the Union territories and includes such officers
who are appointed on deputation as judicial officers in the
Union territories;
(b) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

26
(c) “Union territories” means the Union territories specified
in the First Schedule to the Constitution.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any rules
regulating the scale of pay of judicial officers in the Union
territories made under article 309 of the Constitution, there
shall be paid, immediately after coming into force of this Act,
to the judicial officers in the Union territories specified in
column (2) of the Schedule, the salary at the scale specified in
column (3) thereof.
(2) The judicial officer in the Union territories shall be
paid a special judicial allowance at the rate of ten per cent of
their basic pay:
Provided that the special judicial allowance together with
basic pay in the scale of pay of Rs. 22,400-525-24,500 shall, in
no case, exceed Rs. 24,850 per mensem .
Explanation:— For the purposes of this section, “special
judicial allowance” means an allowance payable to the judicial
officers as compensation for their duties which involve essential
work comprising of reading, referencing, dictating judgments and
preparing for cases beyond normal working hours of courts.
4. Subject to the provisions of section 3, the rules and
orders applicable to judicial officers, immediately before the
commencement of this Act, shall continue to regulate the
conditions of service of the judicial officers (other than special
judicial allowance) unless otherwise provided by rules made
under this Act but such rules shall not pertain to matters
relating to their recruitment, transfer and posting.
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 3, the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
and orders regulating the conditions of service and, allowances
(other than special judicial allowance), leave and pension of the
judicial officers in the Union territories.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session, immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Salaries of
judicial officers
in the Union
territories.
Rules and
orders
applicable to
judicial officers
in respect of
allowances,
leave, etc.
continue to
apply.
Power to make
rules.

27
THE SCHEDULE
[See sections 2( b) and 3( 1)]
Sl.No. Designation Scale of pay
1. Civil Judge (Junior Division) Rs.8000-275-13500
2. Civil Judge (Senior Time Scale) Rs. 10650-325-15850
3. Senior Civil Judge Rs. 12750-375-16500
4. District Judge (Entry Level) Rs. 15100-400-18300
5. District Judge (Selection Grade) Rs. 18400-500-22400
(Twenty per cent of District Judges)
6. District Judge (Super Time Scale) Rs. 22400-525-24500
(One post in Delhi)
27

28
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is expedient, in the public interest, to pass this legislation in respect of
members of the District and Subordinate Judiciary in the Union territories in
order—
(a) to set the salary of the Judicial Officers at a level which would
attract proper talent to opt for a career in judicial service;
(b) to provide pay scales and other conditions of service to the
members of Subordinate Judiciary which would satisfy their needs to
maintain a dignified way of life commensurate with the onerous duties that
they discharge and to boost their morale and commitment to service;
(c) to evolve distinct service conditions to the members of Subordinate
Judiciary in the Union territories keeping in view the prevailing relativities,
the judgments of various courts including the Supreme Court and the
financial position of the Government;
(d) to introduce a Special Judicial Allowance (SJA) as compensation
for their duties which involve essential work comprising of reading,
referencing, dictating judgments and preparing for cases beyond normal
working hours of courts.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; ARUN JAITLEY
The 7th May, 2003
28

29
29
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to introduce scale of pay of the Judicial officers
in the Union territories and special judicial allowance at the rate of ten per cent
of their basic pay. The proposal involves recurring expenditure of about Rs.76.56
lakhs per annum and non-recurring expenditure of Rs.5.16 crores towards
payment of arrears from the 1st day of July, 1996. The expenditure will be
charged from the Consolidated Fund of India.
2. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide that the rules and orders applicable to
Judicial Officers immediately before the commencement of this Act shall
continue to regulate the conditions of service in respect of their recruitment,
allowances (other than special judicial allowance), leave and pension. However,
allowances being paid to the Judicial Officers in the Union territories cannot be
quantified since a number of allowances recommended by the First National
Judicial Pay Commission (Shetty Commission) and approved by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in its judgment of 21st March, 2002 are pending in that court
for its directions.
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of either recurring or non-
recurring nature.

30
30
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and
orders regulating the conditions of service in respect of allowances (other than
special judicial allowance), leave and pension of Judicial Officers in the Union
territories.
2. The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon may be
after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters
of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.

31
31
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of the salaries and allowances of the judicial officers in the Union
Territories and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law and Justice)

32
ANNEXURE-II
A comparative chart showing pay scales recommended by Fifty National Judicial Pay Commission, granted by the
Union Government as on interim mensem and also proposed in the Bill alongwith special judicial allowance
Recommended by the FNJPC Implemented by the Central Government Proposed to be implemented through legislation
vide  implementation order dated 11.10.2001
Civil Judge (Jr. Div) - Rs.9000-250-10750-300- Civil Judge - Rs.8000-275-13500/- Civil Judge - Rs.8000-275-13500/-
13150-350-14550/- (Junior Division) (Ju nior Division)
Civil Judge (Jr. Div) - Rs.10750-300-13150-350- Civil Judge - Rs.l0650-325-15850/- Civil Judge - Rs.10650-375-15850/-
(1 Stage ACP- after 5 yrs) 14900/- (Senior Time Scale) (Senior Time Scale)
Civil Judges (Sr. Div) - Rs.12850-300-13150-350- Senior Civil Judge - Rs.l2750-375-16500/- Senior Civil Judge - Rs.12750-375-16500/-
(II Stage ACP for Civil 15950-400-17550/-
Judge (Jr. Div)-after 10 yrs)
Civil Judges (Sr. Div) - Rs.14200-350-15950-400-
(1 Stage ACP- after 5 yrs) 18350/-
District Judges (Entry - Rs.16750-400-19150-450- District Judge - Rs.l5100-400-18300/- District Judge - Rs.15100-400-18300/-
Level) + (II Stage ACP 20500/- (Entry Level) (Entry Level)
for Civil Judge (Sr.Div) - (in all UTs)
after 10 years) District Judge - Rs.16400-20000/-
(Entry Level)
(in Delhi and Pondicherry by virtue of order
dated 11.3.2002 as directed by Supreme Court)
District Judge - Rs.18750-400-19150-450- District Judge - Rs.18400-500-22400/- District Judge - Rs.18400-500-22400/-
(Selection Grade) 21850-500-22850/- (Selection Grade) (Selection Grade)
(20% of the posts of (20% of the posts of
District Judges) District Judges)
District Judge - Rs.22850-500-24850/- Nil District Judge - Rs.22400-525-24500
(Supertime Scale) (Senior Time Scale
(one post in Delhi)
*The judicial officers in the UTs shall be paid Special Judicial Allowance (SJA) at the rate of 10% of their basic pay. The SJA  togetherwith basic pay in, no case, shall exceed
Rs.24,850 per mensem .

33
2. Sharing of expenditure in respect of subordinate courts, etc.
Recommendations FNJPC Whether implemented ( vide Whether proposed to be implemented
implementation order dated 11.10.2001) through legislation or not?
by the Central Government or not?
12 3
The Central Government must in every State
Share half of the annual expenditure on
subordinate courts and quarters for judicial
officers.
No
(Submitted to the Supreme Court for
clarification/modification)
Not implemented as ACP is not available to
All India Service Personnel. (Submitted
to the Supreme Court for clarification/
modification)
Partially implemented. (Every judidal officer
will be provided with one national and one
local newspaper. Further, a District Judge
will be allowed one magazine in addition).
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
3. Assured Career Progression Scheme (ACP Scheme)
ACP scheme in four stages for judicial officers
in the cadre of Civil Judge (Jr. Division) and
Civil Judge (Sr. Division).
4. Provision of Newspaper and Magazine
One national and one local newspaper and
one magazine to be provided to every judicial
officer at the cost of the State since judicial
officers confine themselves to law journals.
5. LTC
LTC once in four years and HTC (Home
Town) once in two years.
6. Leave Encashment
Leave encashment for one month once in 2
years.

34
7. Telephone facilities
Telephone facilities in all courts (2000-3000
calls) and residences (1000-2000 calls) of
the Judicial officers.
8. Conveyance Allowance
One car as pool vehicle for every four judicial
officers instead of at present five judicial
officers or 75 litres of fuel in A and Al cities
and 50 litres fuel in District Centres of
equivalent price thereof, to a judicial officer
if he owns a car and does not avail of pool
vehicle. 25 litres of fuel or equivalent price
thereof has also been recommended by the
Commission for a judicial officer who owns
a scooter.
No. Telephone facilities at per with Central
Government rules.
Partially implemented. (One pool car for a
maximum of four judicial officers instead of
five officers or conveyance allowance at the
rates available to the Central Government
employees).
Yes
Yes
(Rs.5500/- in the case of judicial
officers in Delhi)
No
No
No
No
9. DA, CCA, Hill Allowance, Transfer Grant, Concurrent Charge Allowance. etc.
DA, CCA, Hill Allowance, Transfer Grant,
Concurrent Charge Allowance, Advances,
etc. which at par with those available to
the Central Government/State Government
officers.
10. Robe Allowance
A lump sum amount of Rs.5,000/- should be
paid to every judicial officer, once in five
years as robe allowance.
Recommendations FNJPC Whether implemented ( vide Whether proposed to be implemented
implementation order dated 11.10.2001) through legislation or not?
by the Central Government or not?

35
11. Retirement benefits
Qualifying service of 33 years will be
necessary for earning maximum pension i.e.,
half of the salary. Commutation may be
allowed upto 50% of pension, restoration of
commutation of pension shall be made after
15 years, gratuity and family pension may
continue as per existing rules and cash
payment of Rs.l,250/- per month be made to
all retired judicial officers as ‘Domestic Help
Allowance’.
12. Medical facilities
(1) The State Government shall notify the
list of Hospitals/Dispensaries, Government and
Private, in each City/District;
(2) The judicial officers shall entitled to
claim expenses incurred by them for medical
attendance and treatment obtained by them
and their family members in such notified
Hospitals/Dispensaries;
(3) The judicial officers shall be entitled to
reimbursement of the expenses incurred by
them for medical attendance and treatment in
any place other than the hospitals/dispensaries
notified by the Government;
(4) There should not be any restriction on
reimbursement except to the of in-patient
room entitlement.
Payment of Rs.100/- per month to all judicial
officers in addition to the above benefits.
All recommendation of FNJPC except the
following have been implemented:
(1) commutation of pension to the extent
of 50% not accepted. This may remain
upto 40% as in the case of Central
Government employees.
(2) Domestic Help Allowance not accepted.
(Submitted to the Supreme Court for
clarification/modification in respect of
Commutation of pension upto 50% and
Domestic Help Allowance to retired
judicial officers)
No. Medical facilities at par with those
available to a Central Government officers
under CGHS/Central Services (Medical
Attendance) Rules/State Rules as the case
may be. The CGHS provides free medical
attendance and treatment to Central
Government officers. The AIS(MA) Rules
provides medical attendance other than
authorized medical attendant or private
Doctors etc. with prior approval of the
authorized, medical attendant. These Rules
also recognize certain hospitals for specialized
treatment, and in certain special cases, to
take treatment in private hospitals abroad in
relaxation of Rules.
(Submitted to the Supreme Court for
clarification/modification)
No
No

36
All judicial officers, should be provided with
Government quarters according to their
entitlement on payment of rent not exceeding
12.5% of the basic pay. All judicial officers
including those provided with Government
accommodation will be entitled to HRA at the
rate available to other Government servants.
Drawing room of every quarter shall be
reasonably furnished at Government cost.
13. Home Orderly Allowance
Home Orderly Allowance should be paid to
every judicial officer @ Rs.2500/- per month.
No
No
No (Not accepted in view of the Supreme
Court’s order in review petition of All India
Judges Association case).
(Submitted to the Supreme Court for
clarification/modification)
No. (Giving HRA in addition to Government
accommodation and furnishing of drawing
room is not accepted).
No
No
No
No
14. Reimbursement of electricity and water charges
50% of charges of electricity and water
consumed by the judicial officers at their
residence on the ground that they do office/
court work even in their residence.
15. Sumptuary Allowance
Payment of sumptuary allowance @
Rs.1000/-, Rs.750/-, Rs.500/- per month to
all District Judges, Civil Judges (Sr. Division)
and Civil Judges (Jr, Division) respectively.
16, Residential accommodation/House Rent Allowance
Recommendations FNJPC Whether implemented ( vide Whether proposed to be implemented
implementation order dated 11.10.2001) through legislation or not?
by the Central Government or not?

37
17. Retirement age
An increase in the age or retirement of judicial
officers from 60 to 62 years.
18. Other recommendations
FNJPC has recommended for adoption of
format for writing the confidential reports
for judicial officers as in the case of IAS
officers, rechristening of subordinate judiciary,
judicial education and training, work methods
and work environment, information technology,
etc.
No
Yes
No
No

38
38
ANNEXURE-III
A STATEMENT SHOWING THE BREAK-UP (UT-WISE) OF JUDICIAL OFFICERS
WHO WOULD BE BENIFITED BY THE PROPOSED LEGISLATION
A list showing UT-wise strength of judicial officers is shown below:
Name of UT No. of No. of posts in each category
sanctioned posts
Delhi 385 Civil Judge 65
CJ (STS) 110
Sr. Civil Judge 43
DJ (Entry Lvl.) 135
DJ (SG) 31
DJ (ST) 1
Chandigarh 19 Civil Judge 13
DJ (Entry Lvl.) 5
DJ (SG) 1
Pondicherry 19 Civil Judge 10
Sr. Civil Judge 4
DJ (Entry Lvl.) 4
DJ (SG) 1
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 8 Civil Judge 4
Sr. Civil Judge 2
DJ (Entry Lvl.) 2
Lakshadweep 3 Civil Judge 2
DJ (Entry Lvl.) 1
Daman and Diu and Dadra
and Nagar Haveli 3 Civil Judge 3
T
OTAL: 437 437

39
39
ANNEXURE-IV
MEMORANDUM DATED 11 AUGUST, 2003 SUBMITTED
BY THE ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
JUSTICE CHINTHALA SRI RAMULU, M.A.., LLB 930, NEW BAKARAM, GANDHI NAGAR,
(Judge, High Court of A.P. Rt.) HYDERABAD - 500 080, A.P. INDIA
Chairman Cell : 9848054442
All India Judges Association Mobitel : 56888654
(Res) Tel : 55365552
Dt. August 11, 2003
To
Shri Pranab Mukherjee,
Hon’ble Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Parliament House,
New Delhi.
Subject: The submissions and the protest of the All India Judges Association on the introduction
in Lok Sabha the Bill named “The Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of the Union
Territories Bill, 2003.”
Sir,
The All India Judges Association, which represents the “judicial services”  constituted
under Art. 233 and Art. 234 of the Constitution of India, all over the country, has come to know
that the Government of India, on 9th of May, 2003, has introduced in Lok Sabha, ‘The Salaries
and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003’.  The said Bill, has
been referred to the Parliamentary Committee under your Chairmanship for consideration.
The Supreme Court in the All India Judges’ Association case (AIR 2993 SC 2493) directed
constitution of a separate Pay Commission for prescribing uniform pay scales including allowances
to the judges all over the country. The Court observed that judiciary is above the administrative
executive and any attempt to place it on par with the administrative executive has to be
discouraged.... and the service conditions of the judges which are wrongly linked to those of the
administrative executive have to be revised to meet the special needs of the judicial service. The
judgment became final and binding after all Review petitions by the Union of India and States, were
dismissed on 24th August, 1993, vide judgment reported as AIR 1993 SC 2493.
Pursuant to the directions and observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the
Government of India by its Resolution dated the 21st March, 1996 (enclosed), notified constitution
of the First National Judicial Pay Commission for the Subordinate Judiciary of all the States and
Union Territories, amongst others, with the following terms of reference:
(a) To evolve the principles which should govern the structure of pay and other
emoluments of judicial officers belonging to the Subordinate Judiciary all over the
country.

40
(b) To examine the present structure of emoluments and conditions of service of taking
into account the total packet of benefits available to them and make suitable
recommendations having regard, among other relevant factors, to the existing
relativities in the pay structure between the officers belonging to Subordinate Judicial
Services vis-a-vis other Civil Servants.
(Clauses c and d not reproduced)
The First National Judicial Pay Commission, submitted its Report in 1999 to the Prime
Minister of India, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, and to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India
for necessary acceptance. The Supreme Court in its different hearings heard the Union of India
and all the States through their Advocate Generals, and by its detailed judgment pronounced on
21st March, 2002, accepted the Report, subject to modifications of some recommendations. The
court allowed time till 1st July, 2002. The Court from time to time further extended time to Union
of India and the States, on their requests to make budgetary allocations. The Court admitted for
consideration some points raised by the Union of India, in relations to some allowances, which are
still sub-judice. The Union of India did not file any application on the payment of pay scales, but
only sought more time for finances as was also the case with some States. On the last monitoring
hearing on implementation of the order, all States made statement that they will pass/have passed
orders implementing the judgment on judicial commission recommendations. The Union of India, on
behalf of various Union Territories, through the Attorney General, made submissions that showed
that it was so seeking time not for implementing the recommendations but to move a legislation
to nullify the final and binding order, by not agreeing with the Court Order. The Attorney General
indicated the introduction of Bill at a time when Court was seeking
The Association submits that the proclamation of public interest  mentioned in the Statement
of Objects and Reasons in the Bill, is directly opposed to the recommendations of the Judicial Pay
Commission, which was constituted by the Government of India itself by its Resolution of
21st March, 1996, with specific terms of reference. The Bill has recommended scales of pay and
allowances, which are totally on a different pattern than those recommended by the Commission
and accepted by the Supreme Court. The Bill seeks to introduce the scales of pay which are even
lower than the existing scales of pay in different Union Territories, and are also opposed to the
new scales of pay recommended by Judicial Commission and directed  by the Supreme Court. The
lower scales of pay, far from attracting proper talent to a career in judicial service, will not only
dissuade new comers, but will also demoralize the existing incumbents. This is also incomplete
inasmuch as it does not deal with all the allowances listed in the judgment of apex court accepting
the recommendations.
The Association submits that the Special Judicial Allowance provided in the Bill, in place of
replacing the old scales with new ones is nothing but an attempt to place the judiciary at par or
below administrative executive, rather than to discourage it as directed by the Supreme Court
leading to, setting up of separate Pay Commission.
The Association submits that the Government has not only attempted to mislead the
Committee of the Parliament but also the Parliament itself, by not suppressing in the Bill, the fact
of Government of India Resolution of 21st March, 1996, constituting the First National Judicial Pay
Commission, the fact of its submitting its Report after hearing all Governments and Union
Territories and High Court, the fact of Supreme Court accepting the recommendations and directing
its implementation in its final judgment dated 21st March, 2002, and continuing monitoring by the
Apex Court.
The Bill moved by the Government shows no reasons, to differ with the recommendations
of the First National Judicial Pay Commission, in case of judges of Union Territories, especially when
the Supreme Court has directed the implementation of the recommendations uniformly all over India.

41
The Association submits that number of States have already implemented the pay scales as
approved by the Supreme Court. The Bill, which seeks to recommend different and lower scales
of pay than those implemented for other judicial officers in other States, would be in direct conflict
with the original judgment of Apex Court which directed separate Pay Commission to achieve the
uniformity in scales of pay and allowances all over the country.
The Association is of the view that such a confrontational approach of the Government of
India, is not only subversive of the Rule of Law in a democracy, but also extremely contemptuous
of the highest court of the land, besides abuse of legislative power in a reprehensible manner.
The All India Judges Association, seeks to place on record of Parliamentary Committee its
protest to the Bill and would like the Committee to consider the Bill in the light of facts brought
to your notice by this letter, and would request the Committee to restrain the Government by
placing all facts before the Parliament, before it discusses the Bill.
On behalf of the Association, I seek opportunity of giving oral evidence before the
Committee to the following representatives of the Association.
1. Shri Justice C. Sriramlu. Chairman,
Add: As above All India Judges Association
2. Shri C.K.Chaturvedi Working President,
23/209, Lodi Colony All India Judges Association
New Delhi-ll0003
PH:24697117
With regards.
P.S. Copy of 3 Judgments Yours truly,
of Supreme Court
‘TRILOGY’ and
Resolution of Government of India Sd/-
are enclosed. (JUSTICE C. SRI RAMULU)

42
ANNEXURE-V
AFFIDA VIT EVIDENCE DATED 3RD SEPTEMBER, 2003 SUBMITTED BY
SHRI JUSTICE C. SRI RAMULU, CHAIRMAN, ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
I, Justice Chinthala Sri Ramulu, Chairman, All India Judges Association at Hyderabad, AP do hereby
solemnly affirm and make submissions on behalf of the Association as follows:
1. The All India Judges Association filed the PIL Writ Petition S.P. (Civil) No. 1022 of 1989
in the year 1989 before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India which is pending final disposal
and monitoring of the implementation of certain directions already given by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in their three orders/judgements dated 13.11.1991 ( vide AIR 1992 DV 165)
dated 24.08.93 (AIR 1993 SC 2493) and dated 21.03.2002 [002 (4) Supreme Court Cases
247] during the last seven years. The case/matter is sub judice  and no finality of the case
is reached as yet in the Supreme Court. On the issue relating to the recommendation of the
First National Judicial Commission presided over by the. Former Judge of the Supreme
Court Hon’ble Shri Justice Jagannath Shetty, for the formation of Indian Judicial Service
on par with IAS, IPS, IFS and other All India Services which was incorporated in the
Articles of the Constitution has not reached any finality. The Union Government which is
a party to the case has been seeking opportunity from the Court for eliciting opinion and
views of the various State Government in that regard.
Our further submission is that the subject matter of the proposed bill can not be raised
or moved by a Bill/Legislation in the Parliament by circumventing the effects of or in gross
violation of the three said orders/judgements of the Hon’ble Supreme Court as the matter
is sub judice  and ultravires of those judgements/orders.
Strangely the Union Government seeks to secure surruptuously the suppression of the
said three orders/judgements of the Hon’ble Supreme Court by keeping the Hon’ble
Members of the Parliament in complete dark by suppressing the material facts and events
about the pendency of the All India Judges Association case and also about the existence
of the said three judgements/orders of the Supreme Court, to which case the Union
Government and all States including Union Territories, are parties. The Association is of the
view that the Union Government, perhaps to avoid any possible move for contempt of court
action, the initiation of the proposed Bill has been undertaken.
2. We respectfully point out that the opening words in the statement of objects and reasons
viz. : “it is expedient, in the public interest, to pass this legislation in respect of members
of the District and  Subordinate Judiciary in the Union Territories”  are disingenuous.
Public interest would not be served by passing this Bill simply because it will put in reverse
gear all that has been attempted or done in this past seven years:
(a) The question with regard to pay scales in respect of members of the judicial service
was first referred to the 5th Pay Commission, but by  an amendment made on
24.10.1996, the reference to 5th Pay Commission with regard to the Pay Scales of
Judicial Officers was deleted. This was because of the appointment of First National
Judicial Pay Commission known as Justice Shetty Commission by a Government
Resolution of 21st March, 1996.
42

43
(b) The Vth Pay Commission submitted its report on 30.01.1997  for all Central
Government Servants (excluding Judicial Officers)  and this was accepted by
Government of India by  30.09.1997 — w.e.f. from 01.01.1997.
(c) As the Vth Central Pay Commission Report had been accepted but no relief was
available to the members of the Judicial Subordinate Service, a question arose that
pending the recommendation of the Shetty Commission whether any interim orders can
be passed giving some relief. Accordingly, on 16th December, 1997, another term of
reference was added according to which the Commission was empowered to consider
and grant such interim relief as it may consider just and proper to all categories of
Judicial Officers of all the States/Union Territories. It was made clear that the interim
relief, if recommended, was to be adjusted against and included in the package which
may become admissible to the Judicial Officers on the final recommendation of the
Commission.
(d) By a preliminary Report dated 31st January, 1998, some interim relief was granted by
the Justice Shetty Commission.
(e) After thorough deliberations, Justice Shetty Commission submitted its final Report on
11th November, 1999. By order of the Supreme Court dated 14th December, 1999, the
State Governments and the Union Territories were directed to send their responses to
the Union of India so that it could correlate the responses and indicate its own stand
on the recommendations of the Commission.
(f) Recommendations of Shetty Commission were in respect of various matters including
pay structure and pay scales. With regard to pay scales, the Shetty Commission set
out the principles governing the pay structure of the Subordinate Judiciary. It referred
to the All India Judge’s Association Case (AIR 2002 Supreme Court 1752), wherein it
had been observed that the parity in status should be between the political Executive,
the Legislative and the Judges and not between the Judges and the Administrative
Executive.
According to the Shetty Commission pay scales were directed to come into force from
01.01.1996, but monetary benefits were recommended to be payable w.e.f. 01.07.1996.
Other allowances, which the Commission had recommended, were to be given effect
to from 1st November, 1999. Taking into consideration that there were at present
12,771 posts on regular pay scales, the estimated impact of the introduction of the
new pay scales was stated to be of the order of Rs. 95.71 crores for one year.
(g) Under the monitoring of the Supreme Court each and every State of the Union, except
Himachal Pradesh, has finally accepted for implementation the Shetty Commission
Report with regard to pay structure and pay scales — and affidavits to that affect
have been filed in the Supreme Court of India.
(h) By judgement dated 21.03.2002 (reported in AIR 2002 S.C. 1752) (Copy Annexed) the
recommendations of the Shetty Commission were approved by the Supreme Court of
India and yet the Pay Scales and Pay Structures of the Subordinate Judicial Services
under the Bill is materially different from that approved by the Supreme Court,  Paras
39 and 40  of the judgement of the Supreme Court stated as follows:
Para 39
“The States as well as the Union of India shall submit their Compliance report by
30.09.2002. Case be listed thereafter for  further orders.”

44
Para 40
“Any clarification that may be required in respect of any matter arising out of this
decision will be sought only from  this Court. The proceedings, if any, for
implementation of the directions given in this judgment shall be filed only in this Court
and no other court shall entertain them.”
(i) Thereafter on various dates the Supreme Court monitored the matter in which Union
of India represented the Union Territories and various orders were passed including the
latest order dated 09.05.2003 (Copy Annexed) reproduced below:
“Learned Attorney General appearing for the Union of India and the Union
Territories States that the Central Government has made variation of pay scales of
Judicial Officers in pursuance of recommendations by the Shetty Commission
which is over and above the said recommendations except in some cases, but the
same is not in that form. We are of the view that the pay scales as
recommended by the Shetty Commission should be implemented in letter and
spirit and uniformly. He prays for and is allowed 10 weeks time to file an
affidavit indicating therein the date from which the recommendations will be
implemented ”. (Emphasis added)
There was no dispute that they would be implemented.
(j) It will be noted that despite this clear statement of the Attorney General to the Court
as reproduced above, “The Salaries and Allowances of the Judicial Officers of the
Union Territories Bill, 2003”  was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 09.05.2003 (the
day the order was passed by the Supreme Court).
3. Further, the All India Judges Association is of the form of view that the Union Government
has no right to introduce legislation to set at nought the legal effect of the three judgements/
orders already passed by the Supreme Court to which they are party and try to circumvent
them by introducing the proposed legislation.
It is settled Law that a binding judicial pronouncement between parties cannot be made
ineffective with the aid of any legislative power by enacting a provision which in substance
overrules such judgment and is not realm of legislative enactment which displaces the basis
of foundation of the judgment and uniformly applies to a class of persons concerned with
the entire subject sought to be covered by such an enactment having retrospective effect.
The legislature can change the basis on which a decision is given by the Court and thus,
change the law in general which will affect a class of persons and event at large. It cannot,
however, set aside a decision inter party. Such an act on the part of the legislature amounts
to exercising the judicial power of the State and to functioning as an Appellate Court or
Tribunal, S.R. Bhagwat v. State of Mysore, (1995) 6 SCC 16: AIR 1996 SC 188.
The legislature under our Constitution have within the prescribed limit, power to make laws
prospectively as well as retrospectively. By exercise of those powers, the legislature can
remove the basis of a decision rendered by a competent Court thereby rendering that
decision ineffective. But the legislature has no jurisdiction within the certain limits to amend
the provision to the Act retrospectively and to declare what a law shall be deemed to have
been, but it is not open to the legislature to say that the judgement of the Court properly
constituted and rendered in exercise of this power in a matter brought before it shall be
deemed to be ineffective and the interpretation of the law shall be otherwise than as
declared by the Constitution, (1) State of Tamil Nadu v.  M Rayappa, AIR 1971 SC 231
(1971) 3 SSC 1, (2) Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmadabad v. New Shrock Spg

45
& Wvg CO. Ltd., AIR 1970 SC 1292 : (1970) 2 SSC 280, (3) Shri Prithiv Cotton Mills
Ltd. v.  Broach Buireau Municipality, AIR 1970 SC 192 : (1969) 2 SCC 283 and (4) The
Central Provinces Ltd. v.  Amalgamated Coal Field Ltd., AIR 1971 SC 57 : (1970) 1 SCC
509.
4. Further the Association is of the view that the legislation now undertaken covers only
limited and negligible number of judicial officers of the Union Territories when almost all
the States in India have accepted the pay scale as recommended by the Shetty Commission
and approved by the Supreme Court. They want to create separate law for the Union
Territories and thus create a division between the judicial officers of the Union Territories
on the one hand and the judicial officers of rest of the country which is ultravires and
unconstitutional and hit by the principle of equal pay for equal work.
In the light of all the above, a most serious question arises for consideration under your
distinguished Chairmanship, Sir, as to whether, and if so, what report at all should be
submitted by the Hon’ble Committee to the Parliament.
N
EW D ELHI Sd/-
3rd September, 2003 (Justice C. Sri Ramulu)
Chairman
ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION

46
ANNEXURE-VI
WRITTEN SUBMISSION DATED 3 SEPTEMBER, 2003 BY SHRI C.K.
CHATURVEDI, WORKING PRESIDENT, ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
The All India Judges Association would like the Hon’ble Committee to formulate the
following issue or question for consideration in the light of various submissions made by the
Association:
Whether the Bill under consideration does not seek to dismiss three final and binding
judgments of Hon’ble Supreme Court namely main judgment in the case of All India Judges
Association vs. Union of India and others reported as AIR 1992 SC 165; the Review
Judgment reported as AIR 1993 SC 2493 and the latest judgment of 21st March, 2002,
reported as AIR 2002 SC 247; as well as the recommendations of the First National of the
First National Judicial Pay Commission, in so far as it related to the judicial officers of the
Union Territories?
The Association makes following submissions in respect of the Bill in the light of various
facts and circumstances as mentioned hereunder:
The Clause 1(3) of the Bill states that the Bill shall be deemed to have come into force on
the 1st day of July,  1996. The First National Judicial Commission recommendations are to
be effective with effect from the same date as also directed by the Supreme Court
Judgment of 21st March, 2003. The Association submits that the effect of this clause
would be to efface and superceding the directions of the Supreme Court giving effect to
the recommendations w.e.f. 1st July, 1996 with regard to pay scales. The Association would
request the Committee to seek clarifications on this aspect from the Union Government.
2. The scales of pay mentioned in the Schedule to the Bill shows that the scales of pay
provided in the Bill are in total disregard of the order of the Supreme Court made on
9th May, 2003, that the pay scales as recommended by the Shetty Commission should be
implemented in the letter and spirit and uniformly.
3. The Union of India has yet to file an affidavit indicating the date from which the
recommendations in terms of the orders of the Court will be implemented, though, the time
of 10 weeks sought by the Attorney General has elapsed. The Association would request
the Committee to seek clarifications from the Government on this aspect.
4. In the face of final and binding judgment of Supreme Court in the Main case AIR 1992
SC 165 ordering uniformity in the scales of pay of all the judicial officers, throughout India
and the constitution of First National Judicial Pay Commission with the a term of reference
on this aspect of uniformity, the BILL does not show any reason or intelligible differentia
to have a separate treatment for the judicial officers of the Union Territories. The
Association would request the Committee to advice the Government on the binding nature
of the Supreme Court judgment. The Supreme Court in its latest order held that there
should be some specific and valid reason if departure was to be made from the
recommendations of the Pay Commissions.
46

47
5. The financial position of the Government mentioned in clause (c) of the Statement of Object
and Reasons melt away if one reads the affidavit of Shri Tabom Barn, Joint Secretary in
the Ministry of Law filed by Government on the last day of hearing itself in Supreme Court
on 9th May, 2003 to plead modification of recommendations for UT officers on the plea
that under the modifications the officers will get much more than what they get under the
Shetty Commission. The Association requests the Committee to get the matter enquired into
by ordering the records of the Government to know the reason. The apparent reason spelled
out by the Attorney General in open court was that it was a class war referring to IAS
and other services and the feeling of jealousy, for which the Government was doing some
balancing. The said reason only ridicules and hits at the law of the land that there can be
no parity between judicial services and other administrative services.
6. The Association draws the attention of the Committee to the following averment made by
the Government in the Supreme Court in its application IA 105/2002 and IA 118/2002, to
the effect that it had every intention to implement the recommendations but it would create
anomaly if other States are not able to implement the same.
“It is respectfully submitted that the delay caused for the implementation of the
judgment dated 21.3.2003 in respect of pay scales of the Judges of the Union Territories
is neither intentional nor deliberate. The reasons for delay are bonafide and the same are
without any intention to show any kind of disregard to the order passed by this Hon’ble
Court.”
“That it is respectfully submitted that in view of the aforesaid decision reached at by
the States, the States would take appropriate action in State Legislatures through resolution
or any other alternative legislative measures. In view of the same at present it would
create “anomalies if the applicant implements the directions of this Hon’ble Court
in respect to the Union Territories as it may cause disparity between the  Union and
the States .”
The Association invites attention of the Committee to the date-wise index of affidavits filed
by one State after another last date of hearing on 9th May, 2003 and thereafter before the
Supreme Court reporting acceptance of the Shetty Commission Recommendations. It would
show that the recommendations have practically been accepted by all the States except
Himachal Pradesh who has pleaded financial constraints and looks to the Centre to show
the way.
The Association submits that by proceeding with the Bill under discussion, now it is the
Union Government which is creating the anomaly and disparity. The Committee is requested
to counsel the Government in its report to the Parliament on the Bill.
7. The Association submits that the Judicial services of the UTs were initially covered by the
reference to the Vth Central Pay Commission, an expert body, in the matters of Pay and
service conditions. The terms of the Commission were amended to delete the judicial
services from its reference. This was in view of the fact that these services were included
in the reference of Shetty Commission.
8. The Association respectfully submits that as a matter of legal proposition, if the Government
has decided to bid good bye to the recommendations of the Shetty Commission, despite
adjudication on these by the Supreme Court, after hearing the Union of India, the
Government itself cannot take the place of expert body and frame its own scales. In such
circumstances, the status quo ante  is to be restored, in which a fresh Commission hears
the judicial services before making recommendations for action by Government. The
Officers of the Law Ministry who framed the Bill are not experts in the field.

48
9. The Association submits that the Vth Pay Commission too would have found itself bound
by the Supreme Court judgments on the subject delinking the judicial services from other
services for the purpose of pay and allowances.
10. The Association requests the Committee to consider the above submission. The Association
further invites the attention of the Committee to the reduction in the salary of the District
Judges at entry level in the Bill. The salary is being reduced from retrospective date
in 1996. Association submits that the existing salary of the District Judges at entry
level was decided by Supreme Court in 1995 in which the Union of India was a party. The
Association submits to the Committee that such executive power of the Union to reduce
the salaries is illegal and unconstitutional, except when there is a proclamation of Financial
Emergency in the Country under Art.360 of the Constitution.
11. The Association submits that there cannot be retrospective reduction in salary etc.
PRAYER:
In the light of above submissions, the All India Judges Association, humbly request the
Committee to make suitable report to the Parliament in the matter, so that the Rule of Law is
maintained in the Country and the independence of judiciary is strengthened.
Sd/-
(C.K. CHATURVEDI)
WORKING PRESIDENT
ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION

49
49
ANNEXURE-VII
ADDITIONAL MEMORANDUM DATED 9TH SEPTEMBER, 2003
SUBMITTED BY THE ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
JUSTICE C. SRI RAMULU,
CHAIRMAN,
930, NEW BAKARAM, GANDHI NAGAR,
HYDERABAD-500 080, A.P. INDIA
Cell : 9848054442
Mobile : 56888654
(Res.) Te l : 55365552
Dated: 9.09.2003
To
Shri Pranab Mukherjee,
Hon’ble Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Parliament House,
NEW DELHI.
Sir,
Under your most distinguished Chairmanship, the Association on 3rd September, 2003, had
the privilege of presenting its views, evidence and submissions on the Bill on the Salaries and
Allowances of the Judicial of the Union Territories, which is presently with the Committee under
your Chairmanship. We are grateful to provide us an additional opportunity to furnish factual data
with regard to pay scales approved by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vis-a-vis  the pay scales
proposed in the Bill, for the purpose of highlighting the disparities for consideration of the
Committee.
We are to submit that with regard to pay scales, the Shetty Commission set out the
principles governing the pay structure of the subordinate Judiciary. It referred to All India Judges’
Association case wherein it had been observed that the parity in status should be between the
political executive, the legislature and the Judges and not between the Judges and the administrative
executive.
After taking into consideration the recommendations which had been made by the Fifth
Central Pay Commission, and getting an independent study and report from the Indian Institute of
Public Administration, New Delhi, and the pivotal role of the subordinate Judiciary and the essential
characteristics of a judicial officer, the Shetty Commission evolved a master pay scale of
Rs.9000-24,850.  It concluded that the number of pay scales should be equal to the number of
clearly identifiable levels of responsibility and extremely narrow scope of promotional avenues in
judicial services.

50
After considering all the relevant circumstances, the Commission recommended the
following scales of pay:
(i) Civil Judges (Jr .Divn) ENTRY LEVEL Rs.9000-250-10750-300-13150-350-14550
(ii) Civil Judges (Jr. Div.) (I Stage ACP scale) Rs.10750-300-13,150-350-14,900
(iii) Civil Judges (Sr. Divn.) (II Stage ACP scale Rs.12,850-300-13,150-350-15,950-400-
Civil Judges (Jr.Divn.) 17,550
(iv) Civil Judges (Sr . Divn.) (I Stage ACP scale) Rs.14,200-350-15,950-400-18350
(v) District Judges (ENTRY LEVEL) Rs.16,750-400-19,150-450-20,500
+ (II Stage ACP scale for Civil Judges
(Sr.Divn.)
(vi) District Judges (selection grade) Rs.18.750-400-19150-450-21850-500-22850
(vii) District Judges (super time scale) Rs.22.850-500-24,850
In the table above, words ACP scale stand for Assured Career Progression scale.
The table also indicates that in judicial service there are only two  clearly identifiable level
of responsibility corresponding to two entry-level scales at (i) and (v) above. These two levels
respectively, are in terms of Recruitment under Article 234 Article 233 of the Constitution of India
in the Chapter VI of the Part VI of the Constitution. These services in the language of Constitution
of India are described as SUBORDINATE COURTS. Though, by long usage the judges presiding
over in these courts have come to be described as Judicial Officers.
The Commission provided the ACP scales only in the “judicial service” below District Judge
level. This is to avoiding long and peculiar stagnation in the very nature of judicial service, in which
there is only one promotional level of appellate court of District Judges.
The Commission in its Report stated that it was only trying to set the salary at a level that
allows aspirants with modest backgrounds, and with family responsibilities, to accept the challenge
of judicial service and a level that does not progressively penalize those dedicated individuals who
choose to serve and make sacrifices in terms of loneliness and general withdrawal from community
affairs serve the public.
In arriving at the previously mentioned pay scales DESCRIBED IN THE TABLE ABOVE,
the Commission noted that while fixing the maximum of the master pay scale it had been
constrained by the vertical cap of the salaries of the High Court Judges. In other words, the
District Judges could not get more salary than a High Court Judge whose salary was statutorily
fixed. It, however, recommended that as and when the salary of a High Court Judge is raised, and
then the salary of the judicial officers should be increase by maintaining the ratio that it had
recommended. According to the Commission, the pay scales recommended by it should be deemed
to come into force with effect from 1.7.96.
The Union of India was heard at length through its Solicitor General on the above scales
of pay before the same were accepted and directed to be implemented w.e.f. 1.1.96 by its judgment
dated 21st March, 2002.
The Association submits that the total expenditure involved in respect of revision of pay
scales of UT officers does not exceed Rs.2.50 crores. This is based on information supplied to
the Supreme Court in the affidavit of Shri D.C. Gupta, Secretary (Expenditure).

51
All the STATES of India have accepted the recommendations and are implementing the
same. See Index of Affidavits  filed herewith to show the compliance and acceptance by different
States of India.
The Association submits that, though there is no similar service or post available, for
purpose of comparison, in terms of either responsibility or in terms of nature of functions,
in the Government of India; yet it evolved its own scales based on parity with other
government services of the executive: The Government of India took a decision with regard
to the pay scales of judicial services of the Union Territories as follows:
(i) Civil Judge (Jr. Division) Rs. 8000-275-13,500
(ii) Civil Judge (senior time scale) Rs.10,650-325-15,850
(iii) Senior Civil Judge Rs.12,750-375-16,500
(iv) District Judge (entry level) Rs.15,100-400-18300
(v) District Judge (selection grade) Rs.18,400-500-22,400
NOTE/REMARKS:
The Association submits that the Judicial Officers cannot be compared in any manner
and for any purpose with the officers in the executive branch of the Government. The Judicial
Officers can be compared only with their nearest equals in functioning. The nearest equals in
terms of nature of duties of judicial officers are in their own judicial family consisting of High
Court Judges or Supreme Court Judges. Their scales of pay and other service conditions are to
be related to the salaries and conditions of superior judiciary. It is respectfully submitted that
the range of scales of salaries starting from Rs.8000/- going up to Rs.26,000 are to be shared
on equal footing by the Judicial wing of the State. In prescribing or assignment of scales within
judiciary, by the Supreme Court, on the basis of recommendations of a duly constituted Pay
Commission, the executive wing of Government should not complain as, parity in range of
scales of pay is duly maintained and not at all disturbed with the highest salary of High Court
judges statutorily fixed at Rs.26,000/-.
The Association submits that only the Tribunals constituted by Government under Article
312 or other statutes can be considered to be somewhat nearly equals in Government. The
monetary compensation which the Government pays for performing the quasi-judicial function
in Tribunals, when it appoints its own officers in these tribunals for the judicial function,
provides another test to know the salaries for the judicial officers performing pure judicial
functions in Courts. The Government appoints DISTRICT JUDGES and other
ADMINISTRATIVE MEMBERS in these tribunals on the scale of pay of Rs.18,400-22,400. In the
face of this position, the Government cannot prescribe scale of Rs.15,100/- to Rs.18,300/- for
entry level District Judges, of similar rank as in Tribunals, when they are working in Judiciary
proper.

52
COMPARISON FOR PURPOSE OF SHOWING DISPARITY
The Association invites your attention to the  following disparities from comparison of two
tables:
A. The entry-level scale of Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.) is inferior, with a difference of Rs.l000/-at
start and at the end of the scale.
NOTE/REMARKS
1. The Bill in the Statement of Object and Reasons, though, recognizes the onerous
nature of responsibilities as a class of judicial Officers; yet, it seeks to treat them at a level
with executive officers doing non-judicial functions of sorts.
2. The reasons for separate treatment in this regard are discussed elaborately in the
Judgments of Supreme Court, Law Commission Report and Justice Shetty Commission
Report.
3. There are no ACP scales of pay in the Bill, corresponding to scales (ii) and (iii), in
the scales of pay given by Shetty Commission.
NOTE/REMARKS
4. The Justice Shetty Commission worked out a Master Scale and then recommended
various telescopic scales one sliding into another, to take care of the peculiar stagnation
and no growth aspect of judicial services, and gave detailed reasons for the same. The
Government in its affidavit in the Court stated that since such scales are. not available to
other Government employees in the Government, it applied the same reasoning to deny the
same to Judicial Services, though, they stand out separately as a class and represents
judiciary in itself,  rather than employees of judiciary or employees of the Government
The Government has thus adopted a fallacious or arbitrary approach leading to
disparity.
NOTE/REMARKS
5. The Justice Shetty Commission has linked the rise in the salary of judicial officers
with the rise in the salary of High Court Judges in terms of certain proportion.
6 The section 3 the Bill refers to salaries as mentioned in the Schedule in the Bill.
NOTE/REMARKS
1 There is no enabling provision in the Bill to enable the Government to revise in
future the salaries based on recommendations of Pay Commission etc. or otherwise
by issuing a Government order. Absence of an enabling provision in the Bill to
revise salaries when required, will result in long term freeze on the salaries, till Act
is able to be amended.
2. The opening word of section 5 in the Bill to the effect, “Subject to provisions
of section 3” would disable the Government to revise salaries by issuing a
Notification.
7. The incorporation of the Salaries in the Bill would bring in avoidable rigidity, necessitating
Amendment of the Act every time. This would be a time consuming process and subject

53
to other business of Parliament. The Judicial Services and its officers would be seriously
prejudiced by this delay vis-a-vis others in the society.
8. The SPECIAL JUDICIAL ALLOWANCE provided in section 3(2) of the Bill at 10% on
the basic salary on the old scales/existing scales, in lieu of pay fixation in the new revised
scales of pay recommended by Shetty Commission would result in substantial financial
loss rather than gain as made out by the Government as elaborated in the notes/remarks
below:
NOTE/REMARKS
In terms of the fitment formula for fixation of salaries in new scales, as
recommended by Justice Shetty Commission, first a 10% benefit is to be added to the initial
scale and then the pay is to be fixed in the revised scale of pay at a stage next to this
sum in the revised new scales. This would invariably be more than mere 10% addition
to the existing salaries, besides making officers to continue  working in inferior scales
of pay.
9. This continuation in inferior scales of pay would prejudice them for their
various entitlements of benefits/allowances/facilities, which depend on the scale of pay
enjoyed.
10. The Bill seeks to effect reduction in salaries of District Judges (entry-level) in the case
of Judicial Services of UT of Delhi and Pondicherry by bring down their scales of pay from
entry level of Rs.16,400 to lower level of Rs.15.100, and corresponding ending of the scale
at lower level.
11. The Bill seeks to reduce salaries from retrospective effect w.e.f. from 1.7.96 in disregard
of the fact that these salaries were because of Supreme Court Judgment of 1995, in case
of Delhi officers and for Pondicherry thereafter.
12. The reduction in salaries would defeat the purpose of attracting best talent as mentioned in
Objects of the Bill.
13. The Bill is pre-mature as the Interim Application No.118/2002, moved by Union of India in
respect of some clarifications of ACP scales and other allowances is still pending disposal
after notice. The disposal of whole matter is still sub-judice.
14. The Association invites your attention to the following observations of the Supreme Court,
which have a direct bearing on the Bill and whole matter:
“The most important point in these proceedings appears to us to be as to whether
the recommendations of the Shetty Commission laying down different scales of pay should
be accepted or not. It is to be borne in mind that pursuant to the judgment in the review
case (All India Judges Case) the Central Government had accepted the recommendations
and had  constituted the Shetty Commission. Correspondingly, it had  deleted from the terms
of reference of the Fifth Central Pay Commission the consideration in respect of the pay
scales  of  judicial officers. Therefore, it can safely be concluded that the  Central
Government had agreed to set up a Pay Commission  specifically for  judicial officers and
normally the  recommendations made in that behalf should be accepted unless  for some
specific and valid reason a departure was required to  be made...It was, therefore,. rightly
urged by Shri F.S. Nariman  that there must be good and compelling reasons for the States
and the Central Government in  not accepting the Shetty Commission.”

54
FUNDAMENTAL ERROR
The Association further draws your attention to a fundamental error committed by
the Union of India, in recommending its own scales to members of judicial service,
formulated on the basis that there should be a parity between the executive and judiciary.,
even though this was contrary to the decision of the Court in All India Judges’ Association.
Case as well as in the review judgment, where it was stated in no uncertain terms that
the judiciary could not be equated with the executive and it must have its own pay
structure.
The Court in Para 17 of the judgment already enclosed with the submissions
observed as under on the aspect of mistake even based on parity.
“Even if we were to examine the two scales of pay, one for the IAS officers after
the Fifth Central Pay Commission Report and he scales of pay recommended for the
judicial service, we find that there is a fundamental error which has been committed
by the Union of India. The scales of pay approved for the IAS officers are as follows:
Junior scale Rs.8000-13,500
Senior scale:
(i) Time scale Rs.10,650-15,850
(ii) Jr . Admn. grade Rs.12,750-16,500
(iii) Selection grade Rs.15,100-18,300
(iv) Super time scale Rs.18,400-22,400
(v) Above ST scale Rs.22,400-24,500
Secretary To Government of India Rs.26,000/-(fixed)
Cabinet Secretary Rs.30,000/-(fixed)
“18. What the Union of India has done is that it equated the District Judge at the
entry level with the selection grade for the IAS officers. The pay scale approved is
Rs.15,100-18,300. We, however, find that an IAS officer enters the selection grade
after having put in approximately 14 years of service. On the other hand, a Civil
Judge, would normally enter the level of the District Judge, and is appointed first as
an Additional District Judge, are having put in 18 to 20 years of services far as the
IAS officers are concerned, cafter 17 years of service, an IAS officer would normal
enter the super time scale of 18,400-22,400. If the number of years which are put
in service, is a measure to be adopted in determining as what should be the pay
scales, we find that the Government of India has erred in equating the District Judge
at the entry level with the scale of pay of a selection grade IAS officer; The proper
equation should have been between the District Judge at the entry level with a super
time scale of an IAS officer. It is on that basis that the scales of pay should have
been determined.”
“19...The scale of pay of Rs.16,750-20,500 recommended by the Shetty Commission
is lower than the super time scale. for an IAS officer of Rs.18,400-22,400, when such
an officer enters the super tike scale after 17 years of service. A judicial officer
enters the selection grade of a District Judge after having put in 21 to 25 years of
service. The pay scale recommended by the Shetty Commission Rs.18,750-22850. This
is less than the scale above ST scale recommended for an IAS officer which is of
Rs.22,400-24,500 even though as IAS officer enters that scale after having put in
25 years of service which is on a par with the number of years put in by a judicial

55
officer on his entry into selection grade. It is only the District Judge (super time
scale) as recommended by the Shetty Commission which is comparable with the last
scale of an IAS officer.”
Concluding on the aspect of pay scales the court continued as under:
“20. From the aforesaid, it is clear, and it is so mentioned in the Shetty
Commission Report, that the said Commission has  taken into consideration the
recommendations of the Fifth  Central Pay Commission while determining the pay
scales for  the judicial officers. In our opinion, the pay Scales recommended by the
Shetty Commission are just and reasonable. Considering, the years of service put in
by the judicial officers at different stages, the parity in the scales of pay
recommended by the Shetty Commission for the judicial officers with the scales of
pay of IAS officers is not, by and large  disturbed. In fact, the scales of pay
recommended by the Shetty  Commission appears to us to be somewhat lower, on the
average  than the scales of pay recommended for an IAS officer if we  take into
consideration, as we must do, the number of years a judicial officer has put in
service. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the pay scales recommended by the
Shetty Commission should be accepted. We wish to emphasize that even though in
the earlier judgments, it has rightly been said that there should be no equation or
parity between judicial service and the executive service,  
nevertheless even on the
basis that there should not be great  distortion in the pay scales of the judicial
offices vis-a-vis executive, we find the recommendations made by Shetty Commission
are just, fair and reasonable.”
The above discussion. would show that the Bill only seeks to create
discrimination and disparity between equals in violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India, an article of faith. It can never be in public interest to provide
inequality between equals. The provisions in the Bill clearly show that the scales have
been arbitrarily framed by closing eyes to what is discussed in the binding judgment of
the Supreme Court on 21st  March, 2002. 
The Bill, if passed as it is, would defeat object
of having uniformity in service conditions of judges in the countr y.
The Association, therefore, prays that the Committee under your distinguished
and experienced Chairmanship makes a suitable comprehensive report to the
Parliament to consider removing an disparities in letter and spirit in the light of
various discriminations and difficulties brought to your notice by way of  our view,
evidence, submissions and what is mentioned above in this communication.
The Association would also request to the Hon’ble Committee of the
Parliament on Home Affairs to suggest to the Government to first correct the
fundamental error, as pointed out by the Supreme Court, in prescribing incorrect
scales of pay, and then only a comprehensive Bill should be considered, if required.
The Association once again records its thanks and gratitude to you for
providing all opportunity of addressing the Committee.
With warm regards,
Yours truly,
(JUSTICE C. SRI RAMULU)
CHAIRMAN
ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION

56
BEFORE THE HON’BLE SHRI PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
CHAIRMAN AND OTHER HON’BLE MEMBERS
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE OF
PARLIAMENT ON HOME AFFAIRS
The Association submits following date-wise factual developments
INDEX OF AFFIDAVITS
Sl. No. State Date of Filing Page Nos. Status
Affidavit
1. Union of  India 9.5.20 1-9 Bill moved
2. Gujrat 9.5.2003 10-13 Accepted
3. Haryana 9.5.2003 14-32 Accepted
4. Goa 12.5.2003 33 Accepted
5. Rajasthan 19.5.2003 34-43 Accepted
6. Himachal 26.5.2003 44-47 Financial Difficulty
7. Tripura 3.6.2003 48-5 Accepted
8. Orissa 5.6.2003 51-61 Accepted
9. West Bengal 6.6.2003 62-73 Accepted
Repealing Act moved
10. Andhra Pradesh 10.6.2003 74-81 Accepted
11. Manipur 13.6.2003 82-103 Accepted
12. Uttaranchal 17.6.2003 104-1 13 Accepted
13. Karnataka 8.7.2003 1 14-146 Accepted
14. Jharkhand 14.7.2003 147-170 Accepted
15. Maharashtra 17.7.2003 171-175 Accepted
16. Assam 7.8.2003 176-177 Accepted
17. J&K 22.8.2003 178-180 Accepted
18. U.P. 9.5.2003 181-186 Accepted

57
ANNEXURE-VIII
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Comments of Department of Justice to the submissions made by All India Judges
Association before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs
regarding the ‘Salaries and Allowances of Judicial Officers
of the Union Territories Bill, 2003'.
Sl. Submissions made by All India Judges Comments of Department of
No. Association Justice
12 3
57
1 All India Judges Association case is
subjudice and no finality of the case is
reached as yet in the Supreme Court,
pending final disposal and implementation of
its judgments. Shetty Commission’s
recommendations for formation of All India
Judicial Service has not reached any finality.
Union Government which is a party to the
case has been seeking opportunity from the
Court for eliciting opinion and views of the
State Governments.
It is a fact that the All India Judges
Association case is pending before the
Supreme Court. The Shetty Commission had
recommended for formation of All India
Judicial Service at the level of District
Judges only. On the other hand, the National
Commission to Review the Working of the
Constitution – in its Report stated that
formation of All India Judicial Service would
not be a better alternative to the existing
system. Therefore, no further action could
be taken on this score.
Union of India and the States are parties to
All India Judges Association case. The High
Powered Committee to assess the fiscal
situation of the States in their meeting held
on 9th August, 2002 expressed the
apprehension that in addition to the direct
impact due to revision of pay scales and
sanction of allowances recommended by the
Shetty Commission, there would be
considerable impact on the State finances as
existing parities would get disturbed and the
other employees would also demand
extension of allowances similar to what is
provided to the Judicial Officers. They
requested that the Centre should keep in
view the State’s concern while taking a
decision on the application of pay scales of
Judicial Officers in the UTs. Thereafter, the
State Finance Ministers in the meeting

58
12 3
convened by the Ministry of Finance on 7th
September, 2002, expressed serious
difficulties regarding the Constitutional,
financial and administrative issues involved
in implementing the Supreme Court’s
Judgment dated 21.3.2002 in the All India
Judges Association case relating to pay
scales and other service conditions of the
subordinate judiciary. It was resolved that
States will take appropriate action in the
State Legislatures through resolution or any
other alternative legislative measures. The
meeting of Chief Ministers of States and the
Prime Minister held on 18th October, 2002
also ratified this decision.
The Bill was moved in the Parliament
keeping in view the Supreme Court
Judgments, the prevailing relativities with
other services and the financial position of
the Government. In fact, the provision for
Special Judicial Allowance @ 10% of the
basic pay was provided in the Bill to make
the total emoluments of judicial officers not
less than that of the scales approved by the
Supreme Court.
The Government took a decision well within
the Constitutional framework to bring up a
legislation under Article 309 of the
Constitution. The objective is to set the
salary of the judicial officers at a level that
would not only attract proper talent, but also
not disturb the prevailing relativities. It has
been done in keeping in mind both the
decision of Supreme Court and the financial
position of the Government.
The Bill has been formulated to set the
salary and allowances of judicial officers in
the UTs keeping in view the prevailing,
relativities, Supreme Court Judgments, and
the financial position of the Government.
Therefore, the proposed legislation is in the
public interest.
The proposed Bill can not be moved in the
Parliament by circumventing the effects of
or in gross violation of the three judgments
of the Supreme Court as the matter is sub-
judice and ultravires of those judgments.
The Union Government seeks to secure
suppression of the three judgments of
Supreme Court by keeping the Hon’ble
Members in complete dark about the
pendency of the case and the three
judgments. The Union Government has
initiated the Bill to avoid any possible move
for contempt of court action.
2. The opening words in the /Statement of
Objects and Reasons in the Bill, viz. “it is
expedient, in the public interest, to pass
this legislation in respect of members of
the District and Subordinate Judiciary in
the Union Territories”  are disingenuous.
Public Interest would not be served by
passing this Bill simply because it will put in
reverse gear all that has been attempt or
done in the past seven years.

59
12 3
(a) The question with regard to pay scales in
respect of members of the judicial service
was first referred to the 5th Pay
Commission, but by an amendment made on
24.10.1996, the reference to 5th Pay
Commission with regard to the Pay Scales
of Judicial Officers was deleted. This was
because of the appointment of FNJPC
(Shetty Commission) by Government
Resolution of 21.3.1996.
(b) The 5th Pay Commission submitted its
report on 30.01.1997 for all Central
Government servants (excluding judicial
officers) and this was accepted by
Government w.e.f. 01.01.1997.
(c) Pending the Report of Shetty Commission,
the Commission was empowered to
consider and grant interim relief to judicial
officers of all States and UTs as the
Government had already accepted 5th Pay
Commission Report.
(d) By a preliminary Report dated 31.1.98,
some interim relief was granted by Shetty
Commission.
(e) Shetty Commission submitted its final
Report on 11.11.1999. Supreme Court vide
its order dated 14.12.99, directed the State
Governments and UTs to send their
responses and indicate its own stand on the
recommendations of the Commission.
(f) Shetty Commission in its Report set out the
principles governing pay structure of
subordinate judiciary. It referred to Supreme
Court’s observation in All India Judges
Association case that parity in status should
be between the political Executive, the
Legislative and the Judges and not between
the Judges and the Administrative Executive.
Matter of record, hence no comments.
The Government implemented the pay scales
recommended by 5th Pay Commission w.e.f.
01.01.1996.
Matter of record, hence no comments.
Matter of record, hence no comments.
Matter of record, hence no comments.
During the course of hearing in the All India
Judges Association case, the Supreme Court
insisted that the parity did not mean equality
in pay, but meant equality in status. Besides,
one of the terms of reference of Shetty
Commission was to examine the present
structure of emoluments and conditions of
service of judicial officers and make suitable
recommendations having regard to the
existing relativities in the pay structure
between the officers belonging to
subordinate judicial service vis-a-vis  other
civil servants. The Bill has been introduced
in order to maintain the existing relativity
with other services.

60
12 3
(g) Under the monitoring of the Supreme Court
each and every State, except Himachal
Pradesh, accepted for implementation of
Shetty Commission to Report with regard to
pay structure and pay scales. Affidavits to
that effect have been filed in the Supreme
Court.
(h) The pay scales proposed in the Bill are
different from what has been
recommended by the Commission and
accepted by the Supreme Court.
(i) The Supreme Court, vide its order dated
09.05.2003, directed the Union of India that
the pay scales as recommended by the
Shetty Commission should be implemented
in letter and spirit and uniformly. The
Attorney General prayed for and the Court
allowed 10 weeks time to file an affidavit
indicating therein the date from which the
recommendations will be implemented.
There was no dispute that the pay scales
would be implemented.
States are free to implement the
recommendations of Shetty Commission. As
States are also parties to the All India
Judges’ Association case, they are free to
file their own affidavits independently. Union
of India is administratively responsible for
UTs only. It may be added that one of the
recommendations of the Shetty Commission
was that the Central Government should
bear 50 per cent of the expenditure on
subordinate judiciary in the States.
Department of Justice in consultation with
the Solicitor General of India made a
forceful plea for rejecting that
recommendation and the Supreme Court
rejected this recommendation of Shetty
Commission.
The Government had considered the
recommendations of the Commission in
consultation with the concerned
Departments and partially implemented in
respect of the judicial officers in the Union
Territories vide order dated 11.10.2001. The
pay scales were revised keeping in view the
prevailing relativities vis-a-vis the IAS. The
Government had also considered the
Supreme Court’s judgment in this regard.
The Bill has been introduced in order to
maintain the existing relativity with other
services and also considering the overall
financial position of the Government.
However, by introducing SJA @ 10% of the
basic pay, judicial officers would be entitled
for more or less the same emoluments as
recommended by the Shetty Commission
‘and directed by the Supreme Court.
In fact, the Bill was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on 09.05.2003 with a view to comply
with the Supreme Court’s directions for
implementation of the pay scales. By
introduction of Special Judicial Allowance @
10% of basic pay, most of the judicial
officers would be getting higher emoluments
than those based on the scales recommended
by Shetty Commission.

61
12 3
(j) Despite the clear statement of the Attorney
General to the Court, the Bill was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 09.05.2003,
the day the order was passed by the
Supreme Court.
3 The Union of India has no right to
introduce legislation to set at nought the
legal effect of the judgments of the
Supreme Court to which they are party and
to circumvent them by introducing the Bill.
Attorney General had informed the Court
that the competent authority decided for
introduction of Special Judicial Allowance @
10% of basic pay to the judicial officers in
UTs and most of the judicial officers would
be getting higher pay than those based on
the scales recommended by Shetty
Commission. He, therefore, informed the
Court that there is a substantial compliance
with the Supreme Court’s directions. The
Department of Justice had also filed an
affidavit to this effect in the Supreme Court
on 08.05.2003. Further, it was stated in the
affidavit that a Bill will be introduced in the
Budget Session of the Parliament which is
scheduled to continue till 09.05.2003, for
which the President’s recommendation under
article 117 of the Constitution has been
obtained.
The Department of Justice had consulted the
Department of Legal Affairs on this issue
and they opined as under:
“The legislative Entry relating to
appointment of subordinate courts is
traceable to Entry 41  of List II, State List
read with articles 229(2), 233 and 234 of
the Constitution. Accordingly, it may not be
constitutionally feasible for the Union
Government to bring a legislation to effect
uniform pay scales in terms of the
recommendations of the Supreme Court in its
Judgment of 21st March, 2002. However, the
Union Parliament is competent to make such
law for the Union Territories.”
In fact, the Bill was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on 09.05.2003 with a view to comply
with the Supreme Court’s directions for
implementation of the pay scales. By
introduction of Special Judicial Allowance @
10% of basic pay, most of the judicial
officers would be getting higher pay than
those based on he scales recommended by
Shetty Commission. The Government took
the decision well within the Constitutional
framework to bring up a legislation under
Article 309 of the Constitution. The

62
12 3
4. The proposed legislation covers only
negligible number of judicial officers in UTs
when almost all States have accepted the
pay scales recommended by Shetty
Commission. The Union Government thus
create a division between the judicial
officers in UTs and those in the States
which is ultravires and unconstitutional and
against the principle of equal pay for equal
work.
objective is to set the salary of the judicial
officers at a level that would not only attract
proper talent, but also not disturb the
prevailing relativities. It has been done in
keeping in mind both the decision of
Supreme Court and the financial position of
the Government.
The mode of legislation is adopted to
vindicate the principle of Parliamentary
Supremacy in allocation of the fund for the
services.
States are free to implement their own pay
scales. Union of India is administratively
responsible for UTs only. As regards pay,
together with SJA @ 10% of basic pay,
most of the judicial officers in UTs would
be getting more or less the same pay as
recommended by Shetty Commission.

63
ANNEXURE-IX
No:L-19018/3/2003-Jus
(Department of Justice)
***
Comments of Department of Justice to the amendments proposed by
Shri Anadi Sahu, M.P., Member, Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs
Sl. Proposed amendments Comments of Department of
No. Justice
12 3
63
1 Amendment of the proviso to sub-clause (2)
of clause-3: It may read as follows:—
“Provided that the speci al Judicial Allowance
together with basic pay shall not exceed
Rs.400/- per mensem of the highest scale
of that post”.
2 Clause 4 in line 22-the bracketed sentence –
other than Special Judicial Allowance be
deleted.
3 In the schedule serials 2 and 3 clubbed
together and it should be a running scale for
Civil Judge of the Senior Time Scale and
The limit of Rs.24850/-  is in conformity with
the maximum of the highest scale prescribed
by FNJPC for subordinate judiciary. This
aspect has been reflected in the original
Proviso. As such it may not be desirable to
change it. Besides, it would give rise to a
situation where maximum scale of pay will
become lower than the pay drawn at an
intermediate stage. For instance, the scale of
District Judge’s pay at entry level is
Rs.15,100/- to Rs.18,300/-, with an annual
increment of Rs.400/-. As per the proposed
amendment, the maximum of the scale will be
limited to 18,700/ - (Rs.18,300/-+Rs.400/-),
whereas given the SJA, it would be
Rs.20,130/-. If the scale is limited to
Rs.18,700/-, by accepting the proposed
amendment, it will entail a reduction of
Rs.990/- from the pay fixed at the earlier
stage of this scale (which is Rs.19,690, fixed
after grant of increment). The proposed
amendment may therefore not be
accented.
This could be accepted subject to marginal
heading being changed to read as “Rules and
orders relating to conditions of service of
judicial officers to continue to apply”.
Clubbing the pay scales of Civil Judge
(STS) and Senior Civil Judge will disturb the
existing hierarchy as Senior Civil Judge is

64
12 3
there should be no separate pay scale for
senior Civil Judge. The running scale should
be Rs.10650-16500/-
the promotion post of Civil Judge (STS).
Clubbing of these two pay scales will not
only curtail the promotion avenues for Civil
Judges (Senior Time Scale) but also
diminish the status of Senior Civil Judges,
who are senior most judges in the Lower
Judicial Service. As such the proposed
amendment may not be accepted.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.