CS(HA)- 149

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS

SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON

REGISTRATION AND OTHER RELATED
LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 77 AUGUST, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 7™ AUGUST, 2001)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

AUGUST, 2001/SRAVANA, 1923 (SAKA)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION

REPORT
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
ANNEXURE
(i) The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
(ii) Comments of States and UTs on the proposal for the Amendment
of Section 30(2) of the Registration Act, 1908 and affixing of

photographs of executant and finger print on documents

(ii) Minutes of the Conference of the Chicf Ministers/Finance Ministers
of States and UTs held on 14.09.1998 at Vigyan Bhawan

PAGES
(itil

(1111-1६)

4$-46

B
a
Day


9 9० 39 ७ # ७ ७

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2001)

Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj

Shri Hiphei

Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
Dr. L.M. Singhvi

Shri $, Ramachandran Pillai
Shri K.M, Saifullah

Shri C.M. Ibrahim

Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
Shri Drupad Borgohain

Shri Kuldip Nayyar
Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya

LOK SABHA

Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
Shrimati Nisha Chaudhary
Shri Samar Chaudhary

Shri M.O.H. Farook

Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Rajen Gohain

Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
Shri Vinay Katiyar

Shri Arun Kumar

Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
Shri P.H. Pandian

Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel
Shri Shriniwas Patil

Shri Jitendra Prasada

Shri Subodh Ray

Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
Dr. Jayanta Rongpi

Shri Anadi Charan Sahu
Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
Shri Manabendra Shah

© Ceased to be Member w.e,f. 14 June, 2001
4 Expired on 30 January,2001
* Expired on 16 January, 2001


ghuraj Singh Shakya
Vishnu Datta Sharma

9 Dr, Raghuvansh Prasad Singh :

40 Lal Bihari Tiwari

4) Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi 4
42 Dr. S. Venugopal

43 Shri Beni Prasad Verma

44. Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha :
o4 Shri Harin Pathak :
746 Shri 5. Portnuswamy ,

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director

Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer

@ Ceased to be Member we. 19 March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on Human Resource Development
+ Nominated w.e.f 20 February, 2001 :
Nominated w.e,f, 8 March, 2001

i)



INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing C
Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its
present this Seventy-ninth Report of the Committee on the Registration and Oth
(Amendment) Bill, 2000",

2.0 In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliam
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lo
the Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000, as int
Sabha on 1" December, 2000 and pending therein, to the Committee for exam
instructions to report during the Budget Session, 2001.

mmittee

3.0 The Committee considered the Bill in six si
9 and 31 July, 2001.

ings held on है February, 12

3.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 8 February, 2001 decide
Communique inviting suggestions/comments on the Bil
individuals/institutions/organizations interested in the subject matter of the Bill
2001. The Press Communique appeared in the leading Newspapers on 3 March,

3.2 In the sitting held on 23 April, 2001 the Committee decided ¢
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for extension of time upto the first day of
Monsoon Session of Parliament as it was not possible to submit it
end of the Budget Session due to its pre-occupation with e:
(2001-2002) of the Ministries/Departments under its jurisdict
legislation i.e. the Constitution (Ninety-first amendment) Bill, 2060. के
by the Committee, was granted by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 March, 200

5.3 The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Legislative Departm«
Law, Justice and Company Affairs in its sitting held on 12 June, 2001

3.4 In its sitting held on 27 June, 2001, the Committee heard Secretary
Development, Union Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Al
Secretary, Government of National Capital rritory of Delhi, ser
provisions of the Bill.

3.5 In its sitting held on 9 July 2001, the Committee undertook claus:
consideration of the Bill.

3.6 The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 31 July
adopted the same.

3.7. in the sitting held on 31 July, 2001, the Committee also deci
tendered before the Committee may be laid on the Table of both the House:

1 December, 2000
ary, 2001

* Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part Ii, Section-2, dat
“* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part 1, No. 38690 dated 14 Fr



4 In course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on the
Bill and took cognizance of suggestions listed in memoranda received in response to the Press
Communique, replies to queries raised by the Members on the Bill in the meetings, submitted by
the Legislative Department, Department of Urban Development and Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.

PRANAB MUKHERJEE
Chairman

NEW DELHI,

July 31, 2001. Committee on Home Affairs



REPORT

The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000, (See Annexure-I)
purports to introduce the following features in the process of public registration of documents
relating to transfer of properties:

(i) Discontinuance of the registration of documents relating to any land
situated in any part of India in a Registry of a Presidency town’ or at
Delhi’;

(ii) Compulsory affixing of photographs and finger-prints of the executants
on the documents at the time of registration;

(iii) Compulsory registration of documents in respect of transfer of
immovable properties on the basis of “agreement to sell”, “power-of-
attorney”, etc. in accordance with Power-of-Attorney Instruments; and

(iv) Computerisation of registration records.

2.0 To put the aforesaid objectives into effect, the Bill proposes amendments/deletions of
certain provisions enumerated in the following Acts:

(i) The Registration Act, 1908; (Section 16,17,30,32,49,67 and 69)
(ii) The Transfer of Property Act, 1882; (Section 53) and
(iii) The Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (Schedule-I)

मन The Bill would entail substantive changes in the Registration Act, 1908; changes in other
two legislations mentioned above are relatable to changes effected in the Registration Act and are
consequential in nature.

2.2 The genesis of proposed changes in the Registration Act emanates from the proposals of
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations for discontinudnce of registration of
documents pertaining to immovable property in any part of India in the Registry of a Presidency
town or Delhi as registration of property belonging to a State, elsewhere causes loss of revenue
(Stamp duty)’ to that particular State. Furthermore, they have expressed the view that the
afotesaid provisions have been grossly misused for illegal transfer of property (benami
transaction)

23 In view of above, most of the State Governments have suggested deletion of sub-section
(2) of Section 30 of the Registration Act, 1908, which empowers the Registrar of a Presidency
town or Delhi to receive and register any document relating to the transfer of an immovable
property situated in any part of India. So far ten States’ and three Union Territories’ have
endorsed the proposal to delete the foregoing sub-section of the Registration Act, 1908.

24 Even some States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and
Rajasthan have gone a step further in forwarding their respective State Bills so as to do away

1 Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai; Lahore was omitted from the Registration Act, 1908 in 1948.

2 Delhi was included in the year 1969 by the Indian Registration (Amendment) Act, 1969

> Though stamp duty on immovable property is in List-llI-Concurrent List (Entry No.44) of the Seventh Schedule to Constitution, but
the rate of the same is under the control of the concerned State Government in view of Entry No.63 of List-II-State List

4 Orissa, Mizoram, Punjab, Tripura, Bihar, Meghalaya, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh

5 Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli.



with® sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the Registration Act for the concurrence of the Union
Government in accordance with sub-clause (2) of Article 254 of Constitution, The Union
Government has since given concurrence to those State Bills. The Ministry in their written reply
to the questionnaire has stated that those States and West Bengal have since omitted the said sub-
section of Section 30 of the Registration Act, 1908 with the concurrence of Union Government.

2.5.0 The compulsory affixing of photographs and finger-prints of the executant on the
documents relating to immovable property suggests insertion of a new section i.e. 32 A in the
Registration Act, 1908.

2.5.1 The new provision i.e. 32 A as envisaged under clause 5 of the Bill also owes its genesis
to the suggestions of State Governments/Union Territories stating the misuse of immovable
property through benami transaction for hire and purchase thereof by terrorist outfits operating
from Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and North-East. These unscrupulous elements launders money
in purchase and hire of immovable property under the cover for furthering terrorist activities or
for providing financial security to themselves and their families. The problem is acute in
Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Ahmedabad as well as in Punjab and Terai areas of Uttar Pradesh.

2.5.2 The Union Government have sought comments of the State Governments/Union
Territories on the issue of compulsory affixing of photographs and finger-prints of the executant
on the documents of registration in 1995. Comments thereon received from fourteen
States/Union Territories, so far, have been put at Annexure-II. Out of fourteen States,
Meghalaya and West Bengal are not in agreement with the idea and expressed some difficulties.
Meghalaya Government is of the view that people in village may find it difficult to get
themselves photographed for the purpose of executing a deed.

2.6.0 However, a consensus on the issue emerged in the Conference of the Chief
Ministers/Finance Ministers of States and Union Territories convened at the behest of the Union
Finance Minister on 14 September, 1998 where the Chief Minister of Meghalaya and West
Bengal amongst others were also present. Though the West Bengal Government had voiced their
administrative difficulties to the provision of compulsory photographing, the Meghalaya State
Government had not repeated their reservation on the issue expressed earlier ( See Annexure-III)
for minutes of the Conference of the Chief Ministers/Finance Ministers of States and Union
Territories held on 14.9.1998 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi).

2.6.1 It is pertinent to add here that there was consensus in the said Conference on other issues
stated at para | of the Report.

262 The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill makes reference to the same
Conference of Chief Ministers/Finance Ministers of States/Union Territories wherein consensus
on the four issues referred in the opening para of the Report was evolved as a sequel to which
amendments to Acts mentioned in para 2 of the Report have been proposed.

2.7.0 The Comptroller and Auditor General of India on the basis of all India study conducted
on the issue of deleting sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the Registration Act, 1908 has made
observation in its Study Report (1998) that procedure prescribed in the said sub-section was not
being followed and it was causing revenue loss to State Governments. Therefore, the
Comptroller and Auditor General recommended deletion of sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the
Registration Act, 1908.

nee

© Registration of deeds and documents is in Entry 6 Of List-IIl-Coricurrent List of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution

2,



eee

2.7.1 The Secretary, Department of Urban Development, Ministry of Urban Development
Poverty Alleviation in his deposition before the Committee had inter-alia stated/pointed out that
there was no uniformity in the size of photographs required to be affixed on the document of
registration in the States. Furthermore, he had insisted on laminated photographs for its better

preservation.

3.0 The Committee appreciates the rationale underlying the mandatory provision of
affixing of photographs and finger-prints on registration documents. The Com mittee
understands that the requirement of finger-prints is in addition to signature/thumb
impression’. The Committee also understands that registration of documents relating to
immovable property takes place either at Registrar Office’ or at sub-Registrar Office”
under whose jurisdiction the property or any portion thereof is actually situated. The
Registrar Office is located at District Headquarters and sub-Registrar Office mostly at sub-
Division of the State. The Committee notes that it may happen that photographing facility
is not available at the village, where the property is situated but the same is available at the
place of registration i.e. sub-Divisions or District Head-quarters ofa State. Therefore, the
Committee is of the view that the difficulties to the compulsory photograph expressed by a
State are not convincing and recommends to the Union Government to go ahead with the
implementation of said provisions of the Bill after its enactment.

3.1 The Committee while taking cognizance of the suggestion of Orissa Government for
taking photographs and finger-prints of both vendor (seller) and yendee (buyer) on the
registration documents, enquired about existence of any legislation/practice in any
State/Union Territory. The Secretary, Legislative Department had cited the instance of
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi for affixing of photographs (not finger-
prints) of both seller and buyer on the registration documents and informed the practice is
in vegue in some States/ Union Territories. The Committee points out that clause 5 of the
Bill which intends to insert Section 32 A in the Registration Act, 1908, does not specifically
mention about the requirement of affixing of photographs and finger-prints of both buyer
and seller.

3.2 The Committee appreciates the compatibility of requirements of both photographs
and finger-prints on the registration documents with the specific purpose to deter the
misuse of immovable property by unscrupulous elements including terrorist outfits. To
achieve that objective in an effective manner, the Committee recommends to the
Government to examine the feasibility of making compulsory for both seller and buyer to
affix their photographs and finger-prints on the documents of registration relating to
immovable property.

4.0 The compulsory registration of documents containing contract to transfer any immovable
property deserves attention of the Government in view of the fact that property transferred under
contracts other than sale deed are not registered as a result of which evasion of payment of stamp
duty on the property takes place, which results in gross loss of revenue to the Government. This
apart, transfer of property without their proper registration also create confusion as to the claim
of title thereby creating legal hassles to the vendee (buyer). In view thereof, some States i.e.

7 ight hand for woman and left hand for man
8 Registration Act, 1908 (sub-section (1) of Section-30)
9 Ibid, Seotion-28


Gujarat, Rajasthan have since amended section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 to make
registration of contract in nature of part performance compulsory.

4.1.0 It may be mentioned that property worth one hundred rupees or more are required to be
registered after which mutation takes Place but section 17 (2) (v) of the Registration Act, 1908
allows certain documents (which does not create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish any right,
title or interest of the value of Tupees one hundred or more in the immovable Property) to transfer
property without registration. The document of ‘agreement to sale’, in accordance with section
53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1988 fall under the section 17 (2) (v). Thus, the same is not
required to be registered.

4.1.1 Transfer of property usually takes place under “power-of-attorney”. Power-of-Attorney
is of two types 1.6. General Power-of-Attorney (GPA) and Special Power-of-Attorney (SPA).
Power of Attorney, which is otherwise known as “Letter-of-Attorney” is an instrument
authorizing another to act as one’s agent or attorney. The person in whose favour Power-of-
Attorney is executed and the person who gives the same under it are both known and indicated in
the instrument of Power-of-Attorney.

4.1.2 Though Power of Attorney empowers the attorney to sell immovable property on behalf
of the Principal (Owner) in accordance the Powers-of. ~Attomey Act, 1882 but sections 32 and 33
of the Registration Act, 1908 allow the attorney to present documents on behalf of the Principal
for registration at the registration office. Registration of property transferred under Power of
Attorney is not mandatory in view of the provisions laid down in section 53 A of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 (popularly known as Power of Attorney deals). Thus, Power-of-Attorney
does not transfer any title to the ‘Property to any other person nor is it compulsory to registerthe
same. But even without registration, the same is a valid document.

4.1.3 Section 53 A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 speaks about “part-performance of
contract”. In accordance with part-performance of contracts property sold through the instrument
of contracts may not be registered but receive legal protection in accordance ‘with “Part-II-
Specific Performance of Contracts” of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.

4.2.0 Sale and purchase under part-performance of contracts had started way back in 1972,
when the Delhi Land (Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972 came into effect. The epicenter of
transfer of property under the Part-performance of contracts was the National Capital Territory of.
Delhi itself. The Delhi Land (Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972, came into force with effect
from 14 June 1972 as a sequel to Delhi Development Act, 1957 for the development of Delhi in
accordance with Master Plan prepared therefor, In accordance with the Delhi Development Act,
1957, large scaie acquisition of lands was made under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for
planned development of Delhi, which put certain restrictions on private colonization activity but
could not stop registration of sales of private lands as that was legally permissible at that time.
The Delhi Land (Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972 put restriction on transfer of land which
have been acquired by the Central Government or in respect of which acquisition proceedings
have been initiated by the Government. Thus, it became legally not permissible to enter into
regular deeds of sale which could be got registered. In other words, registration of property, other
than developed by the Government, in Delhi, ceased to exist,

4.2.1 In the aftermath of enactment of the Delhi Land (Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972,
Properties were transferred through the deeds in nature of agreement to sell which has protection
of section 53 A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Thus, began the phase of the transfer of
property without registration.



4.2.2 As a consequence of freezing of land as a sequel to Delhi Development Act, 1957 and
Delhi Land (Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972, parties execute the following deeds in the nature
of part-performance to transfer property which are in vogue:

(i) General Power of Attorney to perform all transactions in relation to the
property;

(ii) Special Power of Attorney to sell it further;

(iii) a will in favour of the buyer or some of his family members:

(9५). areceipt about payment of money;

(v) an agreement to work as a contractor by the buyer for the seller: and

(vi) an agreement to sale.

Out of the documents referred above, the document at SI.No.(vi) carries the whole legal efficacy
about the transaction which has the backing of section 53 A of the Transfer of Property Act. 1882
and other instruments of transfer are supportive to the instrument of ‘agreement to sale’

4.2.3 These transactions have also become institutionalized to the extent that they got statutory
recognition in our fiscal legislations as back as in 1984 under section 3 (47) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961

4.3.0 Though, transfer of property under part-performance of contracts is rampant in Delhi.
even small towns of the country are not immune from such malady. States have incurred huge
revenue loss due to ever increasing resort to contracts in the nature of part-performance as the
contracts are economical substitute for regular sale deed where payment of stamp duty is avoided

4.4.0 The Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation took initiative in 1997 tc
bring legislative changes in relation to properties in National Capital Territory of Delhi. Since the
problem had acquired an all-India dimension, it was thought desirable to enact an all-India
legislation in this regard.

4.4.1 It was also contemplated to give retrospective effect to the legislation from a cut-off date
i.e. 1 June, 1972, but later on it has been decided to give the legislation a prospective effect

4.5.0 The Committee inter-alia sought the views of Legislative Department, Department of
Urban Development of the Union Government and the Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi on the issue of giving retrospective effect to the legislation. The Committee specifically
wanted to know from the Secretary, Department of Urban Development, the revenue loss
incurred by the Government due to non-registration of documents transferring properties in Delhi

4.5.1 The Secretary, Legislative Department, has supported the idea of giving effect to the
legislation prospectively as implementation of the legislation retroactively may entail legal
complications. He also stated that implementation of the Law retroactively may not be
administratively feasible.

4.5.2. The Secretary, Urban Development in his deposition before the Committee opined that
registration of previous documents should be made compulsory in order to trace the past records
of land/property changing hands, but the amount of stamp duty to be levied or relaxed may be left
to the concerned State Government. He then stated that in th@original draft Bill, it was
contemplated that the cut-off date for registration might be left to the concerned State
Government. He further stated that for conversion purposes the Delhi Development Authority
was insisting on compulsory registration of documents and the Land and Development Office
was insisting that unless the registration document was produced, mutation would not be carried
out.

wn


45.3 As to revenue loss, the Secretary (Urban Development) gave the estimate of Rs.57.6
crore which would be accruable to the flats on leasehold plots and sold under Power-of-Attorney
[1.०. 152,742 flats (total flats constructed 1, 89, 742 minus 37,000 which has been converted to
free hold)|@ rate of 8 percent of stamp duty (cumulative from the cut off date i.e. 1972).
Whenever the leasehold property changes hands, the Land Development Officer collects 50
percent of unearned income. The representatives of Delhi Development Authority (DDA), who
accompanied the Secretary, Urban Development clarified that flats are only one type of property.
There are many other types of property created by the DDA on which loss of revenue in the form
of stamp duty, unearned income etc. has not been computated in view of difficulties involved.

3

4.5.4 The Committee discussed the pros and cons of giving retrospective effect to the
proposed legislation. After deliberating on this aspect, the Committee agreed that it would
be prudent to implement it prospectively.

4.5.5 After the enactment of the Bill, instrument of transferring property in nature of part-
performance of contracts will be registerable. Ninety percent of stamp duty on the value of
property will be paid at the time of registration of “agreement to sale” and the remaining percent
1.6. ten percent of stamp duty would be paid at the time of registration of ‘sale deed’. Thus, there
would be two registrations, if property is transferred under Section 53 A of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1982, in the event of enactment of the law. The Secretary, Legislative Department
has informed the Committee that the Ministry had filed official amendments to the Bill to make
the aforesaid provision applicable to Union Territories only as the rate of stamp duty in respect of
States is under List No-Il-State List. He further informed that a notice of the amendment for the
purpose had been sent to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha on 12 December 2000.

5.0 Another objective of the Bill is the computerization of registry records by the concerned
State Governments/Union Territories for there preservation and perpetuation for the purpose of
which new section 16 A is proposed to be inserted in the Registration Act, 1908. The
Registration records would be kept in electronic form such as floppies or diskettes subject to
safeguard prescribed by the Inspector-General of Registration ‘in addition to Books!! and
Indexes’ laid down for the purpose in the Registration Act.

5.1 The aforesaid provisions in the new section i.e. 16 A as contained in clause 2 of the Bill
devolves power to make rules for providing for the manner in which the registration records to be
kept in electronic form, to Inspector General of Registration with the sanction of the State
Government.

5.2.0 The Committee appreciates the idea of keeping registration records in electronic
form, in addition to the traditional methods, But the Committee is unhappy with the sorry
state of affairs in most of the registries located at sub-Divisional levels and feels that there is
an utmost need for their proper up-keeping.

5.2.1 The Committee understands that the life of floopy, diskette should be taken into
account and necessary care should be taken to transfer the records to other floopy, diskette
well in advance 50 as to check loss of any information therefrom.

5.2.2 The Committee understands that State Government provides fire-proof boxes to the
office of every Registrar for safe custody of the registration records and the State
Government ensures safe custody of the records in sub-Districts in accordance with sub-
section (3) of Section 16 of the Registration Act, 1908. In that context, the Committee is also

राख RURenReeeneeeneeneeeeeeenmeeeeeeee
tration Act, 1908 (sections-3 and 69)

ction-51

* छा, section-35



aware of the fact that the transfer of the entries in indexes Nos. I, वा and Ill by the sub-
Registrar to Registrar is no more in existence’.

5.2.3 The Committee expresses apprehension about the safety of registry records at the
sub-Registrar Office and recommends that provisions may be made in the Act to make it
mandatory for the States to supply fire-proof boxes to each registration offices in sub-
Districts in that State.

6.0 A point was raised whether property transferred by a way of Aiba (gitt) under the
Muslim Personal Law would also required to be registered since the Bill propose
registration of the documents of registration.

ompulsors

6.1 The Ministry has clarified the position in their written submission which is as under

“An oral gift under the Mohammedan Law is valid and a registered
instrument is not necessary for validation of such a gift. Section 129 of
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 clearly provides that provisions in
Chapter VII of this Act which deal with gifis shall not be deemed to
affect any rule of Mohammedan Law. The proposed amendments in
section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and section
Registration Act, 1908 do not in any way affect the Moh
Personal Law as the Bill under consideration does not deal with

6.2.0 A point was raised that the Delhi Government after declaring certain land as ‘Lai D
did not put it to any use. As a result the owner of the land had to suffer because he could no’
transfer it legally. A plea was then made that if the Delhi Government declares certain area as
‘Lal Dora’, then a time limit should be fixed upto which the said land could be kept under that
category. The point was referred to the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs for their comments,

6.2.1 The Legislative Department in their written reply has stated as under:-

“ Since ‘Lal Dora’ is administered by the Union Territory Administration of Nation
Capital of Territory of Delhi, Legislative Department is unable to answer this but
issue is considered relevant for examination of the present Bill, this can he
examined in consultation with them.”

7.0 The Bill is a Financial Bill as the expenditure for keeping Registry Book in r
Union Territories will be meted out of Consolidated Fund of India and stamp duty
the registration of property situated in the Union Territories would be depo
Consolidated Fund of India.

‘Ld The President, after being informed of the subject matter of the Bill by ti
Law, Justice and Company Affairs has recommended the introduction of the Bill
with clauses (1) and (3) of Article 117 read with clause (1) of Artick ¢

India.

8.0 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting
July, 2001 in the presence of Secretary, Legislative Department and representative of [
of Legal Affairs:

13 Ibid, section-86, (repealed in 1929)



Clause 2

8.1.0 The clause intents to insert 16 A following section 16 in the Registration Act, 1908 for
\eeping the books for maintaining documents of registration as provided in sub-section (1) of
Section 16 of the said Act, in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form in the
manner and subject to the safeguard prescribed by the Inspector General of Registration in the
State

‘8.1.1 The clause was adopted subject to the observations/recommendations of the
Committee in para Nos 6.2.0 to 6.2.3 supra.

Clause 3

8.2.0 The clause seeks to insert sub-section 1(A) after sub-section (a) of section 17 of the
Registration Act, 1908 so as to make contracts for transfer of immovable property under 53 (A)
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, compulsorily registerable after the commencement of
Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2000 and any contract in the nature of
part-performance for transfer of property will not have legal effect under section 53A of Transfer
of Property Act, 1882. Accordingly, it amends clause (v) in sub-section (2) of section 17 of the
Registration Act, 1908.
8.2.1 The clause was adopted without any change.

Clause 4
8.3.0 The clause proposes to omit sub-section (2) of section 30 of the Registration Act; 1908 to
discontinue registration of immovable property located in any part of India, in the Registries of
Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai and Delhi.

8.3.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 5

8.4.0 ‘The clause makes it compulsory for every person presenting any documents relating to
transfer of property at the Registration Office to affix his/her passport size photograph and finger-
prints to the documents of registration.

8.4.1 The clause was adopted subject to the observations/recommendations of the
Committee made in paras 3.0 to 3.2 supra.

Clause 6

8.5.0 The clause amends proviso to section 49 of the Registration Act, 1908 which is required
as a consequence of making contract in the nature of part-performance compulsorily registerable.

8.5.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 7

8.6.0 The clause makes its mandatory for the Registering Officer to endorse photograph and
finger-prints of the person presenting a document of registration in addition to his signature, day,
hour and place of presentation on the documents,

8.6.1 The clause was adopted without any change.

Clause 8

8.7.0. The clause repeals section 67 of the Registration Act, 1908 which is consequential to the
deletion of sub-section (2) of section 30 of the said Act to stop registration of document
pertaining to immovable property located in any part of India, at the Registries of Kolkata,
Mumbai, Chennai and Delhi.



Se

8.7... The clause was adopted without any change.

Clause 9

8.8.0 The clause makes provision for delegation of rule making power in relation to safe
custody and manner of keeping books containing documents of registration in electronic form to
Inspector-General of Registration.

8.8.1 The clause was adopted without any change,
Clause 10

8.9.0 The clause omits certain words in section 53 A of the Transfer of Property Act, [882
make registration of documents in the nature of part-performance compulsory

8.9.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 11

8.10.0 The clause provides exemption on the portion of duty paid in respect of document falling
under article 234 of the Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 as proposed in sub-clause (>
of this clause.

8.10.1 Sub-clause (b) of the clause prescribes percentage of proper stamp duty i.e. ninet
percent of duty on conveyance in the nature of part-performance to be paid

8.10.2. The Secretary, Legislative Department has informed the Committee that the Gover
would move official amendment to the clause to make it applicable for the Union Territories

8.10.3 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 12
8.11.0. The clause contains saving provisions .
8.12.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title

8.13.0) Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes
which are of consequential nature, namely, ‘2000’ and ‘Fifty-first’ to be substituted by
“2001! and ‘Fifty-second’, respectively.

8.14.0 The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating offici
amendments and taking into account its suggestions/recommendations in respect of clauses
2 and 5 of the Bill.



OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE

The Committee appreciates the rationale underlying the mandatory provision of
affixing of photographs and finger-prints on registration documents. The
Committee understands that the requirement of finger-prints is in addition to
signature/thumb impression. The Committee also understands that registration of
documents relating to immovable property takes place either at Registrar Office or
at sub-Registrar Office under whose jurisdiction the property or any portion
thereof is actually situated. The Registrar Office is located at District Headquarters
and sub-Registrar Office mostly at sub-Division of the State. The Committee notes
that it may happen that photographing facility is not available at the village, where
the property is situated but the same is available at the place of registration i.e. sub-
Divisions or District Head-quarters of a State. Therefore, the Committee is of the
view that the difficulties to the compulsory photograph expressed by a State are not
convincing and recommends to the Union Government to go ahead with the
implementation of said provisions of the Bill after its enactment.

(Para 3.0

The Committee while taking cognizance of the suggestion of Orissa Government for
taking photographs and finger-prints of both vendor (seller) and vendee (buyer) on
the registration documents, enquired about existence of any legislation/practice in
any State/Union Territory. The Secretary, Legislative Department had cited the
instance of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi for affixing ef
photographs (not finger-prints) of both seller and buyer on the registration
documents and informed the practice is in vogue in some States/ Union Territories.
The Committee points out that clause 5 of the Bill which intents to insert Section 32
A in the Registration Act, 1908, does not specifically mention about the requirement
of affixing of photographs and finger-prints of both buyer and seller.

(Para 3.1)
The Committee appreciates the compatibility of requirements of both photographs
and finger-prints on the registration documents with the specific purpose to deter
the misuse of immovable property by unscrupulous elements including terrorist
outfits. To achieve that objective in an effective manner, the Committee
recommends to the Government to examine the feasibility of making compulsory for
both seller and buyer to affix their photographs and finger-prints on the documents
of registration relating to immovable property.

(Para 3.2)

The Committee discussed the pros and cons of giving retrospective effect to the
proposed legislation. After deliberating on this aspect, the Committee agreed that it
would be prudent to implement it prospectively.

(Para 4.5.4)
The Committee appreciates the idea of keeping registration records in electronic
orm, in addition to the traditional methods. But the Committee is unhappy with the

sorry state of affairs in most of the registries located at sub-Divisional levels and
feels that there is an utmost need for their proper up-keeping.

(Para 5.2.0)



The Committee understands that the life of floopy, diskette should be taken into
account and necessary care should be taken to transfer the records to other floopy.
diskette well in advance so as to check loss of any information therefrom.

(Para 5.2.1)

? The Committee understands that State Government provides fire-proof boxes to the
office of every Registrar for safe custody of the registration records and the State
Government ensures safe custody of the records in sub-Districts in accordance with
sub-section (3) of Section 16 of the Registration Act, 1908. In that context, the
Committee is also aware of the fact that the transfer of the entries in indexes Nos. I.
वा and III by the sub-Registrar to Registrar is no more in existence.

(Para 5.2.2)

The Committee expresses apprehension about the safety of registry records at the
sub-Registrar Office and recommends that provisions may be made in the Act to
make it mandatory for the States to supply fire-proof boxes to each registration
offices in sub-Districts in that State.

(Para 5.2.3)

The clause was adopted subject to the observations/recommendations of the
Committee in para Nos 6.2.0 to 6.2.3 supra.

(Para 8.1.1)

. The clause was adopted subject to the observations/recommendations of the
Committee made in paras 3.0 to 3.2 supra.

(Para 8.4.1)

Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title

= Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes
which are of consequential nature, namely, ‘2000’ and ‘Fifty-first’ to be substituted

by ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’, respectively.
(Para 8.13.0)

The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating official
amendments and taking into account its suggestions/recommendations in respect of
clauses 2 and 5 of the Bill.

(Para 8.14.0



MINUTES



FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, 8 February 2001 in Committee Room
“A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Pranab Mukherjee—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj

Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
Shri K.M. Saifullah

Shri C.M. Ibrahim

Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
Shri Drupad Borgohain

Shri Kuldip Nayyar
Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
Shri Jayant Bhattacharya

LOK SABHA

Smt. Jayashree Banerjee

Shri Samar Chaudhary

Shri M.O.H. Farook

Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
Shri P.H. Pandian

Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel
Shri Subodh Ray

Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
Shri Anadi Sahu

Shri Manabendra Shah

Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari

Shri Beni Prasad Verma

Vv


SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer

, # . +
3.0. * + .
3 1 * * *
43 # *
4 = * *

* * *

6.0 Before the next witness was heard, the Chairman informed the Members about two Bills
referred to the Committee, namely, the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000 and the
egistration and Other Related (Amendment) Bill, 2000. He also added that the two Bills were
required to be reported during the Budget Session of Parliament. The Chairman was of the view
that while it may not be possible to submit the reports on both the Bills, the Committee should
endeavor to dispose of the Constitution (Ninety —first Amendment) Bill, 2000 during the Budget
Session in view of the urgency to enact the same as the constitutional embargo on undertaking
fresh delimitation of constituencies and State Assemblies would lapse after publication, of results
of the current census. The Committee endorsed the position stated by the Chairman.

ne * *
8... * * *
8.1. * * *
9 * * *
10. * * *
11 * * *
120 * * *
13 * * *
14.0. * के *
14.1. * id
14.2. * * *
43 * * *

*#* Relates to other matters.

16



144 * * #

14.5. * के *

14.6, * * id

15. A verbatim record of proceeding was also kept.

16. The Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again on 9 February 2001.

*** Relates to other matters.

17



XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 12 June, 2001 in Committee Room ‘ Ch.
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1 Shri Pranab Mukherjee—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Sangh Priya Gautam

Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai

Shri K.M. Saifullah

Shri Drupad Borgohain

Shri Kuldip Nayyar

Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta

73 9 ७ # ७००

LOK SABHA

8. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
9, Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary

10. Shri M.O.H. Farook

11 Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav

12. Shri Arun Kumar

13. Shri Ram Nagina,Mishra

14. Shri P.H. Pandian

15; Shri N. Janardhana Reddy

16 Shri Anadi Sahu :
17 Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi

18 Shri Manabendra Shah

19 Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya

20. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh

21 Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari

22. Shri E. Ponnuswamy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director

Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer



WITNESSES

Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
(Legislative Department)

Dr. Subash.C. Jain, Secretary
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel

2. bi * *
2.1 ba it *
22 The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Legislative Department and his colleagues

The Chairman made general observations on the circumstances which the necessitated the
introduction of the Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000. Thereafier. he
requested the Secretary to make brief presentation on the subject matter of the Bill

3. The Secretary, Legislative Department thanked the Chairman for giving him the
Opportunity to appear before the Committee. He stated that the substantive provisions of the
Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000 were contained in clauses 2,3,4.5
and 11 of the Bill. The subject matter of the Bill mainly related to Entries 6 and 44, respectively,
of the Concurrent List of the VII Schedule to the Constitution, namely, transfer of property, other
than agricultural land, registration of deeds and documents and stamp duties, other than, duties or
fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty.

3.1.0 The Secretary, Legislative Department then explained some of the important clauses.

3.1.1 He stated that Clause 2 of the Bill sought to insert new section 16A in the Registration
Act,.1908 for the purpose of making an enabling provision for computerization of the records in
the registration offices of the States and Union Territories,

3.1.2 The Secretary, Legislative Department informed the Committee that Clause 3 sought to
insert new sub-section (1A)in Section 17 of the Registration Act to prevent loss of revenue to the
State Governments and the Union Territories by making certain documents i.e agreement of sale,
general power of attorney and other documents, falling under section 53A of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 compulsorily register able. Loss of revenue was more acute in Delhi as
immovable properties were being sold by general power of attorney since the implementation of
the Delhi Land (Registrations on Tfansfer) Act, 1972 which was meant for planned development
of Delhi. He informed that some States such as Gujarat and Rajasthan had already amended
section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, to achieve this objective.

3.1.3. In respect of Clause 4, the Secretary, Legislative Department mentioned that the
provision in sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the Registration Act enabling the Registrars in
Presidency towns and in Delhi to register documents in respect of immovable property located in
any part of India resulted in loss of revenue to the States outside these territories, and to same was
proposed to be deleted, which had been unequivocally supported in the Conference of Chief
Ministers/Finance Ministers, and by the Controller and Auditor General of India. Many States
had already deleted this sub-section. However, the Secretary stated, such a deletion was unlikely
to be effective unless sub-section (2) was also deleted in Presidency Towns and Delhi.

*** Relates to other matters.


+ The Secretary, Legislative Department informed the Committee that affixing of passport
size photographs and fingerprints on the documents presented for registration under section 32, of
the F ation Act, 1908 as proposed in Clause 5, may not only prevent benami transactions by
terrorist outfits but would also curb fraudulent transactions.

3.1.5 He further explained that clauses 6,7,8 and 9 were of consequential nature and were
intended to give effect to the provisions already mentioned. Clause 10 of the Bill which sought to
amend section 533 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 was necessary to give effect to the
proposed insertion of sub-section (1A) in section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908.

3.1.6 As regards clause 11, he informed the Committee that an amendment inter-alia was
110 Schedule I to the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 by insertion of Clause (9) in Article No.23.
her explained that the purpose of insertion of this clause was to provide for exemption of
on of duty paid in respect of a document falling under Article No.23A which was proposed
e newly inserted in the Bill so that while calculating the duty payable in respect of a
covresponding document relating to the completion of the transaction under the article, the duty
paid would be excluded.

propo

4.0 The Chairman raised a question about the Presidency towns. He pointed out that in 1908,
when the Registration Act was enacted, the capital was not transferred from Calcutta to Delhi. At
that point of time, there were three Presidency towns namely Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. He
wanted to know how Delhi was included in the Act of 1908, when it was not even the Capital of
our country at that time.

4.1 Speaking on the Bill, the Chairman said that one of the basic objectives of the Bill was to
censure that the States were not denied the revenues which were due to them. He also stated that
at some point of time, it was suggested that those documents, which were to be made
compulsorily registered under the new provisions of the Bill, in relation to Section 53A of the
Transfer of Property Act, should be given retrospective effect, wherein as per the present Bill it
would be done prospectively. The Chairman wanted to know the problem in implementing this
provision retrospectively by giving a cut-off date.

4.2 The Chairman also asked when some of the States, namely, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra.
Pradesh had already deleted sub-section 2 of Section 30, of the Registration Act why other States
had not yet done it, especially when they had the power to do so as the matter fell in the
Concurrent List. He further asked the Ministry that if the compulsory registration of documents
was made effective from a cut-off date, say, 1972, what would be the estimated accrual of
revenue if it were to be made effective prospectively then what would be the of revenue.

5 Members of the Committee raised the following questions on the Bill:

(8) Why the West Bengal Government was objecting to the provision of compulsory
affixing of photographs and fingerprints of sellers/buyers?

(0) What was the logic behind allowing the registration of land in any part of the
country, in Presidency towns and in Delhi? What would be the implication after
deleting this provision?

(०) Whether the amendment of the Stamp Act was within the powers of the
Parliament? If not, then would it be proper to club it with the present Bill?

(d) Was the Government confident to curb the illegal and benami transfers by
setting this Bill passed ? How were the terrorists or anti-social elements
misusing the present provisions? How would this law completely stop such
misuse?

20



6. The Secretary, Legislative Department sought the permission of the Committee to send
written replies to various questions raised by the Chairman and Members as those were quite
comprehensive, alongwith replies to the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat.

6.1 The Committee granted permission to the Secretary to send written response.
(The witnesses then withdrew)

7. The Committee then decided to hear the views of the Chief Secretary, Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi and Secretary, Department of Urban Development, Union
Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation on the Bill. The Committee authorized
its Chairman to request Hon’ble Chairman to give permission to it to hear to Chief Secretary.

NCT.

8. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 13 June,
2001.

21


Xx E
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 27 June, 2001 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1 Shri Pranab Mukherjee—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
Shri Hiphei

Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
Shri C.M. Ibrahim

Shri Drupad Borgohain
Shri Kuldip Nayyar

Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya

Ren

SrA ७ ७

LOK SABHA

9 Shri Samar Chaudhary
10 Shri M.O.H. Farook

11. Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav

12. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra

13 Shri Subodh Ray

14. Shri Anadi Sahu

15. Shri Manabendra Shah

16 Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma :
Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh

18 Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari

19 Shri E. Ponnuswamy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES

Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation
(Department of Urban Development)

Shri K. Kosal Ram, Secretary
Shri P.K. Hota, Vice-Chairman, Delhi Development Authority
Shri P.K. Pradhan, Joint Secretary



Representatives of the Government of National Capital Territory (NCT ) of Delhi

Shri P.S. Bhatnagar, Chief Secretary
Shri Ramesh Chandra, Pr. Secretary (Finance)
Shri G.S. Patnaik, Div. Commissioner

2 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department of Urban
Development (Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation) to the meeting and
thereafter broached the subject matter of the Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2000. The Chairman pointed out that as per the provisions of the Bill, all documents relating
to transfer of property should be registered compulsorily. He referred that at one point of time it
was thought that the compulsory registration would have retrospective effect and a cut-off year
was also suggested but later on the Government changed its views and decided to give the
legislation prospective effect. The Chairman wanted to know whether there were any specific
advantages in implementing the provision from a cut-off date or it would be more
convenient in applying it prospectively. The Chairman stressed that the Committee would like
to know the amount of revenue involved in giving the legislation retrospective effect. Thereafter,
he requested the Secretary, Urban Development to make his presentation on the provisions of the
Bill including the points referred to by him.

3.0 The Secretary, Department of Urban Development before making general observations
about the various provisions of the Bill appreciated the initiatives taken by the Andhra Pradesh
Government towards computerization which included providing computers, scanners alongwith
software to every registration office, by a way of making reference to the Andhra Pradesh
Registration Act, which was in his opinion was very comprehensive.

Bul The Secretary, Department of Urban Development welcomed the amendments laid down
in the Bill relating to photographs and fingerprints, but he was little apprehensive whether it
would be practicable to insist on compulsory photographing especially in rural areas. However,
he stressed on lamination of photographs for its proper preservation. He pointed out that there
was no uniformity in the size of photographs and urged that the size of the photographs may be
prescribed. Then he stressed on the preservation of records relating to registration and mutation
which included the enforcement of contract for sale and thereby related to maintenance of law
and order, which was essentially prime concern of the State. He requested to make registration of
previous documents compulsory to trace the past records of lands changing hands but the stamp
duty to be levied or relaxed might be left to the concerned State Government.

a2) The Secretary informed the Committee that for conversion purposes, the Delhi
Development Authority was insisting on compulsory registration of documents. Similarly, the
Land and Development Department had also made the registration compulsory for mutation.

3.3. Ona query as to how much the Delhi Development Authority has lost revenue because of
the present law, where registration of documents was not compulsory, the Secretary gave an
estimate of Rs.57.6 crores (cumulative from the cut-off date i.e. 1972) which was related to
constructed flats only. The Delhi Development Authority representative clarified that flats are
only one type of property. There are many other types of property created — by the Delhi
Development Authority. He stated that it was difficult to compute revenue the losses on those
properties as it was not only the loss of stamp duty only, but also loss of other revenues like
unearned income, which a legitimate transactor paid to various authorities.

23


4.0 The Chairman wanted to know the comments of the Secretary, Urban Development as to
what should be the rate of stamp duty? Whether it should be a uniform rate all over the country
or it should be left to the State concerned. Secondly, whether this law could be given
retrospective effect from the cut-off date i.e. 1972 - when the Delhi Land (Restrictions on
Transfer) Act came in to force.

4.1 The Committee appreciated the spirit under the Bill and felt that it would bring a lot of
revenue to the State Governments as well as give clear title to property holders who otherwise did
not have any title rights because the General Power of Attorney and the Special Power of
Attorney did not confer the title of the property on the buyer.

4.2 The Committee was of the opinion that it was difficult to implement certain provisions of
this Bill in retrospective effect as it would lead to administrative complications.

4.3 Some members in the meeting raised a point regarding the Muslim Personal Law,
according to which, if a gift is given by way of ‘hiba’, it can be transferred, but no registration is
required. They wanted to know whether passage of the Bill would affect the above provision in
the Muslim Personal Law. On this issue, the Chairman suggested that the matter may be referred
to the Law Ministry for clarification. Other Members raised the following points:-

(i) effect of the Bill on the prevention of benami transaction;
(ii) requirement of thumb impression/finger prints for the literates; and
(ili) effect of the law on the land under Lal Dora.

(The witnesses then withdrew)

5.0 The Chairman welcomed the Chief Secretary, Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi to the meeting. Giving a brief outline of the subject, he requested the Chief Secretary to
make general observations first and any other specific point which he wanted to bring to the
notice of the Committee in regard to the provisions of the Bill.

6.0 The Chief Secretary termed the introduction of the Bill as a welcome step and he
informed the Committee that some of the provisions mentioned in the Bill, have already been
initiated by Delhi Government, viz. computerization, affixing of photographs of buyers and
sellers etc.

7.0 The Committee wanted to know from the Chief Secretary whether by affixing the
photographs and fingerprints, it is possible to identify the real owner of the property and for
keeping an eye on the terrorists and extremists who are converting their black money into real
estates. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the quantum of revenue to be accrued to
the Delhi Government in the event of the enactment of this law.

Al The Committee was of the view that even if the terrorists use a cover to effect
transactions in real estate, the cover will be real owner of the land and it will be deterrent, in case
the cover changes his mind.

7.2 A member raised the issue of explosion of unauthorized colony in the Delhi and effect of
the legislation on the same.

8. The Chairman sought written comments of the Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi within seven days.

ay



(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

10. The Committee adjourned at 12.40 P.M. to meet again on 9 July 2001 at 3 P.M

2s



XXIV
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 9 July, 2001 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Pranab Mukherjee—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2 Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj

3 Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
4, Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
5 Shri Drupad Borgohain

6 Shri Kuldip Nayyar

7 Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya

LOK SABHA

8 Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee

9. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary

10. Shri M.O.H. Farook

11. Shri Vijay Goel

12 Shri Arun Kumar

13 Shri Ram Nagina Mishra

14 Shri P.H. Pandian

TS: Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel :
i Shri Subodh Ray a
17, Shri Anadi Sahu 4
18. Shri Manabendra Shah

19. Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma

20. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh

21. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari

22 Shri Harin Pathak

23. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director

Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer

Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer

26 '



WITNESSES

Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
Legislative Department

Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel

Department of Legal Affairs

Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary

2.0 The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and also the
representatives of the Ministry of the Law, Justice and Company Affairs.

2A The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Registration and Other
Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000.

Clause 2

3.0 The clause intended to insert new Section 16A after section 16 in the Registration Act,
1908 for keeping the. books for maintaining documents of registration as provided in sub-section
(1) of Section 16 of the said Act, in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form
in the manner and subject to the safeguards prescribed by the Inspector General of Registration
in the State.

3.1 The Committee appreciated the idea of keeping registration records in electronic form, in
addition to the traditional methods. But the Committee was unhappy with the sorry state of
affairs in most of the registries located at Sub-Divisional levels and felt that there was an utmost
need for their proper up-keeping.

3.2 The Committee was given to understand that the life of floopy, diskette should be taken
into account and necessary care should be taken to transfer the records to other floopy, diskette
well in advance so as to check loss of data therefrom.

3.3. The Committee was further given to understand that State Governments provided fire-proof

boxes to the office of every Registrar for safe custody of the registration records and the State
Government ensured safe custody of the records in sub-Districts in accordance with sub-section
(3) of Section 16 of the Registration Act, 1908. In that context, the Committee was also aware of
the fact that the transfer of the entries in indexes Nos. I, II and III by the sub-Registrar to
Registrar was no more in existence.

3.4 The Committee expressed apprehension about the safety of registry records at the sub-
Registrar Office and recommended that provisions may be made in the Act to make it mandatory
for the States to supply fireproof boxes to each registration offices in sub-Districts in that State

35 The Committee adopted the clause subject to its observations/recommendations above.

Clauses 3 and 4

4.0 The Committee adopted clauses 3 and 4 without any change.

27


Clause §

5.0 The clause made it compulsory for every person presenting any documents relating to
transfer of property at the Registration Office to affix his/her passport size photograph and finger-
prints to the documents of registration.

5.1 The Committee appreciated the rationale underlying the mandatory provision of affixing
of photographs and finger-prints on registration documents. The Committee was given to
understand that the requirement of finger-prints was in addition to signature/thumb impression.
The Committee also understood that registration of documents relating to immovable property
took place either at Registrar Office or at sub-Registrar Office under whose jurisdiction the
property or any portion thereof was actually situated. The Registrar Office was located at District
Headquarters and sub-Registrar Office mostly at sub-Division of the State. The Committee noted
that it may happen that photographing facility was not available at the village, where the property
was situated but the same was available at the place of registration i.e. sub-Divisions or District
Head-quarters of a State. Therefore, the Committee was of the view that the difficulties to the
compulsory photograph expressed by a State were not convincing and recommended to the
Union Government to go ahead with the implementation of said provisions of the Bill after its
enactment.

5.2 The Committee while taking cognizance of the suggestion of Orissa Government for
taking photographs and finger-prints of both vendor (seller) and vendee (buyer) on the
registration documents, enquired about existence of any legislation/practice in any State/Union
Territory. The Secretary, Legislative Department had cited the instance of Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi for affixing of photographs (not finger-prints) of both seller
and buyer on the registration documents and informed the practice was in vogue in some States/
Union Territories. The Committee pointed out that clause 5 of the Bill which intended to insert
Section 32A in the Registration Act, 1908, did not specifically mention about the requirement of
affixing of photographs and finger-prints of both buyer and seller.

53 The Committee appreciated the compatibility of requirements of both photographs and
finger-prints on the registration documents with the specific purpose to deter the misuse of
immovable property by unscrupulous elements including terrorist outfits. To achieve that
objective in an effective manner, the Committee recommended to the Government to examine
the feasibility of making compulsory for both seller and buyer to affix their photographs and
finger-prints on the documents of registration relating to immovable property.

5.4 The Committee adopted the clause subject to the observations/recommendations above.
Clauses 6 to 10
6.0 The Committet adopted clauses 6 to 10 without any change.

Clause 11

7.0 The clause provided exemption on the portion of duty paid in respect of document
falling under article 23A of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, as proposed in sub-clause
(b) of this clause.

हक | Sub-clause (b) of the clause prescribed percentage of proper stamp duty i.e. ninety
percent of duty on conveyance in the nature of part-performance to be paid.

28



712 The Secretary, Legislative Department informed the Committee that the Government
would move official amendment to the clause to make it applicable for the Union Territories only

73 The Committee adopted the clause subject to the abuve.

Clause 12

8.0 The Committee adopted clause 12 without any change.

Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title

9.0 The Committee adopted Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title with
changes which are of consequential nature, namely, ‘2000’ and ‘Fifty-first’ to be substitute
‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’, respectively.

10.0 The meeting adjourned at 3.45 P.M.

24



XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thuesday, 31 July, 2001 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
2: Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
4. Dr. L.M. Singhvi

LOK SABHA

3) Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee

6 Shri M.O.H. Farook

4 Shri P.H. Pandian

8. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
9 Shri Subodh Ray

10. Shri Anadi Sahu

11. Shri Manabendra Shah

12. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi

13, Shri E. Ponnuswamy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director

Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer

2 The Committee took up consideration of its draft Seventy-ninth Report on the
Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000 and adopted the same with certain
modifications

3. The Committee thereafter, decided to presenv/lay the Report in the Rajya Sabha/Lok
Sabha in the ensuing Monsoon session on 7 August 2001

3.1 The Committee further decided that the Evidence recorded on the Bill may also be laid
on the Table of both the Houses along with the Report.

3.2 The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj to
present/lay the Report and the Evidence in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Jayeshree Banerjee and
in his absence Shri P.H. Pandian to lay the Report and Evidence in the Lok Sabha.

4 The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M.

30



ANNEXURE



ANNEXURE -।

(See para 1, page no. 1 of the Report)

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 182 of 2000

THE REGISTRATION AND OTHER RELATED LAWS
(AMENDMENT)BILL,2000

A
BILL

further to amend the Registration Act, 1908, the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the Indian
Stamp Act, 1899.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. This Act may be called the Registration and Other Related La short title
(Amendment) Act, 2000.

CHAPTER II
AMENDMENT OF THE REGISTRATION ACT, 1908

16 of 1908. 2. In the Registration Act, 1908 (hereafter in this Chapter referred __ Insertion of
to as the Registration Act), after section 16, the following section 2° section
shall be inserted, namely:- ness
"16A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16, the Keeping of
books provided under sub-section (1) of that section may also be >20ks "
kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other fate J and
electronic form in the manner and subject to the safeguards as diskettes, etc
may be prescribed by the Inspector-General with the sanction
of the State Government.

32)


Amendment
of section
30
Insertion of
new section
32A

Amendment
of section
49.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for
the time beingin _ force, a copy or extracts from the books kept under sub-
section (1) given by the registering officer under his hand and seal shall be
deemed to be a copy given under section 57 for the purposes of sub-section
(5) of that section.".

3. In section 17 of the Registration Act,-

(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(] 8) The documents containing contracts to transfer for consideration, any
immovable property for — the purpose of section 53A of the Transfer of Pr:
1882 shall be registered if they have been executed on or after the
commencement of the Registration and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2000 andifsuch documents are not registered on
or after such commencement, then, they shall have no effect

for the purposes of the said section 538."

(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (५), for the opening words "any document”,
the words, brackets, figure and letter "any document other than the documents
specified in sub-section (1A)" shall be substituted.

4, In section 30 of the Registration Act, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.

5. After section 32 of the Registration Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:-

"3A. Every person presenting any document at the proper registration-
office under section 32 shall affix his passport size photograph and
fingerprints to the document."

6. In section 49 of the Registration Act, in the proviso, the words, figures
and letter “ or as evidence of part performance of a contract for the
purposes of section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882," shall be
omitted

7. In section 52 of the Registration Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), after
the words "and place of presentation", the words, figures and letter “th
photograph and finger prints affixed under section 32A"

shall be inserted.

40 of 188

4 of 1882



8. Section 67 of the Registration Act shall be omitted.

9. In section 69 of the Registration Act, in sub-section (1), after
clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(aa) providing the manner in which and the safeguards subject to which
the books may be kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other
electronic form under sub-section (1) of section 16A;".

CHAPTER वा

AMENDMENT OF THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT,

10, In section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the words "the con
though required to be registered, has not been registered,
or," shall be omitted.

CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENT OF THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899

11. In Schedule I to the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, -

(a) under column heading “Description of Instrument”, in article No. 23,
in Exemption the portion beginning with the words“Assignment of
Copyright” and ending with t he word and figure “section 5” shall be
numbered as clause (a) thereof, and after clause (a) as so numbered,

the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

(b) for the purpose of this article, the portion of duty paid in respect of a
document falling under article No. 23A shall be excluded while
computing the duty payable in respect of a corresponding document
relating to the completion of the transaction under this article.";

(b) after article No. 23 and ___ the entries relating thereto, the
following article No. and the entries shall be inserted, namely:-

35

Omission of
section 67,

Amendment of
section 69.

1882

Amendment of
section 53A of A
4 of 1882.

Amendment of
Schedule lof Aci
2 of 1899.


Descri pt ion ofInstrument.—~—~—~S*”:S@Prcoper Stamp-duty 7 Proper Stamp-duty

छठ, CONVEYANCE IN THE NATURE OF PART Ninety per cent.
Contracts for the transfer of of the duty as

PERFORMANCE
immovable property in the nature of part performance a Conveyance
under section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. (No. 23).". 4 of 1882

12. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 6 and 10, any-

(a) right of a transfer or any person claiming under him debarred under section 4 of 1882
53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall remain so debarred as if section 10 had not come into force in respect of

such right; and

(b) unregistered document relating to the right referred to in clause (a) may be 4 of 1882
received as evidence of part performance of a contract for the purposes of section 53A
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 as if section 6 had not come into force in respect

of such document



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Registration Act, 1908 was enacted to consolidate the law relating to the regis-
tration of documents. The Conference of Chief Ministers and Finance Ministers of States and
Union territories convened by the Union Finance Minister held on the 14th September, 1998 at
New Delhi, inter alia, arrived at the following conclusions, namely:-

(i) sub-section (2) of section 30 of the Registration Act, 1908 should be repealed;
(ii) registration of general power of attorney which is in the nature of a contract to sell
immovable property be made compulsory and consequential amendments be made in the

Registration Act, 1908, the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the Indian Stamp Act, 1899:

(iii) to make affixing of the photograph and finger prints of the executants compulsory at
the time of registration of documents;

(iv) to make an enabling provision for computerisation of registration records.
2. Based on the above conclusions arrived at the said Conference, it is proposed-

(i) to insert a new sub-section (1A) in section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 for
making registration of the documents containing contracts to transfer for consideration
any immovable property compulsory for the purpose of section 53A of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 and for consequential amendments in section 56 of the said Act,
section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and Schedule I to the Stamp Act, 1899;

(ii) to omit sub-section (2) of section 30 and section 67 of the Registration Act, 1908;

(iii) to insert new section 16A in the Registration Act, 1908 to enable the State
Governments to computerise registration records;

(iv) to insert new section 32A to make affixing of the photographs and finger-prints on
the documents compulsory at the time of registration

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

NEW DELHI;
The 10th November, 2000. ARUN JAITLEY

37


PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No. 10/3/98.Leg. III dated the 22nd November, 2000 from Shri Arun Jaitley,
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Bill,
recommends under clauses (1) and (3)'of article | 17, read with clause (1) of article 274, of the
Constitution of India, the introduction of the Registration and other Related Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2000 to Lok Sabha and also recommends to Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert section 16A in the Registration Act, 1908
Sub-section (1) of the said section 16A provides for keeping the books in computer
floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form. It is envisaged that the expenditure
for keeping the books shall be borne by the concerned State Governments. In the case of
Union territories, this may increase the expenditure of the Government of India if the
same is not borne by them out of the budgetary fund already allocated to them. It is not
possible at this stage to estimate the recurring or non-recurring expenditure to be incurred
in this regard.

34


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (aa) in sub-section (1) of section 3
69 of the Registration Act, 1908 which empowers the Inspector-General, with the है
sanction of the State Government, to make rules providing for the manner in which and ¥
the safeguards subject to which the books may be kept in computer floppies or diskettes 4
or in any other electronic form under sub-section (1) of section 16A of the said Act, 4
which are matters of detail and technical in nature. 4

2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

4O



1882.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE REGISTRATION ACT, 1908

(16 OF 1908)
* * * *
PART IIL
OF REGISTRABLE DOCUMENTS
17. 6) * # *

(2) Nothing in clause (b) and (c) Of Sub-Section (1) applies to-
* *

*

(v) any document not itself — creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or
e:“inguishing any right, title or interest of the value of one hundred rupees and
upwards to or in immovable property, but merely creating a right 10 obtain

another document which will, when executed, create, declare, assign limit or
éxtinguish any such right, title or interest; or

* * * *
30. (1) * * *

(2)'The Registrar of a district in which a presidency-town in included and the
Registrar of the Delhi district may receive and register any document referred to
in section 22 without regard to the situation in any part of India of the property to

which the document in certain relates.
* * * *

49. No document required by section 17 for by any provision of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882, to be registered shall-

(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or

(b) confer any power to adopt, or

(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting, such property or conferring
such power, unless it has been registered:

Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable property and required
by this Act or the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, to be registered may be received as
evidence of a contract ina suit for specific performance under Chapter 11 of the
Specific Relief Act, 1877, or as evidence of part performance of a contract for the
purposes of Section 534 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or as evidence of any

collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered instrument.

4

Documents of
which
registration is
compulsory

Registra-
tion by
Registrars
cases

Effect of non-
registration of
documents



Duties of
registering

52. (1) (a)The day, hour and place _ of presentation, and the signature of every person
piesenting a document for registration, shall be endorsed on every such document at the

officers when time of presenting it;

document
presented

wre

Section 30

Sub-section

(2)

Power of
Inspector-

General to

* * * *
67. On any document being registered under section 30, sub-section (2), a copy of
under such document and of the endorsements and certificate thereon shall be forwarded to
every Registrar Registrar within whose district any part of the property to which_ the
instrument relates is situated, and the Registrar receiving such copy shall follow the
procedure prescribed for him in section 66, sub-section (1).

* * * *

69, (1) The Inspector-General shall exercise a general superintendence over all the
registration-offices in the territories under the State Government, and _ shall have power
from time to time to make rules consistent with this Act- 1

EXTRACT FROM THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882

(4 OF 1882)
*

* *

53A. Where any person contracts to transfer for consideration any immovable pro-
perty by writing signed by him or on his behalf from which the terms necessary to consti- :
tute the transfer’ can be ascertained with reasonable certainty,

and the transferee has, in part performance of the contract, taken possession of the
y or any part thereof, or the transferee, being already in possession, continues io 4

1, notwithstanding that the contract, though required to be registered, has not
stered, or, where there is an instrument of transfer, that the transfer has not bees
16 manner prescribed there ur by the law for the time being in force, th
¢ny person claiming under him shall be debarred from enforcing against
26 and persons claiming under him any right in respect of the property of which
s taken or continued in possession, other than a right expressly provided >»

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the rights of a transferee for consi<
10 has not notice of the contract or of the part performance thereof,

tion who



EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899

(2 OF 1899)
* * * *
SCHEDULE |
STAMP-DUTY ON INSTRUMENTS
(See Section 3)
* * * *
Description of Instrument Proper stamp-duty

23, CONVEYANCE [as defined by section 2(10)] not
Being a Transfer charged or exempted under No.62,-

where the amount or value of the consideration for

such conveyance as set forth therein does not exceed Eight annas.

Rs.50.

Where it exceeds Rs.50 but does not exceed Rs.100 One rupee
Ditto 100 ditto 200 Two rupees.
Ditto 200 ditto 300 Three rupees
Ditto 300 ditto 400 Four rupees
Ditto 400 ditto 500 Five rupees
Ditto 500 ditto 600 Six rupees
Ditto 600 ditto 700 Seven rupees
Ditto 700 ditto 800 Eight rupees
Ditto 800 ditto 900 Nine rupees
Ditto 900 ditto 1,000 Ten rupees
and for every Rs.500 or part thereof in excess of Rs.1,000. Five rupees

Exemption

Assignment of copyright by entry made under the
Indian Copyright Act, 1847, section 5.

CO-PARNERSHIP-DEED. See Partnership (NO 46)-

43


oy

LOK SABHA

A. %

BILL

further to amend the Registration Act, 1908, the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 and the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.

(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)



ANNEXURE -II

(See para 2.5.2, page no. 2 of the Report)

COMMENTS OF STATES AND UTs ON THE PROPOSAL FOR THE AMENDMENT
OF SECTION 30(2) OF THE REGISTRATION ACT, 1908 AND AFFIXING OF
PHOTOGRAPHS OF EXECUTANT AND FINGERPRINT ON DOCUMENTS

S.No. Name of the State

I Orissa

2. Mizoram
3; Punjab
4. Tripura
5. Bihar

6. Sikkim

7. Meghalaya

8. West Bengal

9; Uttar Pradesh

Comments

Agrees with the proposal. However, affixing of photograph of
both vendor and vendee may be made obligatory in the
amendment.

Endorses the views of the Government of India.
Concurs in the proposal.
Agrees with the proposal
Agrees with the proposal

No comments as the Registration Act, 1908 has
not been extended to the State.

Agrees with the deletion of section 30(2) of the Act. As regards
other proposals if implemented will give rise to complications.
People in villages may find it difficult to get themselves
photographed for the purpose of executing a deed. The existing
practice that the Registrar should satisfy himself about the
identity of persons executing a document should be enough.

Agrees with the deletion of section 30(2) of the Act. Non in
agreement with the proposal of affixing photographs of
executants and fingerprints as the same will make the
registration process more difficult.

Agrees with the deletion of section 30(2) of the Act. However,
the Registration may be done at the Office of Sub-Registrar
where half or more than half of immovable property is situated;
amendment of section 28 of the Act may be undertaken for this
purpose. No objection to affixing of photographs. The State
Government may be authorized to make rules in this regard. If
the transaction is through Urban Development Authority,
Government Corporation, etc., then affixing of photographs
should not be mandatory. In UP, provision is there for taking



S.No. Name of the State Comments
thumb impression of the executants. The Central Government
may also utilize the voters Identity Cards for this purpose.

10. Lakshadweep Agrees with the proposal for deletion of section 30(2) and taking रु
finger prints of executants. Affixing of photographs will create :
problems for local people due to lack of facilities and certain
limitations. Hence, the suggestion is not acceptable.

1. Daman & Diu Agrees. q

12 Dadra & Nagar Haveli Agrees.

13: Haryana has already amended Sec. 30(2) of the Act and no instructions
regarding finger prints.

14 Himachal Pradesh Agrees with the proposal.

46



ANNEXTURE - Ill

(See para 2.6.0, page 2 of the Reoport)

MINUTES OF THE CONFERENCE OF
THE CHIEF MINISTERS/FINANCE MINISTERS OF STATES AND UTs
HELD ON 14.09.1998 AT VIGYAN BHAWAN

The Conference of the Chief Minister/Finance Ministers of States and Union Territories
convened by the Union Finance Minister was held on 14th September, 1998 at New Delhi. Chief
Ministers of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Orissa, Meghalaya, Manipur and
Nagaland, Deputy Chief Ministers of Rajasthan and Karnataka and Finance Ministers of other
States and UTs attended. The conference was also attended by Minister of State for Finance Shri
K.M.R. Janarthanan, Prof. Raja J. Chelliah and senior officers of the Union Government, States
and Union Territories.

2 Minister of State for Finance delivered his welcome address to the delegates Finance
Minister of India delivered his inaugural address. Subseqeuntly, the Special Secretary (Banking)
introduced the subject of NBFCs and Secretary (Revenue) introduced the agenda items relating to
the revenue department.

PHASING OUT OF CST AND STAGE OF INTRODUCTION OF VAT BY STATE
GOVERNMENT.

| State Governments expressed varying points of view on introduction of VAT. While
most of the States favoured the introduction VAT simultaneously, some states wanted a cautious
approach. Chief Minister of Orissa suggested that a clear view and an in-depth examination of
all pros and cons of introduction of VAT in the whole country needs to be deliberated. He
pointed out that any hasty introduction of VAT may lead to regressive taxation and loss of
revenue to the States. Dy. Chief Minister of Rajasthan requested Union Govt. to assure the states
that the Union Government will step-in, in case of any loss of revenue to the States.in the event of
introduction of VAT. Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh and Finance Ministers of Karnataka and
Rajasthan suggested that preliminary steps to create an atmosphere conducive to introduction of
VAT must be taken by all the State Govts. Rationalization of tax structure and reduction in input
tax is a pre-requisite. It was generally agreed that phased introduction of VAT should be
simultaneous in all the States at least in a zone.

4. There was total agreement that there was a need for training, dissemination of
information on VAT to officials, traders, dealers and the public at large. Methods and procedures
of VAT and strategies for preventing tax evasion should be part of the training. Computerization
of tax departments and modernization of information system in tax administration is very
important. Union Finance Minister agreed to the views expressed by the States and assured that
the Centre would do its bit in supporting the states in their training programme. A method to
compensate the States in case of loss of revenue during the transition period will also be worked

out.
PHASED REDUCTION IN CST
Sy A large number of States were agreeable to the reduction of rates of CST in a phased

manner However, Chief Minister of Orissa, Haryana and West Bengal expressed their

47


reservations as reduction in CST would lead to loss of revenue. A method must be found for
compensating the States if CST has to be reduced and subsequently abolished,

FIXING OF UNIFORM FLOOR RATES

6 Many State Governments suggested that the Union Govt. may fix uniform floor rates for
all the commodities similar to the tax rates fixed for “declared goods”. Chief Minister of West
Bengal suggested that the States in the North Zone at least may take the lead by agreeing to floor
Fates on major items. While Finance Ministers of Assam and Karnataka informed that they had
taken steps to rationalize the tax structure in their States, the neighboring States must also take
initiatives for harmonization and rationalization of taxes. It was generally agreed that the band of
rates suggested by the Committee of State Finance Ministers on Sales Tax reforms should be
accepted

7 All the State Governments recognized the danger to trade and commerce as a result of the
rate wars between States. Chief Minister of West Bengal pointed out that there is an urgent need
that sales tax rates in all the states should gravitate towards these floor rates for a stable economic
environment.

TAX INCENTITIVES

8 Most of the Chief Ministers and Finance Ministers of the States agreed with the views
expressed that competition between States to offer tax incentives to industries has led to 2
shrinking in the revenue base of the States. It is also leading to lopsided industrial development
in the country, revenue leakages and industrial indiscipline. A consensus emerged that the States
should gradually reduce these incentives so that additional resources generated may be invested
in development of infrastructure. Chief Minister of Haryana informed the House that the State
was taking a lead in reduction of ad hoc incentives to industry. Chief Minister of West Benga!
appealed for ending this unproductive and self defeating competition amongst the States and
wanted that all the States may discontinue these schemes at least from 1.4.99. However, Chief
Minister of Nagaland was of the view that for promoting industrial development, some incentives
are required in the North-Eastern States. Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh was also of the view
that since the State is land locked, some incentives have to be offered to attract industry. Chief
Minister of Orissa and Finance Minister of Gujarat were in favour of a nationally accepted tax
policy on industrial incentives.

ABORGATION OF TAX RENTAL ARRANGEMENT FOR SUGAR, TOBBACCO AND
TEXTILE.

9. Most of the States desired that additional excise duty on these three items must be
scrapped. West Bengal, Assam, Kerala and Karnataka emphasized that these three items should
be removed from the list of declared goods and the States must be allowed to tax them to
augment their revenue base. They also suggested’ that once floor rates are agreed between the
States, the restriction imposed by Section 15 of the CST Act should be removed and States
allowed to tax the declared goods. They also suggested that the definition of dealer should also
include works contract, lessors and transaction under hire purchase scheme. The Finance
Minister of Gujarat suggested that high sea sales should be allowed to be taxed by the State
Govts. Section 8(5) included in the CST Act, 1956 should be deleted as it is leading to trade
diversion. Finance Minister of Kerala complained about bogus booking of goods by Railways
leading to tax evasion and requested the Union Govt. to take steps to limit such bogus booking of
goods by Railways. There was a general consensus that the Centre should set up a fund to

48



counter any possible revenue loss to the States owing to reduction in CST rates, introduction of
floor rates and introduction of VAT. They also suggested that unregistered dealers should also be
taxed in inter-State sales to augment resources of the States. They also wanted the simplification
of Tax Laws to facilitate the State Governments in taxing selected services. This would offset
any revenue loss that the State may incur due to tax rationalization.

10. There was a general demand from the States for introduction of consignment tax.
However, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, J & K and some North Eastern States were of the
view that the introduction of the consignment tax will benefit only the developed States at the
cost of the developing States. Since there was no general agreement regarding consignment tax,
discussion was p9ostponed for the next conference.

ll. All the State Govts. Agreed that computerization of sales tax administration should be the
national goal and it is absolutely essential to prescribe standard in the areas of data definition,
allotment of identification numbers to the dealers and establishment of a system for exchange of
data between the States.

STAMP DUTY REFORMS

2s Chief Ministers/Finance Ministers of States and UTs, in general welcomed the
recommendation contained in the report of the Committee of State Finance Ministers on Stamp
Duty Reforms. Many State Governments informed that a number of recommendations of the
Committee have already been implemented in their respective States. The Chief Minster of
Haryana was, however, not in favour of reduction in Stamp Duty rates as it would adversely
affect the resource mobilization of States. He informed that in Haryana, nearly 90 per cent of the
revenue comes from Stamp Duty on conveyance instruments. The Finance Minister of Bihar was
also not in favour of uniform rates although he agreed that the rate of Stamp duty should be more
on larger property and there should be a slab system of Stamp Duty rates.

13; Most of the State Governments agreed to the widening of definition of “conveyance” to
cover transfer on power of attorney and agreement of sale which was leading to evasion of Stamp
Duty. They requested to widening of the definition of Power of Attorney to cover transfer of
property under the garb of GPA and/or an agreement sale. The Chief Minister, Haryana
suggested prescribing a validity period of two years on Power of Attorney. Finance Minister of
Gujarat said that lakhs of property are transferred on Power of Attorney or on the basis of a
collusive court decree, which again causes loss of revenue to the states. Chief Minister of
Haryana said that people get collusive consent decrees from civil courts .elating to transfer of
immovable property for evading Stamp Duty and Registration Fee. He said that it is, therefore,
necessary to make registration of such collusive decrees compulsory.

14. Regarding procedural simplification in implementation of Indian Stamp Act, 1899, State
Governments agreed with the initiative taken so far. It was suggested that Rules should be
simplified and the requirement of taking NOC from a number of Departments for Registration
should be done away with. The states of Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka said that non-
availability of stamp papers of small denomination has been a problem and, therefore, franking
machines are being used in Karnataka, other States may also introduce it. Himachal Pradesh
suggested that the Stamp Act can be amended to make it possible to execute documents on simple
papers and charge stamp duty by way of payment into Government treasury. He said that the
same could be done in respect of Registration Act also. The Chief Minister of Meghalaya
suggested that there should be an in-built provision for enhancement of stamp duty rates in the


stamp Act in view of the fact growing property rates in urban areas including value of works on
onstruction projects

15 The State Governments in general, favoured uniformity in the matter of levy of stamp
duty On equitable mortgage and also uniformity in stamp duty on debentures. Chief Minister of
West Bengal was not in favour of any concessional rate of duty even if such
tnalgamation/merger of financially healthy companies is approved by court.

> State Governments agreed that the issue of levy of stamp duty on capital market
ments required in-depth examination. The state Governments however, agreed to
tion of 0.1% rate of stamp duty on transactions relating to securitisation of loans by
nortgages. Adding a new section 8(A) to the Stamp Act through the depositories Legislation was

med and also the exemption of stamp duty to other instruments traded within the
ory Act particularly debt instruments was worth considering

REGISTRATION ACT

‘ate Govts./UTs agreed to the suggestion regarding doing away with sub-section
n 30 of the Act regarding registration of documents in any Presidency town and at
se of documents relating to immovable properties situated out of these erstwhile
92109 towns and Delhi. It was suggested to repeal the same by a Central legislation. The

| er of Haryana said that they have already done any with this provision in the state
necking the leakage of Stamp Duty to metropolitan areas,

stion that it be made obligatory to affix photographs and fingerprints of the
cuments for proper identification, was in general agreed to. However, Chief
Bengal pointed out that in view of large number of documents that are
the provision of affixing photographs will create immense administrative
hips to the public.

‘inister of Orissa said that it is absolutely necessary to make use of information
logy to modernize registration systems. For computerization of registration offices, he
ntral sector scheme may be initiated on the lines of computerization of land
6 Minister of Tripura also emphasised proper maintenance of records and
istry records so that a great volume of records can be preserved for a long
ister of Andhra Pradesh mentioned about a CARD project which is in the
which seeks to evaluate, do registration and also record the information
ndhra Pradesh suggested that Union Government ray issue an Ordinance
ation Act to cut short the legislative procedures and catalogue the
ferent states. he said that in the absence of it, maintaining the records
well as in a manual system defeats the purpose of computerization.

Mi

Revel

| of the discussion the Union Finance Minister said that after extensive
ing, emergence of a powerful consensus had been reached on the

2 of VAT, zonewise, if not possible for the whole country



(ii) The need for dissemination of information regarding VAT among trading
community and State Government officials.

(iii) Framing of Central scheme for financing states on training programmes

(iv) Setting up of a fund by Centre to counter any possible revenue losses to the
States/UTs during the transition period.

(v) The need for ending unhealthy and unproductive rate wars between States/

(vi) The four floor rates suggested by the Committee of State Finance Ministers were
generally found acceptable. .

(vii) The states widely recognized the unhealthy competition due to tax incentives. it
was noted that in view of the balanced development of the backward areas of the
states, concessions will have to be made. The backward areas should be
identified under definite guideiines.

(viii) The states generally recognized that it would be anomalous to continue with tt
system of the CST in inter-state trade in a VAT regime and a SAARC fr
area.

(ix) On Registration Act, there was uniformity that Section 30(2) should be repealed.
The Union Finance Minister in this regard assured that steps will be taken so that
the repeal is enacted in the next session of the Parliament.

(x) The validity of power of attorney for a limited period of time as suggested by
Chief Minister of Haryana was found acceptable and there was consensus th
photographs and fingerprints of the executants should be made compulsory ८
registration documents. There was a consensus for compulsory regist n of
General Power of Attorney which may be in the nature of a contract to se
immovable property and for consequential amendments in the Registration Act,
India Stamp Act and Transfer of Property Act.

Ete

(xi) There was consensus for enabling provisions for computerisation of registration
records.

है In conclusion, on the basis of suggestion made by the Chief Minisgter of West Bengal
and Madhya Pradesh, the Union Finance Minister proposed setting up of a Committee of Chief
Ministers of the following six States-West Bengal, Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Orissa ani
Arunachal Pradesh. He said that the Committee will have the following terms of reference:

(i) To formulate the implementation schedule for uniform floor rates for
sales tax.

(ii) To recommend the phasing out of the sales tax based incentive schemes.
(iii) To formulate the criteria for definition of backward areas which may be

eligible for incentive schemes including the maximum quantum of such
incentives along with the mechanism for its monitoring


(iv) To suggest time frame relating to the introduction VAT and the reduction
of CST.

pes The Union Finance Minister said that the first meeting of the Committee could be called
by Chief Minister of West Bengal and thereafter it could be decided as to how to complete the
work on hand by 15" November, 1998, as also the time by which report of the Committee should
be made available. He further Suggested that if the Report of Committee of Chief Ministers is

NEECs

23. On the question of NBFCs. Shri Jyoti Basu, Chief Minister of West Bengal mentioned
that the State Government is constantly reviewing the position relating to acceptance of the
deposits by unincorporated bodies and the block level administrative set up relating to the small
Savings programmes and Panchayats is being used for the purpose. The last review was taken in
July, 1998 and the State Government does not think it necessary to enact a Tamilnadu type
at this juncture: As regards NBFCs he felt that the RBI should augment its monitoring
$s ly having regard to the apprehensions that some of the NBFCs are alleged
ed in money laundering activities. It should also share information relating to
registration of NBFCs which have been registered. The complaints of depositors
ed on through the District Magistrates and State Government on a regular and
to RBI. A comprehensive Central Legislation with provisions for attachment
s should be considered.

zg Singh, Chief Minister of M.P. mentioned that the mechanism for redressa

depositors of NBFCs is weak. However, the district administration in various

cases under IPC against NBFCs found cheating depositors

¢ independent regulatory Body on the grounds of SEBI wa

consideration could also be given to devolving certain regulatory functions

) the DMs. As regards unincorporated bodies, the State Government had initiated
onsidering a legislation on the model of the Tamilnadu Act.

Lai, Chief Minister of Haryana suggested that there should be much more
ation sharing on the NBFCs which have sought registration and which are

© that safeguard mechanism in respect of public deposits could be evolved. The
गा could also think of making public deposits as secured instrument for NBFCs and the
he company to repay or service deposits may be treated as a congnizable offence.

६५. Chief Minister of Orissa mentioned that a number of cases have been
ice against NBFCs operating in the State of orissa and the State
ess of framing a suitable legislation on the model of Tamilnadu Act.

hief Minister of Manipur mentioned that NBFCs are practically
pur. However, the Government of Manipur is examining the
du type legislation for protecting depositors in unincorporated

7 Gujarat mentioned that the State Government
olice to initiate criminal action against unincorporated

Sk



bodies/NBFCs wherever there are allegations of fraud. However, there is need to address the
questions relating to NBFCs in a holistic manner with a view to ensure development of NBFCs,
re.nove supply side constraints on industry and protect depositor’s interests. The focus on RBI's
regulatory mechanism should be to detect danger signals on delinquency or failure and there
should be an institutional arrangement to attach all assets of NBFCs to satisfy the liabilities of
depositors.

29. Shri S.C. Jamir, Chief Minister of Nagaland mentioned that he welcomed the proposal
contained in the agenda note.

30. Shri Eknath Khadse, Irrigation Minister of Maharashtra mentioned that the State
Government was proposing to enact a Bill on the line of the Tamilnadu Act in the winter session
of the State Legislature. He also suggested delegation of powers to the officers of the State
Government under the RBI Act. The State Government could create machinery under the police
department/sales tax department but he urged GOI to provide a major portion of the funds for this
purpose.

31. The Taxation and Institutional Finance Minister of UP mentioned that the State
Governments should be involved in the process of registration of NBFCs and officers of the State
Government should have concurrent supervisory powers

32. Shri T. Sivadasa menon, Minister for Finance and Excise, Kerala mentioned that the
Kerala Money Lenders Act and the Kerala Chitties Act provide the regulatory framework for
money lenders and chitties in the State and afford protection to the interests of the clients and
depositors of the companies. The State Government is also involved in the task force on NBFCs
and recognize the need to safoguard the interests of NBFCs.

33. Shri Siddaramaiah, Dy. Chief Minister and Minister for Finance and Planning mentioned
that 211 cases have been booked by the police against 58 NBFCs and ‘unincorporated bodies
under IPC. He suggested that there should be a mechanism to ensure that unregistered NBFCs
do not carry out business. He also suggested that the offences under the RBI Act should be made
cognizable and there should be powers to attach properties of defrauding NBFCs. The State
Government is also contemplating to pass an act on the lines of the Tamilnadu Act as regards
unincorporated bodies.

34. Shri T. Devendra Goud, Minister for Revenue, Government of Andhra Pradesh
mentioned that the State Government was contemplating a legislation on the lines of the
Tamilnadu Act to deal with the unincorporated bodies which try to defraud their depositors

35) Shri Mohinder Singh, Excise and Taxation Minister H.P, mentioned that the State
Government has advised DMs to take action against NBFCs which indulged in fraud and
cheating. It has also suggested that district authorities should be made aware of the companies
which have granted registration and perhaps certain supervisory powers could be given to the
DMs.

36. Finance Minister of Punjab Captain Kanwal Jit Singh mentioned that officers of the State

Government could be empowered under the RBI Act and that the provisions similar to the
Tamilnadu Act should be enacted in the RBI Act itself and be made applicable to all the States.

53


|
|

| ८ Shri 8.8. Lyngdoh, Chief Minister of Meghalaya mentioned that they would like the
State Government to be consulted before a certificate of registration is granted to NBFCs.
However, at the moment there are no NBFCs in Meghalaya.

38 Shri Shankar Prasad Tekriwal, Finance Minister, Bihar mentioned that the present RB!
resulations need to be tightened and there should be a strong monitoring and surveillance
mechanism. He felt that the RBI cannot disown the responsibility towards depositors of the
Companies regulated by them.

39. Dr. Jagdhish Mukhi, Finance Minister, Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi mentioned that by involving State Government in the process of registration of NBFCs and
periodic monitoring, effective checks can be introduced, but the issues need to be deliberated at
length,

40. Finance Secretary, Government of Goa mentioned that the printed speech of the CM Dr
Wilform De. Souza had already been circulated. The Government of Goa has already sought
prior approval of the Central Government for a legislation on the lines of Tamil Nadu Act.

41. The Chief Secretary of Pondichery mentioned that the printed speech of Shri ९.४.
Janakiraman, Chief Minister have already been circulated. The Government proposes to enact on
the lines of Tamil Nadu Act and the State Governments could be given authority to verify records
maintained by NBFCs.

42 Shri A. Rahman Khan, Labour Minister of Tamil Nadu mentioned that the speech of the
Chief Minister Shri M. Karunanidhi has already been circulated. The Tamil Nadu Government
has already enacted a legislation to protect the interests of depositors in financial establishments
and the enactment has been appreciated by the RBI which has advised other states also to enact
similar laws. The State is also pursuing action against erring NBFCs under the relevant
provisions of the RBI and Companies Act.

43. Shri Badal Choudhry, Finance Minister, Tripura mentioned that a central legislation to
protect the depositors of unincorporated bodies should be considered. Having regard to the
problem of NBFCs an independent regulatory body could be considered.

44. Shri J.N. Sarma, Revenue Minister of Assam mentioned that the Government is
contemplating a Tamil Nadu type legislation. They have already authorized officers for the
purpose of Section 45S.

45. Shri P.S. Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India requested the State
Governments to proceed against defrauding unincorporated bodies under relevant provision of
law.

46. Concluding the discussions the Finance Minister observed that there was a consensus on
the following course of action.

(i) Legislation should be enacted by the State Governments on the line of the Tamil
Nadu Act for protection of the interest of depositors in relation to unincorporated
bodies.

(ii) There should be tighter regulation and more effective supervision and monitoring
of NBFCs. Suitable legislation, i. by Government of India for speedy


(iii)

(iv)

(v)
(vi)

attachment of assets of defaulting NBFCs should be enacted so that receipts from
sale of these assets can be shared by all depositors.

Efforts would be made to associate State Governments with the process of
enquiry prior to registration by the RBI. Wider publicity and dissemination of
information concerning the regulatory regime and investment risk should be
undertaken.

There should be effective sharing of information with State Governments
regarding fraudulent and unregistered companies, for timely and effective
criminal action.

Unauthorised deposit taking by NBFCs should be made a cognizable offence.
There should be single window for dealing with depositors grievances. The State

Governments should be set up cells at the state and district levels to help
dissemination of information regarding the redressal of grievances.

55

MGIPMRND—6574 / RS—17-12-2002.