DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERN1\1ENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS FIFTY-NINTH 
REPORT ON THE D'EMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2000-2001) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 

CS(HA}-125 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS FIFTY-NINTH 
REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2000-2001) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18TH APRIL 2001) 
AND 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON 17TH APRIL 2001) 
RAJYASABHASECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL. 200 1/CHAITRA, 1923 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
I. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iii) 
3. REPORT 1-48 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 51-54 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMIITEE (2001) 
Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chair"""' 
RAJYASABHA 
Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
Shri Hiphei 
Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
Shri K.M, Saifullah 
Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
~Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
Shri Drupad Borgohain 
Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta 
Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
LOKSABBA 
Shrimati Jayashree Baneljee 
Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
•Shrimati Nisha Chaudhary 
Shri Samar Chaudhary 
Sbri M.O.H. Farook 
Shri Vijay Goel 
Shri Rajen Gohain 
Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
Shri V inay Katiyar 
Shri Arun Kumar 
Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
Shri P.H. Pandian 
Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel 
Shri Shriniwas Patil 
•Shri Jitendra Prasada 
Shri Subodh Ray 
Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
Shri Anadi Charan Sahu 
Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
Shri Manabendra Shah 
+ Ceased 10 be Member w.e.f I MilCh, 2001 
• Expired on 30 January,2001 
• Expired on 16 January, 2001. 
(i) 

Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
Shri Vishnu Datta Shannap 
Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
Shri Prakash Mani Tripat hi 
a.Dr. S. Venugopal 
Shri Beni Prasad Venna 
Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha 
• Shri Harin Pathak 
• Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additiona l Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Office r 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Office r 
a Ceased a Member w.e. f 19 March, 200 I on being nominated of Committee on Human Resource Development. 
• Nom mated we f. 20 february, 200 I. 
• Nommated w.c f. 8 March, 2001 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chainnan of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this 
Sixty-seventh Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
2. The Fifty-ninth Repvrt of the Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented/laid 
to/in Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on 19 April 2000. 
3. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifty-
ninth Report were received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on 29 September 2000. 
4. The Committee considered the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry in its sitting held on 8 
February 2001. The Committee considered and adopted this Report in its sitting held on 27 
March 2001. 
NEW DELHI 
March 27, 2001 
(iii) 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE 
Chairman 
Commiltee on Home Affairs 

REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations as contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2000-200 I) of the Ministry of Home Affairs which was presented/laid to/in the Rajya Sabha/Lok 
Sabha on 19 April, 2000. 
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observa tions/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows: -
(i) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have been accepted by the Committee: 
Para Nos. 32, 42, 48.3, 60, 82,84, 86, 88, 89, 91, 96, 100, 101, 103, 107, 
108,110, 114, 116,118, 119, 121, 122, 123, 125, 143, 146, 149, 152, 158, 
159, 162, 165, 169, 172, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183 & 185. 
Total- 44 
(ii) Recommendationst6bservations which the Committee has noted with further 
observations/recommendations in view of the Government's replies : 
Para Nos. 30,31,33,37,41 ,46,50,52,56,58,61,74,75,79,80,81, 92,95,98, 
99,105,106 & 177. 
Total- 23 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Para Nos. 126, 27, 128, 129, 130, 134, 135, 136, 138 & 139 
Total-10 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations m respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Para Nos. 126,27, 128, 129, 130, 134, 135, 136, 138 & 139 
' Total- 10 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which 
have been categorised as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at tbe 
earliest. 
4. On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on 
each item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Fifty-ninth Report, action taken thereon by the Government and 
observat ions/recommendations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in 
the succeedmg paragraphs. 

RECOMMENDATION (para no. 30) 
Situation in Jammu & Kashmir 
5. The Committee has been deeply anguished at the brutal killings of innocent 
people of Chatti Singhpura Village of Anantnag District of Jammu & Kashmir and is 
vel) much concerned at the rising number of attacks by the militants on security forces 
and their establishments. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to have a 
comprehensive review of the strategy being used to fight the militants. The situation, 
grave as it is, calls for the adoption of a multi-pronged strategy. The strategy should not 
onl) focus on identifying potential 'soft targets' for militants but it should also ensure 
that our security forces and establishments do not fall prey to the militant s. The 
Committee urges upon the Government to spare no stone unturned to see that the back of 
the militancy is permanently broken, the nefarious designs of the hostile neighbouring 
country are defeated and normalcy in the beleaguered State is restored . 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
5.1 Due to the Kargil incursions, Pak supported terrorist outfits were able to take 
advantage of the depleted security grid to push in armed foreign infiltrators in 
considerable number. This phase also witnessed introduction of suicide squads, 
intensificatiOn of attacks on security forces, upgradation of weaponry/hardware of the 
terrorists and efforts to garner local support as also to provide a Jehadi flavour to the 
ongoing terrorism in the State. The terrorists were keen on causing incidents that would 
attract instant media attention, their aim being to focus world attention on Kashmar. 
Massacre of Chitti Singhpura and focused attacks on security forces were part of the 
premeditated design . 
5.1.1 The Governme nt took a number of steps in the post Kargil phase which included, 
inter alia, strengthening of the counter terrorist grid, strengthening and modernisation of 
J&K Police, strengthening and expansion of Village Def~nce Committees , launching of 
pin pointed counter terrorist operations based upon action~ble intelligence, strengthening 
of security cover for areas inhabited by minorities including Sikhs, dividing the counter 
terrorist grid into integrated sectors for synergised operations and checking infiltration 
through improved border management. The aforementioned steps resulted in the killing 
of approximately 1520 terrorists from August, 99 to August 2000. 
5.1 2 As part of its resolve to bring back normalcy in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
the Government have embarked upon a three pronged strategy, which comprises: 
proactive tackling, with the help of security forces, the cross border terrorism that has 
been unleashed by Pakistan sponsored terrorist outfits; accelerating economic 
development as also redressing the genuine grievances of the people and initiating a 
dialogue, within the constitutional frame work, with alienated sections of the society, 
specially misguided youths. 
5.1.3 The strategy used to fight militants is dynamic in nature and is reviewed from 
time to time through the mechanism of Unified Head Quarters at the State level and also 
through the Operation Group meetings etc. at Central level. The security forces and State 
2 

Police have been alerted of the designs of the Pak sponsored militants to target the 
security forces and have been requested to take up appropriate preventive measures. To 
sharpen the anti-terrorist process in the State of J&K an inter ministerial group has been 
set up to review, revise and supplement the 1998 Action Plan in operation to tackle 
militancy in J&K. 
5.1.4 The Government is fully committed to eradicate terrorism and bring back 
normalcy in the State of Jammu & Kashmir. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.2 The Committee, having taken note of the reply of the Ministry, feels that 
economic development plays a crucial role in dissuading the misguided people 
from the path of violence and secession. It, therefore, recommends that adequate 
funds should be made available to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir for 
accelerating the pace of economic development. However, it should be ensured that 
the flow of funds must remain unhindered. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 31) 
5.3 This gruesome incident was followed by an attack on a BSF camp at Chandpur in 
Srinagar by a suicide squad of the militants. The attack on BSF camp is not an isolated 
incident rather just one of the series of such incidents. Evidently , there has been a 
calculated spurt in the attacks on security forces. This needs to be curbed . There is a 
need for upgrading security in and around the camps/company headquarters of security 
forces. Adequate steps should be taken to maintain foolproof security at all such places 
in order to see that security forces suffer lesser casualties while engaging the militants. 
(Para 31) 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
5.4 Kargi I incursion led to the breaking of the counter terrorist grid for a few months 
as security forces had to be deployed along the border resulting in gaps which were fully 
exploited by the terrorist organizations especially in Kupwara and Baramulla districts to 
push in battle hardened foreign terrorists with State of the art weapons and equipments. 
The emboldened the terrorists to embark upon bold action such as attack on security 
forces primarily to bring media attention as also to demoralize the security forces. The 
security forces and State Police have been alerted of the designs of Pak sponsored 
terrorists and they have been asked to take appropriate counter measures. During the 
period January to August, 2000 the security forces have killed 941 terrorists. 
5.4.1 After the attack on BSF Camps at Bandipore, instructions were issued to all the 
Central Para Military Forces to step up the security of their own establishments and to 
sensitize the field formations of the forces about the need to be in the state of total 
readiness to meet any such eventuality . 
5.4.2 The instructions for stepping up the security of the establishment of the forces 
have been reiterated and the forces have been advised to ensure that Senior Force 
Commanders, In-charge of operations should get each estabtishment physically checked 
and to ensure that the instructions have been implemented in letter and spirit. The forces 
have also been advised to introduce a system of certification by Senior Force 
3 

Commanders to the effect that they have personally checked the security system of the 
establishments. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.5 The initiatives taken to beef up the security in and around establishments of 
defence forces are noteworthy. Yet the Committee is constrained to observe that 
lessons are yet to be learnt from the past incidents. The recent bomb explosion in an 
abandoned car outside the Headquarters of 15 Corps in Srinagar in which 11 people 
were killed, can be a case in point. A car loaded with explosives is abandoned in a 
supposedly high security area and inexplicably fails to attract the attention of the 
security personnel manning the area. The situation warrants a thorough overhaul 
of the security apparatus as wide gaps in the security blanket continue to remain 
unplugged. 
RECOMMENDATION(para no. 32) 
5.6 The Committee is also of the opinion that the Government should take the people 
of the State along with it in its endeavour to fight the menace of militancy 
(Para 32) 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
5.7 The Government have noted the recommendation of the Committee and the State 
Government have also been apprised of the same. 
5.7. 1 Besides involving the people in the Village Defence Committees, the three 
pronged strategy embarked upon by the Government provides, inter-alia, for accelerating 
economic development as also redressing the genuine grievances of the people and 
initiating a dialogue, within the Constitutional framework, with alienated sections of the 
society, specially misguided youths. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 33) 
5.9 The Committee having noted the information furnished by the Ministry in 
relation to VDCs recommends that the entire gamut of functioning of the VDCs, their 
utility and effectiveness need to be critically reviewed by the Ministry. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
5.10 The scheme of Village Defence Committees (VDCs) is being implemented by 
the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir. A VDCs consists of village volunteers and 
has been provided with a nucleus of 03 Specia l Police Officers (SPO), appointed by the 
State Police, in order to have a better command and control. The VDCs scheme is aimed 
at providing protection to the villages, encouraging people's involvement in fighting 
terrorism and strengthening the security grid. 
4 

5.1 0.1 The SPOs are anned with weapons (such as .303 Rifles, SLRs, Ashraf Karim 
Rifles along with required ammunition) and Wireless sets for better communication. 
5.1 0.2 The approved strength of VDCs in J&K at present is 2486 and that of SPOs 
attached with them is 7458. ln addition there is an approved strength of 10,542 other 
SPOs as well. Thus the total strength of SPOs is 18,000 and the GOI is reimbursing to 
the State Government the expenditure incurred in respect of SPOs attached to VDC @ 
Rs.20,000/- per SPO per annum, which includes cost of honorarium, 
weapons/equipments and training. 
5.10.3 Keeping in view the operational requirements, VDC members and SPOs have 
been imparted training, from time to time, through Army, BSF and JKP in handling of 
weapons, wireless sets, tactics and other defensive/operational measures. 
5.1 0.4 The VDCs/SPOs have played an important role in combating militancy in J&K. 
They have proved effective in far-flung and vulnerable hilly areas where population is 
scattered. The existence of VDCs has created an element of security amongst the masses. 
It has even resulted in preventing migration from various Districts. 
5.1 0.5 A large number of SPOs are an integral part of Special Operation Groups (SOG) 
and they participate in active operations, which are conducted either independently by the 
SOG or jointly with SF/PMFs. They are also playing an important role in the collection 
of intelligence with regard to movement/activity of militants and their mentors. 
5.1 0.6 The importance of the information generated by the VDCs/SPOs can be gauged 
from the fact that at least 35 militants, including foreign mercenaries, have been killed, 
large quantities of arms/ammunition/explosives have been recovered and some 
militants/trans-border smugglers have been arrested on the basis of information provided 
by them. 
5.10.7 During the Operation Group meetin& taken by Special Secretary (J&K) on 
5.5.2000, which was also attended by the Principal Secretary (Home)-J&K, as well as 
representatives of MOD, Army, CPMFs, State Police and Intelligence Agencies, the 
working of VDCs/SPOs was discussed at length and it was agreed that they were doing a 
good job and the system may be allowed to continue for the time being. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.11 The Committee recommends that Village Defence Committees 
(VDCs) should be fully equipped so that they can play a more effective role in 
tackling militancy. 
RECOMMENDATION (para oo. 37) 
Deployment of CPMFs oo lodo-Nepal Border 
6. The Committee having noted the progress made in the matter, recommends that a 
final view may be taken by the Government in a time bound manner. It also urges upon 
the concerned Union Ministries/Departments being well aware of the gravity of the 
situation, should respond to the call of urgency. An early decision in this matter becomes 
even more essential keeping in view the increasing use of porous Indo-Nepal border by 
5 

lSI for anti-India activities. The circulation of fake currency notes in the areas adjoining 
Indo-Nepal border and the alleged use of the border as a transit route to Nepal by the 
hijackers of Indian Airlines flight IC-814 can be some of the instances to illustrate the 
seriousness of the situation. 
ACTION T AK.EN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
6.1 An action plan has been drawn for better management of Indo-Nepal border 
-· ·: which envisages patrolling of the critical/vulnerable stretches of the order by a Central 
Police Force as well as assistance to concerned States for strengthenmg of policing and 
intelligence collection all along the border. Necessary proposal is being submitted 
shortly to the Cabinet Committee on Security for consideration and approval. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
6.2 Apparently, the recommendation of the Committee has found some favour 
with the Ministry of Home Affairs vis-a-vis deployment of CPMFs on Indo-Nepal 
border. As stated in the A TR a proposal in this regard is to be submitted to the 
Cabinet Committee on Security for its consideration and approval. However, no 
timeframe bas been indicated for it to become a reality. A time-bound course of 
action may be drawn up by the Ministry and Committee may be apprised of the 
outcome of the exercise. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 41) 
Deputation Quota for IPS in CPMFs 
7 The Committee is of the view that when at the decision making level more than 
one agency was involved, the Ministry of Home Affairs should have discussed the 
proposal with the concerned Departments and thereafter, a final proposal should have 
been brought in. This exercise shows a very casual approach of the Ministry towards 
such a serious problem. In the instant case, the Ministry of Home Affairs should have 
held prior consultations with DP&T so as to discuss the possible repercussions and 
thrash out the outstanding issues before forwarding a firm proposal. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
7. I The proposal for making posting of IPS officers on Central deputation mandatory 
was well considered. This proposal came up because of shortage of IPS officers for 
manning posts under the Government of India. It was felt that if such provisiOn was 
made in the IPS (Cadre) Rules, it would not only ensure availability of officers but would 
also provide sufficient exposure to the IPS officers to enable them later to occupy senior 
posts under the CPMFs. 
7 I I This matter was debated on several occasions at intra and inter ministenallevels . 
The matter was examined threadbare both in this Ministry and in the DOP&T The 
opinion of the Ministry of Law was also obtained. In the absence of any foolproof 
mechanism for enforcing the orders of the Central Government, it was felt that the 
proposal would have to be dropped. There was no lack of commitment in pursuing the 
6 

proposal. This Ministry have again taken up the matter with DOP&T and will follow up 
the same vigorously. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMl\fllTEE 
7.2 The Committee takes strong exception to the manner in which the matter 
has been Dealt with by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the ·Departute.»t of 
Personnel and Training. When a Parliamentary Committee makes a 
recommendation after a great deal of deliberation, it expects a pr.oper and timely 
response from the Government. In the instant case the Committee deprecated the 
messy, halting and faltering response of the Government that too aftea· passage of a 
considerable period of time to its observations/recommendations. If there is a lack · 
of foolproof mechanism, the Committee fails to understand as to what precludes the 
Government from evolving a suitable mechanism in this regard. It, therefore, 
reiterates its earlier recommendation and once again urges upon the Ministry to 
make serious efforts to implement the same. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 42) 
7.3 The Committee notes that the Government has failed to either fill up the 
vacancies at IG and DIG levels in CPMFs for a number of years or to make it compulsory 
for IPS officers to serve in CPMF~ at these levels. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the posts at the level of IG and DIG reserved for IPS offi~ers, if remain 
vacant for a specified period, be de-reserve and filled by cadre officers . This will not 
only boost the morale of the forces but will also increase the promotional avenues for the 
cadre officers. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
7.4 Presently there are 26 posts of IG under the CPMFs of which 23 are occupied 
The remaining 3 posts have fallen vacant recently because of the reversion of officers to 
their cadres after completion of Central deputation tenure. These posts are being filled up 
shortly. As on date as many as 45 IG level officers are on offer for Central deputation 
and therefore, there is no problem in filling up these 3 posts. 
7 .4.1 At present there are 40 posts at DIG level under the CPMFs, of these 7 posts in 
BSF and 3 in CRPF have been temporarily diverted to be filled up by the cadre officers 
of the respective CPMFs. Against these 40 sanctioned posts, 32 posts are already filled 
up (22+10). Only 8 vacancies exist as on date and necessary exercise is on to fill them • r 
up. We have already taken up with the State Governments to sponsor additional names, 
particularly at DIG level, so as to enable the Central Government to fill up these vacant 
posts. 
7.4.2 It will not be desirable to dereserve these posts because IPS officers do not have 
much opportunity to work in other departments/ministries on Central deputation. 40% of 
the senior duty posts in the IPS are for Central deputation . If the quota of IPS in variou" 
CPOs is reduced, the opportunity to come to the Centre will be reduced and Centr 
deputation reserve in the IPS cadre structure will lose its meaning.-
7 

7.4.3 To overcome the present shortage of IPS officers at DIG level to man posts in the 
CPMFs and to ensure that the operation of CPMFs are not hampered, temporary 
diversion of these posts to the cadre officers of the CPMFs is allowed. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
7.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 46) 
Raising of Flying Roun for ITBP 
8. The Committee notes the reply of Ministry of Defence. It, however, is not 
sat1sfied with the reply. The point, the Committee intends to make is that the issue of 
raising the current level of flying hours for ITBP is too important an issue to be ignored 
keeping in view the valuable contribution the ITBP is making to the security of the 
country. The existing commitments of Indian Air Force may be, howsoever heavy, the 
demand of ITBP too is worth a sympathetic consideration. The Committee urges upon 
the Ministry of Defence to approach this issue with a view to finding a way out to extend 
a helping hand to ITBP. Any such gesture on the part of Ministry of Defence will not 
only boost the morale of ITBP personnel but will also go a long way in improving the 
border management of the country. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
8.1 The Ministry of Defence have been requested several times to increase the total 
flying hours allotted to the ITBP from 215 to 336. The Ministry of Defence have not 
agreed to the request. They have expressed their inability to increase the allotted flying 
hours due to resource constraints of the Air Force. Ministry of Defence have, however, 
assured that the- task of airlift of casualty evacuation will be continued even if the total 
number of flying hours allotted to ITBP are exhausted. 
8.1.1 The observations of the Committee have been communicated to the Ministry of 
Defence with a fresh request to increase the flying hours allotted to ITBP. 
8.1.2 The Ministry of Defence has again expressed tl,teir inability to accede to the 
request for enhancement of flying hours. However, it has been assured that the Air 
Headquarters will continue to undertake task of air lift of casualty evacuation even after 
the total number of flying hours allotted to ITBP are exhausted within a year. 
8.1.3 The ITBP has now submitted a proposal for engaging the helicopters from Mls 
Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. fpr meeting the additional requirement which is being 
examined. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
82 The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation in the matter and asks 
tbe Ministry of Home Affain to take up the issue once again with the Ministry of 
Defence for a review of their stand. At the same time the Committee may be 
apprised of the outcome of the follow up action by the Ministry on the proposal for 
8 

engaging the helicopters from M/s Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. For meeting the . 
additional requirements of ITBP. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 48.3) 
Modernisation of Police Forces 
9. The Committee notes that Rs.l 00 crore have been eannarked for release to the 
State Governments under the nonnal scheme of modernisation. As regards allocation of 
Rs.l 00 crore to be released to the State Governments as a special assistance to redress 
their special problems for which they would be required to prepare special projects, the 
Committee , however, fails to understand the rationality for this special dispensation 
when parameters and weightages have been clearly spelt out for providing financjal 
assistance to the States under the nonnal scheme of m9(iernisation. Then, it is not 
understood as to which are the special projects, grants for which will be released by the 
Ministry . The Committee is of the view that Rs.l 00 crore earmarked for special 
assistance to the State Governments to redress their special problems be clubbed with the 
normal scheme for which Rs.l 00 crore have already been eannarked. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
.I The Non-plan Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces has been. in 
operation since 1969-70 to supplement the efforts of the State Governments in this 
regard. Funds under the Scheme are released on 50% loan and 50% grants-in-aid basis. 
The State Governments are required to provide an equal amount as matching 
contribution . A total amount of Rs.Sl6 .74 crore was released to various State 
Governments during the period 1969-70 to 1999-2000. Keeping in view the consistent 
demands from various State Governments as also the growing need to modernize the 
State Police Forces in view of the fast changing law and order ~~enario , the annual • 
allocation has been increased from Rs.SO crore to Rs.200 crore is basically for 
improvement of following six components : - • 
Mobility - purchase of new vehicles 
FSUFPB , Centre for Questioned Documents, 
Finger Print Bureaux, buildings, their expansion and 
Renovation etc. 
Police Training Centre buildings, their expansion 
And renovation, Training etc. 
Light weaponry, VIP Security, Crowd control 
Traffic control. 
Communication 
Equipment/aids to investigation, Data processing, 
Office equipment. 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20% 
10% 
10% 
9 1.1 As for the special dispensation of Rs.l 00 crore, it may be clarified that the 
observations of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee (1998-99) 
9 . . ' 

were taken into consideration while formulating a proposal for enhancing the annual 
allocation from Rs.SO crore to Rs.200 crore (including Rs.l 00 crore for extending special 
assistance). The Committee observed as below:-
"The Committee in this also takes note that a proposal for special scheme for 
modernizat ion of the police forces of insurgency affected State of the North­
eastern region is under active consideration of the Government and the Ministry 
is currently running this Scheme on ad-hoc basis out of the savings from the 
budget allocated to it. The Committee strongly recommend s that while there is a 
general necessity to substantially enhance the level of allocation under the on­
going scheme of modernization of police forces, a similar proposal should also 
come from the Ministry for the States affected by the menace of naxalism, left 
wing extremism etc., with a view to equipping their police forces with latest arms 
and ammunition, vehicles and sophisticated gadgets". 
9.1.2 The Government have, accordingly, earmarked an amount of Rs.l 00 crore for 
extending specia l financial assistance to adversely affected States . The special 
component is also used for giving financial assistance to States after identifying the areas 
which require to be further strengthened. For this, State Governments are required to 
prepare specific projects to strengthen the deficient areas of their police forces . 
9. 1.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs originally proposed to enhimce the allocation 
under the Scheme from Rs.SO crore to Rs.l 00 crore but it was felt that the additional 
allocation be made to States to take care of their special problems and funds should be 
released only for specific projects prepared by the State Governments for this purpose. 
The Government approved Rs.200 crore as special assistance to the State Governments to 
redress their special problems. 
9.1.4 Some of the proposals received from State Governments for grant of special 
assistance are mentioned below:-
a. Andhra Pradesh : Conversion of Grey hound Training Centre to Regional Training 
Centre . 
b. Haryana : Provisions of Forensic Science laboratories. 
Bomb Detection and Disposal System. 
c. Himachal Pradesh : Provisions for weapons, vehicles etc. for two HPAP. 
-Proposal for revamping and modernizing of police set up for 
dealing with Tibetan Refugees. 
d. Karnataka : Highway Patrol 
-Prevention of naxalite activities 
e.Madhya Pradesh: Upgradation of the Training Institute at Bastar 
f. Maharashtra : Speed boats to supplement coast guard. 
Geographical information system 
g. Punjab : Strengthening of Police Stations/Out Posts alongwith Pakistan and J&K 
10 

h. Uttar Pradesh : Control Rooms 
Strengthening of Indo-Nepal Border 
i. West Bengal : Acquisition of monitoring system to counter lSI activities. 
Creation of I 0 Bomb Detection and Disposal Units. 
Acquisition of arms, vehicles, equipment etc. for a combat battalion. 
9. 1.5 The State Governments' proposal for grant of special assistance would be 
examined by a Comm ittee in Ministry of Home Affairs which, inter alia, has a 
representative ofthe Ministry of Finance. 
RECOMMENDATION /OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
9.2 The Commi~tee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. ~0) 
9.3 The Committee notes the various measure s/programmes/ initiative s being taken 
by the Union Government to modernise the State police forces. It understands that the 
task of modernising the police forces is a gigantic one and requires colossal amount of 
funds. lt also understands that State Governments with their scanty resources will find 
it difficult to mobilise funds for this purpose. Under such circumsta nces, the Union 
Government will have to make a sizeable portion of the required amount available to the 
State Governments. At the same time, it being as it is, the primary responsibility of State 
Governments to do their level best to generate the maximum possible funds for the 
mode rn isation of their police forces. In other words, the onus lies on both Union 
Government as well as State Governments . The Committee, therefore, urges upon both 
the Union Government as well as the State Governments to accord h1ghest priority to 
modernisation of Police Forces as it is the most vital requirement of our Police 
Forces keeping in view the serious challenges being posed to the security and integrity of 
the nation from different quarters . The Committee is also of the opinion that no financial 
constraints should be allowed to be the stumbling block in the process of modernisation 
of police forces. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
9.4 The Non-Plan Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces has been in 
operation since 1969-70 to supp lement the efforts of the State Governments in this 
regard . Under the Scheme, funds are released on 50% loan and 50% grants-in-aid basis . 
The State Governments are required to provide an equal amount as matching 
contribution. During the period 1969-70 to 1999-2000, total amount of Rs.S36. 74 crore 
was released to various State Governments for modernization of State Police Forces . 
Keeping in view the consistent demands from various State Governments as also the 
growing need to modernize the State Police Forces in view of the fast chang ing law and 
order scenario , the annual allocation had been increased from Rs.50 crore to Rs.200 crore 
(Rs.IOO crore normal assistance and Rs . l~ crore specia l assistance). 
9.4.1 However , in the Conference of Chief Ministers on Internal Security held on 
5.8.2000, the Prime Minister announced further enhancement of allocation under this 
11 

• 
Scheme from ~.200 crore to Rs.l 000 crore per annum. The modalities of allocating 
funds to the States are also being fine-tuned. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
9.5 The reply of the Mini.~try is noted by the Committee . However, it would like 
to know details regarding funner ellllaacenieat of allocation for the modernisation 
scheme from Rs. 200 crore to Rs. 1000 crore per aanum. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. Sl) 
Resettlement of Kashmiri Migrants in Kashmir 
10. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the State 
Government will soon come up with the Action Plan to rehabilitate Kashmiri migrants. It 
urges upon the, State Government to accord topmost priority to this matter and send its 
draft Action Ptan to the Union Government without any further delay. For, the delay by 
each passing day will further compound the agony and misery of the Jammu & Kashmir 
migrants. The Committee also hopes that the Union Government, on its part, would not 
spare any efforts to extend every possible assistance to the State Government in the 
execution of Action Plan. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED JO BE TAKEN 
• 10.1 The observations made by the Committee have been communicated to the State 
Government with a request to finalise the action plan 'without any further delay and send 
it to the Unio'\ Government for consideration to enable the Union Government to 
facilitate extension of appropriate assistance to the State Government for resettlement of 
Kashmiri migrants back in the Kashmir valley. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
10.2 The Committee is of the 9piaion that efforts should be made to create a 
conducive atmosphere for an early return of displaced Kashmiris to the valley. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 56) 
Housing for CPMFs 
U. The Committee notes the assurance given by Ministry of Urban Development to 
the Ministry of Home Affairs of their best services and hopes that they would live up to 
it. The Committee hopes that the Departmenrof Expenditure and the Ministry of Urban 
Development would have an open mind in relaxing GFR 136 in deserving cases and 
officialism would not come into the way of allowing construction by other agencies. The 
Committee, however, is not at all satisfied with the meagre allocation of Rs.64 crore for 
2000-2001 for providing residential accommodation to the CPMFs. As against the 
requirement ofRs.l, 000 crore to achieve 14% satisfaction level, this amount is woefully 
short. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that there should be a reasonable and 
realistic budgetary provision for this purpose. Hence, it recommends that the 
Government should enhance the budgetary allocation for providing residential 
accommodation to the CPMFs so as to enable them to reach the satisfaction level of 14% 
within the next couple of years. 
12 
.. 

ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
11.1 In order to bridge the shortfall in housing satisfaction in the next 2-3 years, it is 
estimated that approximately Rs.900 crore will be required. Hence, there would be a 
requirement of an additional allocation of Rs.200-250 crore per year in order to achieve 
the recommendations made by the Committee. The funds required for this purpose can 
be provided both from the Plan and Non-Plan. The matter has been taken up with the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional funds both 
under Plan and Non-Plan schemes. It is also proposed to Ministry of Finance that in 
order to utilize the additiohal allocation it would also be necessary to allow other central 
Government/State Government construction agencies to undertake CPMFs housing 
construction wor~ so that the allocated funds are utilized within the given time frame. 
11.1.1 Department of Expenditure have stated that they have no objection to the 
proposal but the additional funds can only be provided out of the existing allocations of 
the Home Ministry . 
11 .1.2 To sort out this issue, a meeting was convened with Department of Expenditure 
and Planning Commission on 29.8.2000. In the meeting it was decided that whatever 
savings in the overall budget of MHA is available in the current financial year should go 
to the housing for the CPMF personnel and for the next year, the allocation of about 
Rs.300 crore be made for this purpose. 
11.1.3 As far as the executing agencies are concerned, it was suggested that the approval 
for utilizing the services of other State and Central Government executing agencies could 
be considered by the CNE at the time of sanction of expenditure. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
11.2 The allocation of the requisite funds for achieving 14% satisfaction level of 
housing needs of CPMFs seems to have been agreed to in principle, by the Planning 
Commission. The issue of awarding construction contracts to other agencies has, 
more or less, been settled. However, the Committee would like to pursue the matter 
further while examining the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 58) 
Augmentation/Modernisation of Central Para Military Forces 
12. The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Ministry to modernise 
Central Para Military Forces. It hopes that the modernisation plans of CPMFs being 
processed by the Ministry will soon be translated into reality. It also hopes that these 
plans which are based on the actual and field requirements of the CPMFs will be 
implemented with full sincerity and commitment. It is also desirable that once approved, 
the disbursal of requisite funds for the implementation of the plans should be strictly 
within the prescribed time. For, it is often seen that funds are· not released in time due to 
a variety of reasons thereby rendering the whole plan haywire which ultimately leads to 
avoidable cost and time over-runs. The Committee is hopeful that every care will be 
13 

taken to ensure that such apprehensions are not allowed to gain foothold while 
implementing these plans. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
12.1 In the Modernisation Plan initially submitted by the CPMFs, for the five-year 
period from 2000-01 to 2004-05, a tentative projection of Rs.4025 crore had been made. 
12. 1.1 The basic premise on which these plans have been prepared is that the 
deployment pattern of the forces will remain largely the same during the next five years, 
i.e. the future raisings during the period have not been brought under the purview of these 
plans. 
12.1.2· The original plans submitted by the respective forces have been discussed Force 
by Force keeping in view the following main consideration. 
To increase striking power of forces with superior arms & ammunition and 
strategic equipments and effective transport vehicles. 
~ 
To provide state of the art communication and surveillance system which is 
the mainstay of developing operational strategy. 
To continuously upgrade the skill of the troops by providing training 
facilities. 
To keep the troops operationally fit by providing personal comfort through 
modem outfits. 
12. I .3 After discussions certain modifications have been made in the plans which have 
resulted in reduction in the overall projection of the plans of all the Forces together to 
Rs.3740.71 crore. 
12.1.4 The fund required for implementation of the Modernisation Plans cannot be met 
from the nonnal budget grant until and unless budgetary support to CPMFs is augmented 
substantially. With an assumed 10% notional growth in annual allocation, the availability 
of funds to the CPMFs is expected to be of the order Rs.4508 crore over a five year 
period which could absorb about Rs.lll7 crore towards implementation of the proposed 
modernization plan, leaving a resource gap of about Rs.2624 crore. Approval of the 
Cabinet will be sought for bridging the identified resource gap of Rs.2624 crore by 
suitably augmenting the annual budgetary allocation for the Forces during the five-year 
period to ensure timely implementation of the modernization plans ofCPMFs. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
12.2 Modernisation of the Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs ) is the need of 
the hour keeping in view the increased amount of challenges being posed to them by 
militants/insurgents/terrorists. However, the resource gap of about Rs.2624 crore 
for implementing the proposed modernization plan is too huge to be ignored. It is 
pathetic to note that the spectre of shortage of funds is looming large over the 
proposed modernization plan even before it has taken off. It compels the 
Committee to express its apprehension as to the time bound implementation of the 
14 

plan keeping in view the anticipated shortfall of the funds. Given the situation, the 
Committee hopes that proposed modernization plan of CPMFs will not be allowed 
to feel the pinch of the paucity of funds. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 60) 
12.3 Given the present circumstances, the Committee is of the considered view that 
there is an urgent need to make the weapons of AK series available to our forces on a 
large scale so that they are able to give a befitting reply to their adversaries. The 
Committee also urges upon the Government to explore the feasibility of large scale 
import of such weapons along with the possibility of entering into an agreement with the 
concerned manufacturer of these weapons for technology transfer to enable Ordnance 
Factory Board to start indigenous mass production of this much sought after weapon 
system. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
12.4 In order to enhance the striking power of security forces, scale of Ashraf Karim 
Rifles at the Coy. Level has been augmented for the Forces deployed in counter 
insurgency operations. In the Modernisation Plan of CPMFs to be implemented over a 
period of 5 years starting from 2000-01, it has been envisaged to procure A K-47 Rifles 
at the enhanced scale. Action has been started to import A K Rifles after inviting Global 
Tender. 
12.4.1 So far as exploring the possibility of commencing indigenous production of A K­
series Rifles in the Ordnance Factories is concerned, as the subject matter concerns 
Ministry of Defence (Deptt. of Defence Production & Supplies), they have been 
requested to examine the suggestion of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs. MOD's response in the matter is as under:-
12.4.2 Ordnance Factories have developed 5.56 mm INSAS Rifle, which is superior to 
A K series weapon both in respect of accuracy and lethality. Hese Rifles are already in 
use with Para-military forces. These Rifles work on the same principles as A K-47 
Rifles. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
12.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 61) 
12.6 The Committee advises the Ministry to finalise its plans regarding raising new 
battalions, acquisition of weapons, communication equipment, purchase of 
vehicles/aircraft /watercraft etc. at an early date and forward the same to it for 
consideration. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to give final shape to its plan 
within a definite time frame. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
12.7 The Modernisation Plan of CPMFs envisages upgradation of Weaponry, 
Communication System and Motor Vehicles including Water crafts. After the approval 
15 

of the Cabinet, procurement of these items will be done as per the phasing indicated in 
the plans. For acquisition of Aircraft for the CPMFs, a separate proposal is being 
formulated for obtaining approval of the Cabinet. 
12.7 .I For arising of new Battalions, an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) has been set up 
to draw up a 5 year plan for augmenting the strength of the Para Military Forces 
including the Rashtriya rifles, keeping in view the post Kargil situation. The IMG has 
already fmalized its report. The recommendations of IMG will be put up for 
consideration of the competent authority after consultations with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
12.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. However, it would like to 
further pursue the matter while examining the Demands for Grants (2001-2002). 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 74) 
Delhi Police 
13. The Committee notes that the Government bas assigned the study on manpower 
requirements and modernisation needs of Delhi Police to the BPR&D. The Committee 
hopes that the study Report of BPR&D will be able to provide a blueprint for the 
moderni sation of Delhi Police. Keeping in view the nature and the magnitude of the 
services being rendered by Delhi Police and the expectations people have from it, it 
becomes essential that the study being undertaken by BPR&D is submitted to the 
Government within the stipulated time frame so that timely action is taken by the 
Government on the recommendations. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.1 The Bureau of Police Research and Development's have since submitted Part-1 
of the report on 6111 September 2000 . It has been emphasized on the Bureau to expedite 
the submission of the full report . 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMI'ITEE 
13.2 The Committee notes that Part II of BPR&D's Report on Delhi Police has 
also been submitted to the Ministry. The Ministry bas since furnished Action Taken 
Notes on the recommendations contained in the Report of BPR&D which the 
Committee proposed to scrutinize while examining the Demands for Grants (2001-
2002) of the Ministry. · 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 75) 
13.3 Another point which the Committee would like to emphasise is the financial 
implications of such recommendations. Often, it has been experienced that 
recommendations of an expert committee or of a research institution are put into cold 
storage on the grounds of paucity of requisite funds and even if they are accepted , they 
are not implemented wholeheartedly. As a result of this, the very purpose of undertaking 
a study gets defeated. Therefore, the Committee hopes that the Government will make 
16 
1 

requisite funds available to the Delhi Police for implementing the recommendations as 
contained in the report of BPR&D. To further illustrate the concern of the Committee, it 
would be pertinent to mention the state of 17 new Police Stations established in 1998 by 
Delhi Police. It has come to the notice of the Committee that these police stations are 
functioning without any basic infrastructure mainly due to the non-availability of 
requisite funds. The Committee fails to comprehend the logic of first sanctioning a 
project/plan/programme and then not providing requisite funds for its effective 
implementation. The Committee, therefore, hopes that the Government will keep this 
aspect in mind while implementing the recommendations of BPR&D in relation to the 
manpower requirements and modernisation of Delhi Police. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.4 The very objective for which the Study has been assigned is to obtain a 
comprehensive report on the requirements of Delhi Police so that these could be met with 
in order to improve 1ts overall capabilities. It will be, therefore, the Government's 
endeavour to implement the recommendations contained in the report as expeditiously as 
possible. The non-availability of sufficient funds, however, does constitute an important 
constraint because of which it becomes unavoidable at times to priorities the 
requirements and implement the recommendations in a phased manner. 
13.4.1 As regards the newly established 17 Police Stations, whereas one Pol ice Station 
has been provided with a permanent building, 10 are functioning from buildings of the 
existing Police Posts or Police Stations; two from residential flats; one from a temporary 
structure and three from tentages. In order to provide permanent buildings to them. Delhi 
Police have acquired land for 12 Police Stations. Besides Delhi Police have sanctioned 
Porta Cabins for 5 of them as an interim measure. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITi''tE 
13.5 The Committee has found the reply of the Ministry unsatisfactory. It 
strongly recommends that all the 17 newly set up Police Stations in Delhi must be 
provided with permanent buildings expeditiously. 
RECOMMENDATIONS (Para nos.79-80) 
13.6 The reply of the Ministry clearly reveals that no such dedicated wing has so far 
been set up by Delhi Public Works Department. The Committee is constrained to 
comment that first it was the specific recommendation for setting up a Housing 
Corporation for Delhi Police which was cold shouldered by the Government and then it 
failed to keep its own words with regard to the setting up of a dedicated wing of Delhi 
Public Works Department for catering to the housing requirements of Delhi Police. 
13 .6.1 A strong plea was made in the Committee by the Commissioner of Police about 
the need for setting up of a separate Housing Corporation for executing the works of 
Delhi Police. He sought the support of the Committee for the same as it was considered 
to be the right solution to the problems of Delhi Police. Some discussion took place in 
the matter. Some Members narrated the experience of the Anhdra Pradesh and Karnataka 
Police Housing Corporations. Having considered the matter in all its aspects, the 
Committee once again strongly recommends the setting up of Housing Corporation for 
Delhi Police. It directs the Ministry to take up the matter afresh with the concerned 
17 

authorities and make all out efforts to see that the proposal gets translated into reality at 
the earliest. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.7 The main reason because of which it has not been possible to adequately increase 
the housing satisfaction for Delhi Police is the shortage of sufficient Plan funds. It is, 
therefore , doubtful whether establishment of the Housing Corporation for Delhi Police 
will in itself meet the requirement. On the other hand, creation of a Housing Corporati on 
without sustained financial support by the Government might only lead to increase in the 
overheads· and become a burden on the public exchequer. 
13.7.1 The other constraint has been the inability of Public Works Department (PWD) 
of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to satisfactorily cater to the 
requirement of Delhi Police because of their commitments elsewhere . This impediment 
was sought to be removed by creating a separate Wing of the Public Works Departmen t 
to exclusively cater to the housing needs of Delhi Police. This , however, did not 
materialize as the Government of National Capita l Territory of Delhi, which exercise 
administrative control over this department, expressed their inability to set up such a 
dedicated Wing. The Government have in this context decided in principle to permit 
Delhi Police to have their housing projects executed through public sector constructi on 
companies as and when the need arises. In fact, cle3rance for execution of two specific 
housing projects through public sector undertakings has already been conveyed to Delhi 
Police. 
13.7.2 Nonetheless, the recommendation made by the Hon'ble Committee to establish a 
Housing Corporation shall be given serious consideration by the Government. The study 
undertaken by the BPR&D on Delhi Police includes assessment of its housing 
requirements . The matter shall be, therefore, examined in depth in the light of 
recommendations to be made in the said study. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
13.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to further 
pursue the matter while examining the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of tbe 
Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 81) 
13.9 As regards the traffic management in Delhi, the Committee has taken note of the 
steps being taken by Delhi Police to improve the traffic scenario of the capital. It, 
however, is not satisfied with the approach being adopted by Delhi Police to ease out 
traffic congestions. [t understands the necessity of identifying problem areas but at t he 
same time feels that traffic being a perennial problem, keeping in view the ever 
increasing number of vehicles on Delhi roads, needs to be looked at in its entirety. A 
piecemeal approach is not going to make Delhi 's traffic scenario any better. The need of 
the hour is to prepare a comprehensive and futuristic perspective plan based on scientific 
assessment of the overall traffic scenario. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
Delhi Police should prepare a detaile d perspective plan which takes care of both present 
as well as future traffic management requirements of Delhi. 
18 

ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.10 The need to formulate a perspective plan for management of traffic in Delhi is 
fully accepted . The Study flSsigned to BPR&D also covers this aspect. In the meantime, 
Delhi Police have also directed their traffic unit to prepare a detailed perspective plan to 
take care of the present as well as future traffic management requirements in Delhi. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
13.11 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. However, as regards the 
detailed perspective plan being prepared by the Traffic Unit of Delhi Police, it 
would like to take it up at the time of the examination of Demands for Grants of 
Delhi Police for the year 2001-2002. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 82) 
13. 12 While scrutinising the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of Delhi Police, the 
Committee deciphered a peculiar trend in the expenditure pattern of the former. It was 
observed that despite asking for more funds at the R.E. 1999-2000 stage under different 
heads (both voted and charged) of the Non-plan segment as also the Revenue and Capital 
sections of the Plan Schemes, the funds so earmarked could not be spent till February 
2000 and despite the short fall, the BE 2000-2001 have been considerably hiked under 
many heads. However, there appeared a desperate effort to indulge in last minute 
spending before the close of the financial year. This, in the view of the Committee, is not 
a healthy trend. The expenditure of the funds allocated for a particular financial year 
should be evenly spread out through the year instead of going in for last minute spending 
spree. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.13 The observation of the Committee have been noted and instructions have already 
been issued by Delhi Police to all Districts/Units of Deputy Commissioners of Police to 
ensure that expenditure of funds should be evenly spread out throughout the year instead 
of going in for the last minute spending spree. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
13.14 The Committee aotu the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 84) 
13.15 The Committee having noted the information is of the view that the Government 
may examine the feasibility of transferring the administrative control of Forensic Lab 
from the Government of Delhi to Delhi Police. 
19 

ACilON TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.16 The Government of NCT of Delhi are of the view that the transfer of 
administrative control of Delhi Forensic Science Laboratory from Delhi Police to the 
Home Department was imperative to achieve the desired standards of objectivity, 
impartiality, reliability, clarity and authenticity of results and to uphold the cherished 
ideals of scientific neutrality. The credibility of forensic examination reports is 
considerably enhanced in judicial scrutiny if the forensic laboratory conducting the 
examination of crime exhibits is independent of the control of the Investigating Agency, 
namely, the Police. The underlying idea is that a scientific report which comes before a 
court of law is a witness neither for the prosecution nor for the defence but is a witness 
for the court. The National Human Rights Commission has also in one of its recently 
published documents emphasized the need to keep forensic laboratories away from the 
control ofthe Police. 
13.16.1 The matter will, however, be considered in depth on receipt of the report on the 
Study assigned to BPR&D. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
13.17 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 86) 
13.18 The Committee is of the view that the proposal pending before the Ministry of 
Home Affairs may be expeditiously examined. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
13.19 A Policy Planning Group has been set up in the Ministry of Home Affairs to 
study the financial set up of Delhi Police. The study assigned to BPR&D will also 
examine the existing scheme of financial powers delegated to the Commissioner of Police 
and make suitabl.e recommendations. The matter will be examined in the light of these 
reports . 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMIITEE 
13.20 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATIONS (Para nos. 88-89) 
Visa Regime for Pakistani Nationals 
14. The Committee has taken note of the unilateral relaxati ons extended to the 
· Pakistani nationals in order to facilitate greater people-to-people contact between the 
citizens of both India and Pakistan. It is, howeve r, really unfortunat e that the 
Government of Pakistan has not made any reciprocal gestures in response to the 
unilateral friendly initiatives of Government of India. In this context, it is also pertinent 
to mention that such relaxation s have often been misused. This is precisely the reason 
why a large number of Pakistani nationals after having entered the Indian territory 
20 

mysteriously disappear. These Pakistani nationals are very difficult to be traced because 
of several biological and racial similarities which they share with their Indian 
counterparts. As a result of that they freely indulge in anti-India activities right on the 
Indian soil. A large number of them are even alleged to be the trained agents ofiSI. 
14. I It is in this backdrop that the Committee has come to the conclusion that in the 
effort to befriend a hostile neighbour of ours, we should not put our own security in 
danger. Care should be taken to see that in the name of people-to-people exchange, 
people coming from across the border do not become a potent threat to the security and 
integrity of our country. The Committee is, therefore, of ~e considered opinion that the 
visa regime regulating the visit of Pakistani nationals to India should be made stringent, 
restrictive and based on hundred per cent pre-verification and on the principle of 
reciprocity. 
ACTION TAKEN /PROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
14.2 Grant of visa to Pakistani nationals, for the purpose of visiting India, is governed 
by the provisions of lndo-Pak Visa Agreement, 1974, as amended from time to time. The 
agreement is based on reciprocity. However, in 1992, the Pakistan Government had 
unilaterally imposed a more restrictive procedure for issue of visas to Indian nationals by 
introducing steps such as 100% pre-verification regime and a system of sponsorship 
certificate. India has, so far, been following a more liberal visa policy towards the Pak 
nationals. Besides, during 1997-99, the Government of India have made several more 
relaxation in the visa regime for Pak nationals. 
14 .2.1 Approximately 50,000 to 60,000 Pakistani nationals visit India each year on 
short-term visitor visas. Although the existing rules and procedures regarding the entry, 
stay and movement of Pak nationals in India have been tightened, a large number of Pak 
nationals have either managed to over-stay or have gone underground. As per available 
information, the number of overstaying/underground Pak nationals is more than 1 I 000. 
Out of these, approximately 2500 are untraced or missing which could be quite 
detrimental to our national security. 
14.2.2 In order to tackle the problem of Pak nationals indulging in anti-national 
activities and in view of the unilateral restrictions imposed by Pakistan on the visit of 
Indian nationals to Pakistan, this Ministry prepared a note for the COS and a draft 
Cabinet Note proposing, inter-alia, introduction of 1 00% pre-verification, the system of 
sponsorship certificate and Visa Sticker. While other agencies supported stricter visa 
regime, the Ministry of External Affairs were not in favour of the proposal. The Note 
was considered by the COS in August 1995 and in view of the divergence in views at 
MHA and MEA, it was decided that the entire issue incorporating the views of MHA and 
MEA would be placed before the Cabinet. A Cabinet Note was accordingly prepared 
which incorporated the views of the MEA that the present time was not appropriate for 
introducing a restrictive visa regime on reciprocal lines for Pak nationals. The then 
Home Minister recorded in August, 97 while sending the file to PM that it was not the 
opportune moment for introducing a more restricted visa regime and the situation should 
be watched for some more time. Accordingly, with the approval of PM, the 
consideration of the Cabinet Note was deferred in September, 1997. 
14.2.3 In July, 1998, considering the worsening security scenario in India, the views on 
the proposal of the Cabinet Note were called for from MEA, R&A W and lB. While 
21 

R&A W and IB have favoured imposition of stricter visa regime, view of MEA are 
aw~ited despite several reminders. 
14.2.4 Recently, the issue relating to the introduction of pre-verification regime and 
system of sponsorship certificate · for Pak nationals was discussed in a meeting held in this 
Ministry. It was decided in the meeting that the Indian High Commission in Islamabad 
would refer, at random, about 1000 visa applications for pre-verifica tion by Indian 
security agencies before grant of visa. If the study shows a definite trend, i.e., an 
overwhelm ing majority of the applicants are either furnishing fake addresses or fake 
indian references etc., the system may be reviewed and the introduction of pre­
verification/spo nsorship certificate regime may then be considered. 
14.2.5 The apprehension mentioned above has been confirmed in the said study. 
Accordingly , this Ministry has initiated the process of preparing a Note for the Cabinet 
proposing the introduction of a pre-verification /sponsorship certificate regime. The 
results of this exercise have also been communicated to MEA for obta ining its comments 
in the matter. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
14.3 The Committee notes the reply oftlte Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para II(), 91) 
BSF 
15. The Committee has taken note of the requirements of BSF and it feeJ.s that they 
need urgent attention of the Government. It was given to understand that 15 battalions of 
BSF do not have their independent headquarters as a result of which they are housed in 
the headquarters of other battalions. Keeping in view the extremely demandin g nature of 
duties the BSF has to perform, the lack of basic infrastructure to its battalions must be 
having a crippling effect on the operational efficiency of the Force. The Committee , 
therefore , is of the view that all the 15 battalions of BSF which do not have their own 
headquarters should be provided with their own as early as possible. It feels that there 
will be greater effic iency, better coordination and higher morale of these battalions once 
they posses their own headquarters. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
15 .I BSF does not have any permanent assets at present for 2 Frontier Hqrs. 14 
Sector Hqrs., 1 STC and 46 Battalions. This includes 8 temporary Bns. Which have not 
yet been sanctioned permanent assets since they are deemed to be temporary and 3 newly 
sanctioned Bns. These 3 newly sanctioned Bns. also have been raised on temporary 
basis. The figure of 15 Bns. seems to have been erroneously mentioned . 
15 .1.1 BSF has indicated that i! would be possible for it to adjust 4 Sector Hqrs. and 3 
Bns. within the availab le land. Similarly, 1 Frontier Hqrs ., 1 Sector Hqrs. and 10 Bns. 
Hqrs. can be adjusted within the existing establishment after acquisition of some extra 
land adjacent to existing establishments. However, land would have to be acquired for l 
Frontier Hqrs., 9 Sector Hqrs., I STC and 25 Bns. This does not include 8 Bns., whieh 
22 

are deemed to be temporary Bns. since their locations have not been finalized . 
Acquisition of land and creation of permanent assets is an on going process and continues 
to receive Government 's attention . 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
15.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 92) 
15.3 Another issue which the Committee would like to highlight is the much needed 
increase in the total number of battalions of BSF. ln this context, the Committee observes 
that the menace of mass infiltration of trained militants and mercenaries into Jammu & 
Kashmir from across the border both at international border as well as Line of Control 
(LoC) can be effectively tackled if the BSF is relieved of its counter insurgency 
operations in Jammu & Kashmir . However, the Committee is not oblivious of the fact 
that it is equally important to maintain a comfortable force level within the State too. But 
this does not, in any way, undermine the necessity of deploying more forces on the 
border . Another aspect is the focus of the strategy of our forces . The Committee is of the 
considered view that the emphasis of our strategy to quell militancy should be on taking 
adequate preventive measures and one of such measures is to deploy more forces on the 
border so that porosity of lndo-Pak border could be minimised . Therefore , the 
Committee , has come to the conclusion that there is an urgent need to augment the force 
level of BSF. Accordingly, it recommends that 22 additional battalions should be 
sanctioned to BSF as per the recommendation of Working Group on Border 
Management. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
15.4 Sanction for 3 Bns. ofBSF was issued in the last fi~tancial year. 
15.4.1 An Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) has been set up to draw up a 5 year plan for 
augmenting the strength of the Para Military Forces including the Rashtriya Rifles, 
keeping in view the post-Kargil situation . The Inter-Ministerial Group has already 
finalized its report, which includes raising the strengthening of BSF as well. The 
recommendations of lMG are being put up for consideration of the competent authority 
after consultation s with the concerned Ministries/Departments . 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMIITEE 
15.5 Though the Committee is fully aware of the circumstances which compel the 
Government to deploy certain forces to perform certain daties which are not part of 
their primary duties yet it feels that specialized forces should be used only for the 
purposes for which they have come beeo set up. 
23 

RECOMMENDATION (para no. 95) 
NSG 
16. The Committee recognises the importance of the role being played by NSG as an 
elite force ofthe country. It also notes the distinction ofNSG as being one of the special 
forces of the world. Keeping in view the special status ofNSG, it is imperative that it is 
provided with all the requisite paraphernalia to enable it to retain its elitist profile. For 
this, it should be ensured that it does not feel the pinch of financial constraints and 
cumbersome office procedure. The Committee was given to understand that NSG has 
submitted an ambitious modernisation plan having the financial implication of Rs.82.4 
crores to the Ministry of Home Affairs. The plan envisages procurement of some 
selective state-of-the art equipment and weapon systems. The Committee has taken note 
of the requirements of NSG and feels that these equipment and weapons should be made 
available to it without any delay. However, given the existing scheme of things for 
procuring them, it is remotely possible to get them expeditiously. In view of the existing 
cumbersome system, it does not seem possible to acquire these equipment and weapons 
for NSG before a considerab le period of time is lost in the procedural wrangles. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should immediately set up two 
Empowered Committees as proposed by NSG to facilitate early procurement of required 
equipment and weapons for NSG. The Committee is also of the opinion that the 
Government should explore the possibilities of delegating the authority and the 
functions of the Procurement Wing of Ministry of Home Affairs to the NSG 
Headquarters so that the chances of delay in actual procurement are also minimised . 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
16.1 NSG's Modernisation Plan involving an expenditure of Rs.82.40 crore over a 
period of 5 years starting from 2000-01 to 2004-05 has been included in the 
comP.rehensive Moderniation Plan of the CPMFs to be approved by the competent 
authority 
16.1.1 With a view to expediting the process of procurement, and, also, removing the 
bottlenecks in procurement of specialized weapons/equipments for NSG, it is proposed to 
constitute a Standing Empowered Committee on the lines obtaining in the Ministry of 
Defence with the representatives of this Ministry, NSG and experts from other 
organizations/agencies. The proposed Empowered Committee will have full powers to 
identify the source and conduct trials/evaluations of weapons/equipments . The 
Committee shall follow the established procurement procedure i.e. hold trials, invite 
technical & commercial bids and hold negotiation with the L-1 Vendors. 
I 6.1.2 With a view to speeding up the process of procurement, the DGs of CPMfs, 
including NSG, have been delegated financial powers up to a limit of Rs.50 lakh for 
procurement of machinery and equipment items in January, 2000. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
16.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry . However, it would like to be 
informed whether tbe Standing Empowered Committee proposed to be constituted 
procurement of specialized weapons/equipment for NSG has been set up or not? If 
not, by what times it is likely to be constituted. 
24 

RECOMMENDATION (para no. 96) 
16.3 The Committee noted that the deployment of NSG Commandos as sky marshals 
in cerlain flights of Air India and indian Airlines since December 1999, in the wake of 
the hijacking of IC 814, has been over-publicised in the media. The Committee is 
disturbed over the scenario. It feels that due discretion and circumspection should be 
exercised by the authorities and the media in such sensitive matters. If details of such 
deployment are public knowledge, it would defeat the very purpose of the arrangement 
and would provide enough scope to hijackers to circumvent the anti-hijacking 
arrangements. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the authorities to be careful 
and selective in briefing the press and media and urges upon the press and media to 
exercise utmost restraint in reporting such matters. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
16.4 The observations of the Committee have been noted and the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and DG, NSG have also been advised accordingly. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMIITEE 
16.5 Tbe Committee notes tbe reply of tbe Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATIONS (para nos. 98- 99) 
CISF 
17. The Committee notes the two new assignments of CISF namely, airport security 
and consultancy services for security and fire safety to all industries. It was given to 
understand that CISF personnel were deployed at 9 airports of the country to ensure their 
security. Similarly, as a result of amendments to the CISF Act carried out in 1999, CISF 
was authorised to enter into the field of consultancy services for security and fire safety 
to all industries. 
17.1 The Committee hopes that deployment of CISF at the airports will definitely 
bring about a qualitative change in the entire gamut of airport security. Airports being 
vital installations as they are, will be more secure and much safer than ever with the 
taking over of their security by the CJSF. However, the Commrttee, at the same time, is 
of the view that airport security is much more specialised a job as compared to manning 
the PSUs. Keeping in view the specialised nature of this job, it is essential that personnel 
entrusted with this job, have adequate exposure of their new assignment. This can be 
ensured by imparting necessary training to them. Along with the necessity of imparting 
specialised training, the Committee opines that creation of a 'Special Airport Security 
Unit' in CISF will further help in improving the quality of security. A special unit like 
this will not only help CISF focus on the minute aspects of airport security but it will also 
help it in acquiring skillful expertise in this field. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
17.2 CISF personnel are being given intensive pre-induction training before their 
deployment on Airport duties. Special emphasis is being laid on the following:-
25 

a) Mental & physical alertness 
b) Combat fitness 
c) Aviation security duties. 
d) Use of modern technical gadgets & communication equipment. 
e) Observation and related tactics 
t) Effective use of dog squad 
g) Good mannerism, pasien88f courtesy and public dealing. 
h) Honesty & integrity. 
i) Language skills. 
17.2. I All the Gazetted Officers, Sub Officers and selected other ranks are being given 
specialized training by Bureau of Civil Aviation Security at respective Airports before 
deployment of ClSF. These officers tn turn further train other personnel of the 
contingent before deployment. 
17.2.2 Seats in a number of courses on Aviation Security training at BCAS Training 
Centre, New Delhi have been allotted to CISF and Force personnel are being trained to , 
improve their professional competence. 
17.2.3 Senior officers from CISF Hqrs. are being regularly detailed to monitor 
performance of CISF personnel deployed on Airport duties and they are also imparting 
on the job training to improve their skills for public dealings. Special emphasis is being 
laid on courtesy and good manners. 
17 .2.4 As on date CISF has been inducted in 19 Airports in the country with the total 
strength of 3829 officers/men. Ministry of Home Affairs have already given sanction for 
inducting CISF at 10 more Airports with the total strength 1336 officers/men. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
17.3 The Committee oace again empltuiaes tlte aeed for creation of a special 
airport security unit of CISF and puts eve11 greater emphasis on the specialized 
training for the CISF personnel for the p•rpose. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no.lOO) 
17.4 With regard to the Consultancy services proposed to be offered by CISF, the 
Committee is of the opinion that CISF will have to reach out to its prospective clients if it 
really wants to mark its presence in the highly competitive and market-driven field of 
consultancy services. The Committee hopes that CISF is fully geared up to don its new 
mantle. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSJ:D TO BE TAKEN 
17.5 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and brought to notice of 
DG, CISF for compliance. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
17.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
26 

RECOMMENDATION (para no. 101) 
17.7 In the sitting of the Committee held on 29 March 2000, the Chairman and 
members had put a number of queries and sought clarifications on various issues to the 
Director-General of CIS F. The Committee directed the Director-General to send written 
responses thereon to the Secretariat latest by 3 April 2000 so that same could be 
considered by it in the subsequent meeting and suitably incorporated in the Report. 
However, till the time of adoption of this Report on 11 April 2000, the written responses 
from CISF had not been received. The Committee took strong objection to the non­
compliance of its direction by CISF. In the absence of the- requisite 
clarifications/responses, the Committee has been derived of critical inputs. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
17.8 The matter was taken up with CISF. ClSF has replied that subsequent to 
its presentation before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 291h March, 
2000, a number of queries were received from Hon'ble Chairman and Members 
of Committee. The replies to these observations could be finalized onJy after 
ascertaining factual accuracy of information relating to the queries. This took 
time. As a result, detailed replies to the points/queries of the Committee were 
submitted by CISF to the Committee Officer, Rajya Sabha Secretariat 'with 70 
copies each in Hindi and English on 11 .4.2000. 
17.8.1 CISF has been directed to ensure timely submission of replies to 
Parliamentary Standing Committee in future. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITI'EE 
17.9 Tbe Committee notet tbe reply of tbe Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 103) 
CRPF 
18. The Committee appreciates the services being rendered by the CRPF to the 
nation despite being over-stretched and extensive deployment It feels that the 
Government should not let a dedicated force like CRPF feel the pinch of resource 
constraints. A force with a deployment level of as high as 98.35 percent should not be 
starved of funds if the morale of the force is to be kept high. Therefore, the Committee, 
strongly recommends that the Government should allocate required funds under the heads 
'Office Expenses', 'Ration Money' and 'POL' as per the demands ofCRPF . 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
18.1 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The additional 
requirements, if any, of the CRPF under the heads "Office Expenses", "Ration Money" 
27 

and "POL" shall be considered at the time of Revised Budget Estimates for the current 
financial year. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
18.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATIONS {Para nos. 105-106) 
ITBP 
19. The Committee recognises the services being rendered by ITBP for the security 
of the nation and lauds its unflapping commitment in keeping an effective vigil on the 
borders. It also appreciates the praiseworthy contribution of ITBP in conducting 
humanitarian relief and rescue operatiotlS in mountainous terrain struck by natural 
calamities such as earthquakes, landslides, floods, etc. Keeping in v1ew the 
comme ndable work being done by ITBP, the Committee feels that it is the duty of the 
Government to remove the problems besetting this one of the premier police forces of the 
country. 
19 .I The Committee was given to ur"erstand that after 1994 there has been no 
increase in the strength of the force. Not even that, its reserve battalions have also been 
pressed into internal security duties. As a result, the entire strength of ITBP is deployed . 
This leaves absolutely no room for the personnel to take enough rest- as there are no 
reserves to relieve the already deployed personnel. The situation warrants raising of 
additional battalions. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that adequate number of 
additional battalions should be raised as per the ground assessment of ITBP. However, 
these additional battalions should be exclusively raised for border management. The 
Committee also recommends that a comfortable level of reserve battalions should be 
maintained so as to keep the stress and strain level of the force as low as possible . 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
19.2 An Inter-Ministerial Group (lMG) has been set up to draw up a 5 year plan for 
augmenting the strength of the Para Military Forces including the Rashtriya Rifles, 
keeping in view the post Kargil situation. The Inter-Ministerial Group has already , 
finalized its report . The recommendations of IMG are being put up for consideration of 
the competent authority after consultations with the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
19.3 The Committee reiterates its view that specialized forces should be used only 
for specialized purposes. 
28 

RECOMMENDATION (para no. 107) 
19.4 The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the fact that the facility of 
concessional fare being extended to the defence personnel when they proceed on leave, 
by the Indian Airlines, is denied to the personnel of CPMFs. ITBP personnel are hit the 
hardest by this discriminatory policy of Indian Airlines. Moreover, ITBP is also denied 
the facility of hiring private chartered flights to enable its personnel to proceed from 
forward areas for their onward journey when sanctioned leave. The Committee feels 
that this kind of discrimination should end. It, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs should take up the matter with the Indian Airlines to offer the facility of 
concessional fare to the personnel of ITBP and other CPMFs proceeding on leave forthe 
to and fro journeys especially in Leh-Srinagar-Jammu sector. At the same time, the 
Government should consider allowing ITBP personnel to fly by private chartered flights 
as in the case of defence personnel. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
19.5 The matter has already been taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
extend the facility of 50% concession in their domestic services to the serving CPMF 
personnel and their family members. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMIITEE 
19.6 The Committee n.otes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para ao.108) 
19.7 Another severe problem having an adverse effect on the functioning of ITBP is 
the acute shortage of staff both at its Headquarters as well as in its Pay & Accounts 
Office. The Committee was surprised to know that soldiers were being used to work as 
clerks in order to make good for the shortage of staff. The Committee has taken a very 
serious note of it and accordingly recommends that the Government should immediately 
make sufficient number of personnel available to the ITBP both for its Headquarters as 
well as for its Pay & Accounts Office. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
19.8 The SIU study in respect ofHqrs. ITBP and Central Record Office oflTBP, was 
Carried out in 1990. The study recommended creation of 90 posts along with surrender 
of 2 posts, both in the office of DG, ITBP and Central Record Office . However, in the 
meanwhile the Ministry of Finance issued orders for I 0% cut in posts under the Home 
Ministry as a whole, before proposals to create posts could be processed further. 
Considering the internal security situation, the Ministry of Finance was requested to 
exempt the CPMFs from this condition. That proposal of exemption of CPMFs from this 
cut has not been accepted as yet. The SIU report has been taken up once again with the 
Ministry of Finance for their concurrence, but the Ministry of Finance has advised to 
defer the proposal in view of the latest instructions of 24.9.2000 according to which no 
posts can be created for one year. 
29 

19.8.1 As far as the Pay & Account Office is concerned, no SIU study has been 
undertaken so far. ITBP has submitted a proposal for creation of 73 additional posts for 
strengthening of this office on the assessment made internally by the Pay & Accounts 
Office. But due to austerity measures, no posts can be created for one year. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
19.9 The Committee notes tbe reply oftbe Miniltry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para do.llO) 
Assam Rifles 
20. The Committee is happy to note that Assam Rifles is putting untiring efforts 
both to stamp out insurgency from the North-Eastern region and to keep an effective vigil 
on the border of that region. It is also praiseworthy that Assam Rifles is doing excellent 
budgetary management despite feeling the pinch of resource constraints. However, the 
Committee feels that this pinch should not affect the execution of its housing projects 
within the prescribed time limit. It is, therefore, recommends that the Government should 
allocate another Rs.l 0 crores to the Assam Rifles in the financial year 2000-200 I itself so 
that it is able to complete its housing projects well within the prescribed time limit. 
ACTION T AKENIPRUPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
20.1 ln the Current Financial year Assam Rifles has been sanctioned the following 
funds: 
1) 
2) 
Plan (Housing) : 
Non-Plan 
Rs.l2.00 crores. 
Rs.53.50 crores 
Rs.65.50 crores 
In the RE for the current financial year the following amount has been projected 
by Assam Rifles for approval. 
I) 
2) 
Plan(Housing) 
Non-Plan 
Rs.l2.00 crores 
Rs.58.00 crores 
Total Rs.70.00 crores 
20.1.1. The allocation of Rs. 3 crores to Assam Rifles has been projected under Non­
Plan for Residential Buildings. The position would be clear only after finalisation of 
Revised Estimates for the current financial year. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
20.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Mi.aistry. 
30 

RECOMMENDATIONS (Para nos. 114, 116, 118, 119, 111, 122, 123 & 12S) 
Personnel Policies followed in CISF 
21. The Committee had discussed these aspects in detail and had made extensive 
recommendations on certain aspects. Para 107 to 130 ofS4 111 Report deal with the issues 
and recommendations . The Ministry of Home Affairs demonstrated very casual approach 
towards the problem. During the courl>'e of consideration of Demands for Grants(l999-
2000). the Committee had raised certain pointed queries and a written questionnaire was 
also sent to Ministry Of Home Affairs and DG , CISF. The replies sent to this Committee 
were either incomplete or factually incorrect. This was brought to the notice of Ministry 
in the subsequent correspondence, but the Ministry instead of rectifying the situation 
evaded the problem. As such the status got reflected in the 54th Report in the 
form of observatio ns and recommendations of the Committee. Para 120,121,126,127 and 
130 of the said report had reflected the anguish of the Committee in no uncertain terms. 
In the Action Taken Replies on the 54'h Report sent to the Secretariat on 30 November 
1999. the Ministry of Home Affairs again did the same thing. Instead of setting the record 
straight, they preferred to overlook the specific recommendations on the specific issues 
and evaded replies wherever contradictions were pointed out. On the issues relating to 
service conditions of direct recruit CISF officers through Civil Services Examination , the 
Ministry replied ; "A Committee under the Chairmanship of SS(ISP), MHA has been 
constituted to examine the service grievances of directly recruited Grade 'A' officers of 
CISF. Further action will be taken after the recommendations of the Committee become 
available." This reply has been fitted to every aspect of the problem whether it be 
clarification for a factual inaccuracy or calling for any factual information from the 
Ministry. 
21.1 If the first reply of the Ministry to questionnaire on A TNs is juxtaposed to the 
second reply, it would clearly appear that the Home Ministry while sending the A TN on 
30.11.1999 had suppressed facts from the Standing Committee. The Nikhi1 Kumar 
Committee Report was accepted for implementation on 31.8.1999 but it is surprising to 
note that Ministry of Home Affair's ATN dated 30.11.1999 states that "further action 
will be taken after the recommendation of the Committee bec-ome available". This is a 
clear-cut case of furnishing wrong and misleading information by the Government to the 
Committee which may amount to breach of privilege and contempt of the Committee 
and thereby of the House. 
21.1.1 The above reply of the Ministry is again misleading and an attempt to confuse 
the Committee. How can the Ministry furnish information in end November, 1999 of a 
position which was prevailing in July, 1999? 
21.1.2 Ministry of Home Affairs in its second reply has stated that the Report ofNikhil 
Kumar Committee was accepted for implementation by Government on 31.8.1999. If 
this is the factual position, how can the Ministry in its third reply say that as the 
finalisat10n of Report took time, the position of July, 1999 was sent to the Committee on 
30.11.1999. These two answers are self-contradicting and instead of setting the record 
straight, have tried to confuse the Committee. 
21 1.3 After listening to the point raised by the Chairman, the Home Secretary assured 
that he shall look into this matter personally and find out if there had been any mis-
31 
• 

reporting or intentional withholding of information. He then stated that he shall report to 
the Committee the outcome of his enquiries. 
21.1.4 Here it is important to point out that despite the assurance of Home Secretary, the 
Ministry vide their communication dated 5.4.2000 sent its response in the matter. It is 
astonishing to note that the latest response of the Ministry is a verbatim reproduction of 
their third reply dated 29.3.2000. This reply was circulated amongst the members on 
6.4.2000. 
21.1.5 It is shocking to find that the Ministry has chosen to repeat the earlier reply 
despite serious objection being taken to it by the Committee and the Home Secretary 
assuring the Committee to personally look into the matter. 
21.1.6 The way the Ministry has handled this episode, raises serious questions about the 
responsiveness of the Ministry towards the Committee. Instead of showing contrition, it 
has in the first place given wrong information, repeated the same and in a quick move 
sought to retrace its steps by sending the revised reply. The Committee feels that this 
matter cannot be allowed to rest at this and it proposes to consider the issue further at its 
next meeting. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
21.2 An inquiry has been conducted by an officer of the rank of Special Secretary into 
the circumstances under which factually incorrect information was submitted in response 
to the issues/questions raised by the Hon 'ble Members of the Committee. Based on the 
inquiry repo.rt, .the Home Secretary has submitted, in writing, to the Hon 'ble Chairman 
that factually incorrect information was indeed submitted to the Committee. As has been 
explained in the communication addressed to the Hon'ble Chairman, the initial 
misreporting was on account of lack of coordination between the concerned Sections in 
the Police Division of the Ministry, namely, Personnel Section which was substantively 
concerned with the processing of the Nikhil Kumar Committee report, and the 
Coordination Section which collected and compiled the information from various 
Sections of the Police Division on the recommendations contained in 54th Report of the 
Committee and drafted the replies. The Personnel Section had sent information relating 
to the Nikhil Kumar Committee on 20th May, 1999 stating that further action would be 
taken after the recommendations of the Nikhil Kumar Committee became available. The 
coordination Section prepared the replies on the basis of information received from 
various Sections and forwarded these replies to the Parliament Section of the Ministry on 
19th July, 1999. Meanwhile, the report of the Nikhil Kumar Committee had been 
received on 14111 June, 1999. However, the Personnel Section failed to inform the 
Coordination Section about the submission of the report by the Nikhil Kumar Committee. 
The Coordination Section, too, failed to check with the Personnel Section before framing 
the replies. Senior Officers should have noted this and taken appropriate corrective 
action which they unfortunately did not. While there is is no doubt that there was a 
noticeable lapse on the part of the Sections and Officers for which they have been 
cautioned, there has been no intentional withholding of information or a wilful attempt to 
mislead the Committee or its Hon'ble members. The Home Secretary has, therefore, 
tendered his unqualified apology on behalf of the Ministry of Home Affairs and its 
officers and has assured the Committee that every thing possible would be done to avoid 
32 

recurrence of such a mistake in future and also to ensure that the recommendations of the 
Committee are dealt with, with utmost care and seriousness. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMIITEE 
21 .3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATIONS (Para nos. 126, 127,128,129,130,134,135,136,138 & 139) 
21.4 The Committee fails to understand how this is going to address the problem of 
already stagnating Direct Recruits . 
21.4.1 In this respect it is pertinent to point out that while examining Demands for 
Grants of the last year a pointed question was asked about Rota Quota System. It was 
submitted to the Committee that Direct recruits are put above the promotees and optees. 
However , subsequently when the Committee referred to the Civil L1st the situation was 
otherwise and the Ministry, thereafter, gave correct reply without apologising for 
furnishing incorrect answer. 
21.4.2 The comparison with BSF or CRPF is absolutely misplaced as the source of their 
recruitment , qualifications prescribed, disabilities imposed and the career prospects 
promised at the time of recruitrpent are not similar. 
21.4.3 The Committee feels that the Group B officers who were elevated to the status of 
Group A in 1987, retrospectively , will continue to occupy the senior most positions in 
the cadre for many years to come. The argument that younger age will favour them does 
not carry much weight. Since the Group C officers have been promoted directly to Group 
A level and have been placed above directly recruited officers , they occupy senior 
positions at a younger age which will continue to neutralise much of the advantage of 
younger age otherwise available to younger officers . The Committee came to know 
another glaring discrimination against direct recruits. The Ministry of Home Affairs in 
their replies have drawn parity with other CPMFs. It is clear that the CISF officers could 
not compete again for the Group A services in the next examination . The officers of other 
CPMFs faced no such restrictions . The restrictions of the rules of the Civil Services 
Examinations were applicable only to the services included in the notification. The idea 
behind imposing such restrictions was that all the Group A services were equal in status 
and career prospects. Before imposing such restrictions on this premise, the Government 
should have been careful to see whether these services really offered those prospects. 
Rather than doing so, these premises were offered in justification of the restrictions 
before the Administrative Tribunal Principal Bench in Alok Kumar v/s Union of India 
and before the Supreme Court in Mohan Singhania v/s Union of India . Since the 
Government has all along been asserting that career prospects for all these services are 
equal , it is the responsibility of Government to see to it that CISF direct recruits are 
offered same kind of service conditions like other organized services of Group A . The 
Committee is of the view that since the CISF officers had been promised a parity with the 
IRS, Customs , Central Excise etc., the attempt to justify parity with other CPMFs is 
unconvincing and preposterous. This seems to be a systematic attempt to deny these 
officers their due . When it comes to allow these officers to appear for subsequent Civil 
Services Examination to improve their positions they are being denied opportunity citing 
33 

the reasons that they are Group A officers like others of Civil Services, but at the same 
time when it comes to offering of same service conditions of Group A officers , they are 
equated with the officers of CPMFs. This is also noteworthy that CPMF officers other 
than direct recruits can appear for Civil Services. The Committee expresses its deep 
anguish that norms of natural justice and right to equality are being blatantly violated by 
the Ministry and feels this would pave the way for avoidable litigation. 
21.4.4 Both prior and subsequent to 1987, there has been no restrictions on competing 
or being allocated from one Group A service to another Group A sen ice . There is no 
reason why this benefit has been denied to the officers for ten years. Now, that the 
officers have been victims of these rules and the change of rules carries more relevance to 
them, it is all the more important that they be placed in the position which was the 
foundation offraming of these rules. 
21.4.5 All the arguments raised in the note submitted by the CISF were clearly intended 
to protect the interests of the IPS officers and to ensure that the cadre officers do not 
become eligible for promotions for a considerable period. 
21.4.6 This shows that the CISF Headquarters have been protecting and furthering the 
interests of the IPS officers at the cost of its own organisation. Recommendations of the 
Nikhil Kumar Committee, attempts to submit evasive and misleading information to the 
Parliamentary Committee etc. are all efforts in that direction. 
2 1.4. 7 It is not the need based character of the force but the most distorted and 
discriminating policies followed in the force which has been playing havoc with the 
career of the young officers. All policies have been framed to suit service interests of 
the IPS officers and without any regard for the status of a Group A service. Cadre 
review or recruitment rules, all actions have been directed to subserve the aforesaid ends. 
21.4.8 All said and done, the Committee strongly reiterates its recommendations in the 
matter as contained in para 130 of 54'h Report regarding re-allocation of these direct 
recruit Group A officers of CISF who were recruited through Civil Services 
Examinations into Indian Police Service (IPS) or many other Group A Services to settle 
their grievances. 
21.4.9 The Committee urges upon the Ministry to have a fresh look at the subject with 
an open mind and take a favorable decision. The Committee, accordingly, directs the 
Ministry to apprise it of the outcome of the exercise as also the outcome of the proposed 
meeting of direct recruit officers with the Home Minister. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
21.5 DG, CISF, along with some of the directly recruited (through Civil Service 
Examinations) officers of the CISF met the Home Minister on 24.4.2000 and made a 
presentation. They have again met Home Minister on 24.7.2000. 
21.5. I The points raised by these officers are being considered again by the 
Government. 
21.5.2 It is expected that the final decision on the issues relating to grievances of the 
directly recruited Group 'A' officers will be possible by 31.12.2000. 
34 

RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
21.6 The Committee takes strong exception to the manner in which the Ministry 
of Home Affairs has treated its recommendations in regard to the redressal of the 
grievances of the directly recruited Group • A' officers of CISF. It unanimously 
feels that these office1·s are being subjected to continued harassment because of 
faulty personnel policies being followed by the Government in relation to them. 
The Committee criticises the diversionary and dilly-dallying attitude of the 
Ministry in responding to its specific observations/recommendations in this regard. 
It deplores the fact that first the Ministry misled the Committee, regretted for the 
same and then informed that a decision was likely to be taken by 31 December 
2000 on the recommendation of the Committee made by it two years ago and 
reiterated subsequently more than once. However, the Ministry could not come up 
with the final decision by that time and informed the Secretariat that the matter 
was likely to be finalised by 28 February 2001 which was precisely two months 
beyond their earlier deadline of 31 December 2000. After the lapse of the second 
deadline i.e. 28 February 2001, the Ministry bas again informed that a decision in 
the matter is expected to be finalised by 30 April 2001. In this way, the Ministry 
bas extended the deadline twice on its own. The Committee is anguished to note 
that the Ministry has merely informed the Secretariat about the extended 
deadline. It has not sought extension of time from the Committee for sending its 
action taken note on the subject. This proves that the Ministry is adopting a very 
casual approach in the matter and in effect, it is taking the Committee for 
granted. In this backdro,, the Committee once again hopes that its 
observations/recommendations in this regard shall be looked into by the 
Government in their right perspective, in a time bound manner and details of the 
decision conveyed to it at the earliest. 
21 .6.1 The Committee in this context notes that its Chairman being authorized by 
it, bas written twice - 4 December, 2000 and 8 March, 2001 - to the Minister of 
Home Affairs conveying Committee's feelings, observations and reiterations in the 
matter and also conveying Committee's annoyance over the lackadaisical manner in 
which the whole episode has been bandied by the Mini.stry. While an 
acknowledgement to the first letter of tbe Chairman was received from the Minister 
on 7 December 2000, his responses to the issues raised in the letters are still awaited. 
The Committee is, however, optimistic that an early reply would be forthcoming 
from the Minister of Home Affairs. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no.143) 
Delhi Home Guards 
22. The Committee has taken note of the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs in 
this regard. It is, however, not satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry. It feels that 
Delhi being a Union Territory albeit with legislature, the Ministry has an overall 
responsibility . It is, therefore, incumbent upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure 
that corrupt practices prevalent in the recruitment of Home Guards in Delhi, are checked 
forthwith. As regards , the problems being faced by the Home Guards in Delhi, the 
Committee hopes that a transparent and workable policy being formulated in this regard 
by the Government of NCT of Delhi, will soon be in place. The Committee also urges 
35 

upon the Government to explore the possibility of enacting a new Home Guards Act for 
Delhi. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
22.1 The Government ofNational Capital Territory of Delhi have recently formulated 
policy guidelines with regard to enrolment, re-enrolment and discharge of Home Guard 
Volunteers in Delhi. The salient features of these guidelines are as follows:-
(i) Approval of the Lieutenant Governor, Delhi has been made mandatory before the 
Directorate of Home Guards, Delhi initiates the process of enrolment/re­
enrolment of Home Guard Volunteers. 
(ii) Vacancies shall be filled only after issuing public notice in two National Daily 
newspapers, one in English and one in Hindi. Copies of notices shall also be 
pasted at the designated places. 
(iii) Application forms shall be made available free of cost, by incorporating the 
format in the public notice. 
(iv) A Selection Board offour members, under the chairmanship of the Commandant­
General, Home Guards and Civil Defence, Delhi has been created for fair and 
just select ion of volunteers. 
(v) List of selected applicant to be sent to the Home Department, Government of 
NCT of Delhi for seeking the approval of the Lt. Governor of Delhi for 
appointment as members of the Home Guards. 
(vi) One last opportunity to the discharged Home Guard Volunteers for seeking 
appointment as Home Guard Volunteers for another term of three years has been 
given as special dispensation subject to conditions mentioned in the policy 
guideli nes. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
22.2 Tbe Committee notes tbe reply oftbe Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION(para no. 146) 
Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme 
23. The Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry and urges upon 
the Government that pensions be granted to the eligible persons without any delay. It is, 
however, not clear whether the cases brought to the notice of the Committee have been 
included in the list of eligible persons or not for grant of pension. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that cases of such nature which have not been included in the list 
of eligible persons as well as any other cases which may be submitted to the Government 
in future, should also be considered favourable by the Government. 
36 

ACTION TAKEN /PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
23.1 The decision of the Government of India to recognise the movement for the 
liberation of Dadra and Nagar Haveli for the purpose of grant of pension under 
Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980 was communicated to the Secretary 
(GAD), Government of Maharashtra on 11 .2-fOOO, with the request to infonn the 
concerned freedom fighters and forward their applications, duly verified by the State 
Government. On receipt of requisite verification reports from the State Government of 
Maharashtra , Samman Pension has been sanctioned in 82 cases w.e.f. 31.7.2000 vide 
sanction letters dated 20.10.2000. 
23.1.1 During the meeting of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Home Affairs on 23.3.2000, Shri Shrinivas Patil, M.P., had raised the points about 
those freedom fighters who had been beaten and kicked into Indian side by the 
Portuguese . Shri Patil also wrote to the Home Secretary in·connection with this matter 
stating that he had received a representation from such freedom fighters. Shri Patil was 
requested to send a copy of the representation so as to enable the Ministry to examine the 
matter further. A reply from Shri Patil is still awaited . A copy of Shri R.D. Kapur, 
Special Secretary (NE), Ministry of Home Affairs D.O. No.4/11/98-FF(P) dated 
1.5.2000, addressed to Shri Patil, in this regard is enclosed at Annexure ' B'. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
23.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 149) 
. 
23.3 The Comm ittee notes the information furnished by the Ministry in the regard and 
at the same time expresses its unhappiness over the fact that out of 20,505 case~ 
recommended by the Special Screening Committee, pension has been sanctioned in only 
7,000 odd cases. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government of Andhra 
Pradesh to expedite the furnishing of verification reports in the remaining cases so that 
pension could be granted to the eligible persons without any further delay. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
23.4 The verification reports from the Government of Andhra Pradesh are still 
awaited. 
23.4.1 The State Government vide their letter dated 31
51 
May, 2000 have asked for some 
modification in the procedure for verification. The matter is being examined. A reply to 
the State Government will be sent shortly. 
RECOMMENDATION /OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
23.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
37 

RECOMMENDATION (para no. 152) 
23.6 The Committee notes the information furnished by the Government and 
recommends that in case of the Union Territories, the Government should extend the 
benefit of dearness relief to the freedom fighters who are receiving pension from the 
Union Territories Administrations. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
23.7 The Union Territory Administrations have been asked to indicate the financial 
implication involved to enable the Government to take a comprehensive view in the 
matter. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
23.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 158) 
Increasing Dependence of States on CPMFs/CBI 
24. The Committee notes the response of the Home Secreta ry and hopes that 
satisfactory progress will be made in the coming years in the directions, as indicated . lt 
wishes to reiterate even at the cost of repetition that creation of additional Central forces 
and referring and inc.reasing number of cases to CBI are not the right solutions to the 
problem. Accordingly to the Committee the right approach would be to allocated 
sufficient funds under the Scheme of 'Modernisation of Police Forces' so that the State 
Police and investigative agencies are properly trained, well equipped with arms and 
requisite state-of-the-art infrastructure, thereby enabling the States to efficiently 
discharge their constitutional responsibilitie s. This would help forge strong and 
harmonious Centre-State relations . 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
24.1 The observations of the Committee have been noted. However, keeping in view 
the requirements of meeting the challenge s posed by terrorists and insurgents and 
simu ltaneousl y strengthening the State Police Forces, it is felt that there has to be a 
proper mix of State Civil Police, State Armed Police and the Centra l Para Military For ces 
(CPMFs). The additional requirements of CPMFs in the country is on account of border 
guarding and enhanced threat due to terrorism and militancy. The CPMFs are better 
trained and maintained to tackle such problem s. At the same time the State Police is 
being strengthened by sanctioni ng India Reserve Battalions to the States . 
24.1.1 The Non-Plan Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces has been in 
operation since 1969-70 to supple ment the efforts of the State Governments in this 
regard. Funds under the Scheme are released on 50% loan and 50% grants-in-aid basis. 
The state Governments are required to provide an equal amount as matching contribution. 
During the period 1969-70 to 1999-2000, a total amount of Rs.536. 74 crores was released 
to various State Governments. Presently, the allocation for 2000-0 I is Rs.200 crore 
38 

(Rs.l 00 crore normal assistance and Rs.l 00 crore special component). Out of the funds 
allocated towards the normal Scheme, an amount of Rs.34.24 crore has already been 
released to various State Governments. The balance amount would be released on receipt 
of complete utilisation certificates for the previous financial year from the respective 
State Governments. 
24.1.2 In the Chief Ministers· Conference held on 5.8.2000, the Hon'ble Prime Minister 
announced that the funds towards police modernisation would be enhanced from Rs.200 
crore to Rs.l 000 crore for the next ten )Cars. Accordingly, a proposal is under 
consideration, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, to enhance the annual 
allocation from Rs.200 crore to Rs.l 000 crore towards police modernisation. 
RECOMMENDATION /OBSE RVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
24.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 159) 
24.3 The Committee wishes to take this opportunity to reiterate once again its firm 
view that the Central Paramilitary Forces ought not to be put on duties other that for 
which the respective force was raised. As already stated on many a earlier occasion, the 
aberrations in their deployment profile lead to a host of complication and problems 
which have a telling effect on their morale and efficiency. It is in the knowledge of the 
Committee as to what happens when a specialised force like NSG or ITBP are deployed 
on duties for which they are. neither meant nor trained or for that matter what happens 
when BSF Jawans after performing border duty, are sent for counter-insurgency duty 
and then sent back to border without rest and recuperation. So, it is high time that this 
trend is reversed and each force performs its duties for which it was raised. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
24.4 The observations of the Committee are un-exceptionable and have been note. 
However, in view of the over all security scenario, utilisation of various specialised 
forces for internal security/counter insurgency has become inescapable. As and when 
additional forces are raised as per the recommendations of Inter-Ministerial Group, it will 
be possible to revert back the specialised forces to their primary role. 
RECOMMENDAT ION/OBSERVAT ION OF THE COMM ITTEE 
24.5 The Committ ee notes the reply of tbe Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 162) 
Dharam Vira Commission Reports and Police Reforms 
25. The Committee notes the response of the Home Secretary and directs the 
Ministry to keep it informed in detail of the progress made in the matter from time to 
time. 
39 

ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
25.1 The directions ofthe Committee have been noted for compliance. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
25.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry . 
RECOMMENDATION (para no.l65 ) 
Federal Crime/Federal Law Enforcement Agency 
26. The Committee directs the Ministry to keep it infonned from time to time of the 
progress made in the matter. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
26.1 This proposal was considered in the Chief Ministers ' Conference and was not 
agreed to. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMIITEE 
26.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry . 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 169) 
Sales Tax in Pondicherry 
27. The Committee notes the factual position and recommends that the new policy 
decision vis-a-vis uniform floor rate of sales tax may be implemented in Pondicherry 
after persuading the Government of Pondicherry, keeping in view the apprehensions and 
sentiments expressed by the Legislature of the Union Territory. In this context, the 
Committee notes the assurance of the Government that if there is any loss of revenue on 
account of introduction of unifonn floor rates of sales tax in Pondicherry, the gap to that 
extend will be filled by the Central Government. 
ACTION TAKEN/P ROPOS ED TO BE TAKEN 
27.1 Out of 206 commodities identified to be brought within the ambit of unifonn 
floor rates of Sales Tax, the Government of Pondicherry have since covered 123 
commodities under the scheme. The Chief Minister of Pondicherry assured the 
Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers to monitor Sales Tax Refonns in the 
meeting held on 21$1 July, 2000 that the remaining commodities would also be soon 
brought within the purview of the uniform floor rates and that the Government of 
Pondicherry would also soon abolish the sales tax related incentives. 
27.1 1 It may be further added that the gap between the Non-Plan expenditure? the 
total receipts in respect of Union Territory Administrations is filled by the entral 
Government. Any loss of revenue on account of introduction of Unifonn Flor ..ates of 
40 

Sales Tax in Pondicherry will, therefore, be met with the Central Government as a part of 
normal budgetary exercise. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF mE COMMI'ITEE 
27.2 The Committee notes the reply oftbe Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no.172) 
Higher Plan Allocation for Union Territories 
28. The Committee strongly recommends that the matter of higher plan allocation for 
Union Territories at R.E. stage may be taken up by the Ministry with the Planning 
'Commission. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BETAKEN 
28.1 The matter has been taken up with the Planning Commission. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
28.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECE)MMENDATION (para no. 174) 
Official Language 
29. The Committee feels that Government should take adequate measures so that 
constitutional obligations are met satisfactorily and tangible results are achieved in this 
regard. The Committee is of the view that the Resolution adopted by the Parliament has 
not been implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Government to provide adequate budgetary support to various Hindi projects and 
programmes. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
29.1 The Government have been implementing the Official Language Policy for 
progressive use of Hindi in the Central Government Offices through persuasion, 
motivation and goodwill. According to the Resolution passed by both Houses of 
Parliament in December, 1967, the Department of Official Language have been preparing 
an intensive and comprehensive programme every year for the propagation and 
development of Hindi and for its progressive use for various official purposes of the 
Union. Accordingly, Annual Programme is prepared every year for transacting the 
official work of the Union in Hindi and all Ministries/Departments etc. are expected to 
achieve the targets fiXed in the programme. Besides this, the Department of Official 
Language have been providing training in Hindi, Hindi typing and Hindi stenography. 
The Administrative Heads of various Central Government Offices are expected to ensure 
that the provisions of the Official Languages Act, 1963, Official Language Rules and 
directions issued thereunder are properly complied with. 
41 

29.1.1 Adequate budgetary support already exists for implementing the various 
programmes/schemes for progressive use of Hindi in Central Government Offices. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITI'EE 
29.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 175) 
29.3 The Committee is of the view that Government has not been successful in 
promoting the concept of linguistic federalism in the country. All Indian Languages 
should be promoted country-wide so that each one has a chance to learn the language of 
one's choice and interest . This idea can be translated into practice if the Government 
allocates more funds for the promotion of all Indian Languages throughout the count!'). 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
29.4 The matter relating to promotion of all Indian Languages is the concern of 
the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development. The 
Department of Official Language, under the Ministry of Home Affatrs, are 
responsible for promoting the use of Hindi for the official purposes of the Union 
as distinct from the development of Hindi and other Indian Languages. 
29.4.1 According to information received from Department of Education in the 
context of a Parliament Question, the Department of Education had set up a 
Central Institute of Indian Languages at Mysore in 1969, for the propagation & 
development of modem Indian languages. Its important activities are as follows:-
(i) Development of regional languages through research material 
production and training. 
(ii) Preparation of teaching books and instructional material. 
(iii) Pictorial glossaries in regional languages. 
(iv) Financial assistance to voluntary organisations and State agencies. 
(v) Grant of awards for book writing in regional languages. 
(vi) Development of audio-visual packages for learning and teaching 
regional languages. 
Besides thts -
National Council for Promotion of Urdu and Sindhi has been set up. 
Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan propagates the learning of Sanskrit in the 
country. 
42 

29.4.2 The financial outlay for the development of languages as a whole during 
the 9th Five Year Plan (1997-2002) is Rs.258.95 crore. 
29.4.3 The Department of Official Language have sent the relevant paragraph 
(No.l75) for appropriate action to the Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
Department of Education. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
29.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION (para no. 177) 
North-Eastern Council 
30. The Committee, however, feels that the budgetary provisions eannarked for the 
region are not commensurate v. ith the financial package announced by the Prime Minister 
and the recommendations of the H1gh Powered Commission. Therefore, the Committee 
is of the view that there is an urgent need to strengthen the Central Resource Pool meant 
for the reg1on at the RE stage. There is also need to strengthen the North-Eastern 
Council so that the initiatives taken for the soc1o-economic development of the region at 
the national level are taken to their logical end. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
30. I All the Ministries and Departments in the Government of India, except those 
which were specifically exempted, have to spend 10 percent of their Budget in the North 
East. Considering that the population in the North East is only about 3.73 percent of the 
total Indian population, it is considered that this allocation is sufficient. 
30.1.1 The Agenda for socio-economic change announced by the Prime Minister at 
Shillong on January 22, 2000 concerns mainly the Central Ministries and these Ministries 
are making adequate provision for the same in their respective Annual Plans. In so far as 
the recommendations of the High Power Shukla Commission are concerned, that 
Commission had recommended an allocation of Rs.93619.0 I crores for infrastructure and 
Rs.9391 crores for basic minimum services as an additionality to the normal plan 
allocations. In view of budgetary constraints there is an urgent need to prioritise these 
recommendations so that it is possible to implement them in a time bound manner. The 
Planning Commission is currently engaged in this exercise. 
30.1.2 Insofar as the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources is concerned, the funds 
for th1s are released from the unspent amount of the 'I 0 percent' allocated for the North 
East by various Ministries. As and when there is complete utilisation of the 10 percent 
allocation for the North East, there would be no Central Pool of Resources available. The 
accretions to the Central Resources Pool would, therefore, vary from year to year. 
30.1.3 The Government agree on the need to strengthen the North Eastern Council. The 
North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 has already been introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha It is hoped that this would be taken up for consideration during the next Session 
of Parliament. 
43 

RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITI'EE 
30.2 The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry wish to record that 
during its study visit to the North-Eastern region in October, 2000, a meeting at 
ltanagar with representatives of the North-Eastern Council bad to be abruptly 
because the NEC officials could not satisfactorily reply even to the initial queries of 
the Members. It appeared to the Committee that since the NEC representatives bad 
not come fully prepared for the meeting, no useful purpose would have served by 
carrying on wit the same. The Committee was of the strong view that a full-Hedged 
discu!.sion on the functioning of NEC needed to be belli. 
30.2.1 It bas since been decided to interact with the representatives ofl't"'EC as part 
of Committee 's scrutiny of tbe Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS (Para nos.178-182) 
General Observations 
Attitude of Ministries/Departments towards Parliamentary 
Standing Committees 
31. The prime objective of setting up of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committees was to facilitate detailed discussion on the Demands for Grants of 
the related Ministries/Departments in a free, frank and objective manner. To achieve that 
objective, the Committees have been closely interacting with the Secretaries and other 
senior officers of the related Ministries/Departments and have also been caUing for 
relevant papers and documents. The focus of the Committees has been to consider 
relevant issues in their right perspective with the aid of necessary inputs furnished by the 
Ministries/Departments and help the Ministries/Departments in arriving at appropriate 
decisions. Many a time it has been clarified that these Committees are not fault­
finding in nature; they are not courts of inquisition. On the contrary the aim of the 
Committees is to work in close cooperation with the executive in the discharge of its 
duties. 
31.1 However, it has been observed over the years that the related 
Ministries/Departments and their Secretaries and other senior officers are not frank and 
forthcoming with the Committees in sharing information/facts with them. Rather the 
tendency has been to be evasive and not to reply to specific points and queries. This 
makes the work of the Committee difficult. 
31.2 A special reference may be made about the quality of the Action Taken Replies 
furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee as contained in its 54th Report ( 1999) on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee is constrained to observe that in response 
after response the Ministry bas been sketchy, evasive and has sought to bye-pass the main 
issues involved. In respect of certain matters particularly in relation to the grievances of 
the directly recruited Group 'A' Officers of CISF, the Ministry has repeatedly given 
factually incorrect and misleading information to the Committee. Here, it may be relevant 
44 

to point out that in the meeting of the Committee held on 31.3 .2000, the Home Secretary 
assured that be shall look into this matter and find out if there had been any misreporting 
or intentional withholding of information. The Home Secretary then informed the 
Committee that he shall report to it the outcome of his enquiries. It is astonishing that 
despite the specific and clear assurance of the Home Secretary on the floor of the 
Committee, the Ministry has chosen to send to it the same reply to which the Committee 
had taken serious exception. Then, in a bid to quickly retrace its steps, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs after two days, sent a revised reply and regretted to inconvenience caused. 
This speaks volumes of the fact that the Ministry of Home Affairs has been taking the 
Committee very lightly and paying scant regard to its observations/recommendations. 
31.3 The Committee thus places on record its strong sense of indignation over the 
indifferent attitude of the Ministry towards it. The matter will be placed before the 
Committee at its next meeting to consider the matter further in the light of reply from the 
Ministry ofHome Affairs. 
31.4 Nonetheless , the Committee once again wouJd like the Ministries/Departments to 
change their mindset and while dealing with the Parliamentary Committees, they should 
feel free and share all relevant information with it and offer their constructive cooperation 
in facilitating the Committees in fulfilling their charter of functions. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
31.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs are fully alive to the importance of role and 
functions of the Hon'ble Committee, the valuable guidance and assistance provided by 
the Committee to the Ministry as also to the Ministry 's responsibiHties to the Committee. 
The Ministry have taken note of the displeasure of the Committee at factually incorrect 
replies submitted to the Committee on certain points/questions raised by the Hon'ble 
members in relation to the grievances of directly recruited Group ' A' officers of ClSF . 
The facts and circumstances leading to submission of factually incotrect information to 
the Committee have been explained in the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations 
contained in paragraphs 114 to 125. The Home Secretary has tendered unqualified 
apology to the Committee on behalf of the Ministry of Home Affairs for the lapse 
committed by officers of the Ministry and has assured the Committee that everything 
possible would be done to obviate such a mistake in future and to ensure that the 
recommendations of the Committee are dealt with, with utmost care and seriousness. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITIEE 
31.6 Tbe Committee notes the rep ly of the Ministry. 
GENERAL OBSERVATION (para no. ~83) 
Reasons for Variations Between BE and RE 
32. The Ministry in its detailed explanatory note on the Demands for Grants 2000-
200 I have explained the reasons for variation in the figure of BE and RE ( 1999-2000) 
and BE (2000-2001) in respect of each demand of the Ministry. In this regard the 
Committee notes that under Demand No.48 (Other Expenditure of MHA) the Ministry 
has only indicated the areas where there have been shortfall in last year 's expenditure but 
no reasons have been given therefor. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
detailed reasons in this regard. The Committee recommends that in future reasons for 
45 

variations between BE and RE of current year and BE figures of the coming year 
should be clearly spelt out under each demand. 
ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
(a) Under Relief and Rehabilitation of repatriates from Sri Lanka (Rs.S.Ol crore) 
32.1 The Chief Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu had written to Home Secretary 
requesting for augmenting the budget provision meant for relief and rehabilitation of Sri 
Lankan repatriates/refugees at the RE stage in 1998-99 to a level of Rs.45 crore. The 
matter was considered in this Ministry and after due consideration of all the factors like 
the trend of past expenditure incurred in the past and the probable items of expenditure, it 
was decided to keep a budget provision of Rs.35 crore in the Budget Estimates for the 
year 1999-2000. 
32.1.1 The Government of Tamil Nadu were not able to prefer claims for expenditure to 
the extent of even this amount although they were reminded time and again in the matter. 
Keeping in view of the trend of expenditure, it was considered appropriate to bring down 
the requirement of funds to Rs.30 crore at theRE stage 1999-2000. 
(b) Under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Schemes based on the current 
trend of expenditure (Rs.3.23 crore) 
32.2 The actual expenditure durjng the last financial year i.e. 1998-99 was Rs.l77. 79 
crore. After making an additional provision ofRs.l2 crore for the payment of the second 
instalment of dearness reliefto freedom fighters w.e.f. 01.09.1999, the amount provided 
for in the Budget Estimates (1999-2000) was Rs.l89.45 crore. Keeping in view the 
expenditure during the first six months of the fmancial year (1999-2000) at an average of 
Rs.IS .25 crore per month, the amount provided for was scaled down marginally in the 
Revised Estimates 1999-2000 (i.e. from Rs.J89.45 crore provided in BE to Rs.J86.22 
crore) 
(c) Debt relief Scheme for borrowen in J&K due to less requirement (Rs.SS.OO 
crore): 
32.3 The variation in BE & RE for the year 1999-2000 was due to receipt of the less 
claims of borrowers as most of the borrowers have not been compensated. 
(d) Non-Payment to Chogyal (Rs.lO.OO crore) 
32.4 The issue of the settlement of the claims submitted by the Chogyal ofSikkim is a 
long standing issue following the merger of Sikkim with India in April, 1975. The then 
Chogyal of Sikk.im had submitted certain claims to the Government of India. The matter 
is under constderation ofthe Government of India since then. However, settlement is yet 
to be reached at between the Ex-Chogyal of Sikkim and the Government of India. This is 
due to the difficulty in assessing the exact value of the properties in respect of which 
compensations have been claimed by the Ex-Chogyal, at today's rate. Also, different 
Acts regarding property and land are required to be examined in detail. However, steps 
have been taken to resolve the issue and inter-ministerial Committees have been formed. 
Recently a meeting was held on the issues with the representatives of the Ministry of 
46 

Finance and the Department of Legal Affairs, etc. to suggest possible action towards 
settling the claims. Meetings have also been held with legal heirs of late ex-Chogyal and 
his lawyer. It is due to this that the amount of Rs.l 0 crore could not be utilised. 
(e) Less Subsidy in Helicopter (Rs.2.00 crore) 
32.5 The Helicopter Services could be operated only for 7 months during 1998-1999 
i.e. from 01.08.98 to 30.04.98 and Ol.l0.98 to 31.03.99. The services could not be 
operated during 01.05.98 to 30.09.98 due to early onset of monsoon in North Eastern 
Region and the prevailing bad weather conditions in that region. Further, there had been 
fewer demands for Heltcopter services by the Mmistries!Departments of the Government 
of India, as the services had been introduced recently and the officials were not familiar 
with the services. Therefore, the payment of hourly charges for the helicopter services 
has been considerably less, resulting in the excess savings. 
(f) Less requirement in Other Rehabilitation Programmes (Rs.J. 76 crore) 
32.6 In this connection it is stated that the money was provided in the budget of 
Ministry of Home Affairs for resettlement of refugees affected by ethnic violence in the 
State of Assam. Presently, 44,000 families (approx.) are staying in various camps ofthe 
Districts Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon Dhubri and Gossaigaon of Assam. 
32.6.1 A Central team comprising Joint Secretary (NE), Financial Adviser (Home) and 
other officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs visited Kokrajhar Camps, Assam on 
23rd/24111 October 1999 and askssed the situation on the ground . The Central team asked 
the State Government officials to chalk out an Action Plan to rehabilitate the refugees and 
wind up the carrl'ps within a time frame. 
32.6.2 Accordingly, the Government of Assam submitted their Action Plan in the month 
of November, 1999 to the Government of tndia to rehabilitate the refugees. The Action 
Plan was discussed in the meeting of SRE Standing Committee held on 26.11.1999 with 
the Government of Assam. In the said meeting, the aforesaid Action plan was approved 
in principle. However, it was felt that rehabilitation of refugee families could even be in 
manageable smaller batches supported by adequate security arrangements. The State 
Government were asked to submit their revised Action Plan along with a detailed 
Security Plan to shift the 15,000 refugee families to their erstwhile villages. It was noted 
that without Security Plan, shifting would not be effective. In the past, ~rsons who were 
rehabilitated were again attacked and lost everything and carne back to the refugee 
camps. 
32.6.3 Keeping in view the above facts, the above requirement was reduced to Rs.2.00 
crore. Rs.2.00 crore also could not be utilised because of delay in the submission of 
Action Plan by the Government of Assam to the Government of India resulting in 
savings. 
(g) Revision of the Plan outlay of the North Eastern Council (R.s.25.00 crore) : 
32.7 The Ministry of Finance in the mid year Pre-Budget review in September, 1999 
had reduced the NEC Plan Budget allocation from Rs.450.00 crore to Rs.425.00 crore. 
This was primarily because of inadequate expenditure in the frrst 5 months of the 
financial year 1999-2000. Expenditure booked against the NECPian Budget during the 
47 

period April to August, 1999 was Rs.l37. 71 crore against the BE figure of Rs.450.00 
crore i.e. approx 30%. The expenditure under "Grants-in-aid" and "Loans" was very low 
i.e. Rs. 6. 72 crore against the BE figures of Rs.l25.32 crore. The expenditure was also 
quite low in the schemes concerned with direct funding i.e. under Major Head "2552" 
where Rs.l5.03 crore was booked against BE figure ofRs.S6.52 crore. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMI'ITEE 
32.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
GENERAL OBSERVATION (para no. 185) 
Recruitment in CPMFs 
33. The Committee, therefore, recommends that candidates appearing in examination 
for recruitment as constables in CPMFs should be given an option to take the 
examination in any of the 18 languages as mentioned in the 81 Schedule to the 
Constitution. At the same time, there should also be a provision to ensure that the 
recruits acquire working knowledge of Hindi during their probation. 
ACTION T AKENIPROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
33.1 The matter relating to recruitment of Constables in CPMFs was examined m 
consultation with the CPMFs and DOP&T. The recruitment to various posts in the 
Central Government is governed by the Official Language Resolution, 1968 adopted by 
both the Houses of Parliament. The said resolution provides that for selection against a 
post of Centra l Government being recruited through an agency other than the UPSC, 
compulsory knowledge of either Hindi or English is required. As such, the policy of the 
Government for holding the written test either in Hindi or English in respect of 
recruitment of Constables in CPMFs is in conformity with the Official Language 
Resolution, 1968 since the recruitment is being done by CPMFs themselves. 
33.1.1 ln view ofthe Official Language Resolution, 1968 adopted by both the Houses of 
Parliament, the recruitment of Constables in CPMFs cannot be held in regional 
languages. 
33 1.2 In view of the advice of DOP&T and impracticability of holding the 
examination in 18 languages, it is respectfully submitted that the recommendation 
of Parliamentary Standing Committee cannot be accepted at this juncture. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
33.2 The Committee notes tbe reply of the Ministry. 
48 

MINUTES 

v 
FIFI1I MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, 8 February 2001 in Committee Room 
' A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Pranab Mukherjee----Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
' 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
7. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
8. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
9. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
1 0. Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
11 . Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta 
12. Shri Jayant Bhattacharya 
LOKSABHA 
13. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
14. Shri Samar Chaudhary 
15. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
16. Shri Vijay Goel 
17. Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
18. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
19. Shri P.H. Pandian 
20. Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel 
21 . Shri Subodh Ray 
22. Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
23. Shri Anadi Sahu 
24. Shri Manabendra Shah 
25. Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma 
26. Dr. Raghuvan sh Prasad Singh 
27. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
28. Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee , Deputy Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari , Committee Officer 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
51 

2. • • • • 
3.0 • • • • 
3.1 • • • • 
3.2 • • • • 
4. • • • • 
5. • • • • 
6.0 • • • • 
7. • • • • 
8. • • • • 
8.1 • • • • 
9. • • • • 
10. • • • • 
II. • • • • 
12. • • • • 
13. • • • • 
14.0 The Committee took .up for discussion the Action Taken Replies contained in the 59'h 
Report of the Comm1ttee on the Demands for Grants for 2000-2001 relatiftg to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
15.0 • • • • 
15.1 • • • • 
15.2 • • • • 
15.3 • • • • 
15.4 • • • • 
15.5 • • • • 
16. A verbatim record of proceeding was also kept. 
17. The Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again on 9 February 200 I. 
••• Relates to the other matters. 
52 

VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 27 March 2001 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
LOKSABHA 
5. Shri Samar Chaudhary 
6. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
7. Shri Vijay Goel 
8. Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
9. Shri Arun Kumar 
I 0. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
I I. Shri P.H. Pandian 
12. Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
13. Shri Anadi Sahu 
14. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
16. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
17. Shri La I Bihari Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members thereafter the Committee considered the draft 
6 7'\ 68'h and the 69
1
h Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-200 1 ). After a 
brief discussion the three Reports, were adopted. The Committee authorized the Chairman 'to fix 
a date for presentation/laying of the reports and nominate a member of Rajya Sabha and two 
members of Lok Sabha for the purpose. 
3. * : * * • 
4. * • • • 
••• Relates to the other matters 
53 

5. • • • • 
6. • • * • 
7. • * * * 
8. * • * • 
9. • • • • 
I 0. I • • • • 
I I. • • • •• 
12. • • • • 
13. * • • • 
14. • * • • 
15. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again at 11:00 A.M. on 28 March 200 I. 
••• Relates to the other matters. 
54 