PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 148
ND  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22 FEBRUARY, 2011)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22  FEBRUARY, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL
COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

107
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL
COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22 ND FEBRUARY, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 ND FEBRUARY , 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-287


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—31
1. Introduction .................................................................................................... 1—2
2. Salient features and necessity of Bill ........................................................ 2—5
3. Presentations of Ministry of Home Af fairs .............................................. 5—7
4. Views of Representatives of Residents’ Welfare Associations and MLA,
Delhi Cantt., Delhi Legislative Assembly and Member , NDMC ........... 7—8
5. Comments of Government on Evidence tendered by non-official
witnesses ........................................................................................................ 8—10
6. Final Comments of Ministry of Home Af fairs ........................................ 10—15
7. Deliberations of Committee ......................................................................... 15—21
8. Analysis of Government Justification for retaining status quo of
NDMC ............................................................................................................ 21—30
9. Recommendations of Committee ................................................................ 30—31
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF T HE C OMMITTEE—AT A G LANCE ... 32—33
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF C OMMITTEE ................................................. 35—64
6. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 65—99
I. The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill 2010 ................. 67—73
II. Press Release ................................................................................................. 74
III. List of persons/bodies from NDMC area who submitted Memoranda
on the Bill ...................................................................................................... 75—77
IV . Written comments submitted by Members on the Bill .......................... 78—99

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
*7. Shri Javed Akhtar
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri L. Raja Gopal
16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
17. Shri Naveen Jindal
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat)
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
* Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 st September, 2010 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who resigned from the Membership
of the DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f. 13 th September, 2010.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty-eighth Report on the  New Delhi Municipal Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred the  New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2010  (Annexure-I), as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 3
rd August, 2010 and pending therein,
to the Committee on 20 th August, 2010 ♣, for examination and report within two months i.e. by
19th October, 2010 which was extended initially upto 15 th November, 2010, followed by another
extension upto 31 st January, 2011 and finally upto 25 th February, 2011.
3. The Committee considered the Bill in eight sittings held on 21 st and 30 th September, 7 th and
22nd October, 23 rd November, 20 th December, 2010 and 5 th, 13 th and 24 th January, 2011. The
Committee held preliminary discussion on the Bill in its sitting on 21 st September, 2010 and heard
the presentation of Home Secretary in its next meeting held on 30 th September, 2010.
3.1 The Committee heard further presentation of the Home Secretary on the Bill in its meeting
held on 7 th October, 2010, and heard him once again in its next sitting held on 22 nd October, 2010.
In the sitting held on 22 nd October, 2010, the Committee felt that as the Bill involved certain policy
issues, it should hear the representatives of institutions of local self government, NDMC and
Residents Welfare Associations of private as well as government colonies in the NDMC area. The
Committee in its sitting held on 20
th December, 2010 h eard representatives of RW A of a private
colony and a government colony each from NDMC area and Shri Karan Singh Tanwar, MLA,
representing Delhi Cantonment Constituency (which included Sarojini Nagar, an NDMC area) and
also a member of NDMC, on the Bill.
3.2  In the sitting held on 20
th December, 2010 the Committee decided  to issue a press release
inviting written memoranda from the residents of the NDMC on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, the press release was issued, (Annexure-II). In response thereto, fifteen memoranda
were received (List of persons/bodies who submitted Memoranda is at ( Annexure-III).  The
Committee in its sitting held on 5
th January, 2011, further heard the Home Secretary.
3.3 Detailed comments on the Memoranda were received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and
circulated to the Members.  The Committee in its sitting on 13 th January, 2011, held another round
of discussion on the Bill.
3.4 Eleven Members of the Committee submitted their views in writing, in support of the Bill,
nine of which were identically worded. A Member of the Committee submitted his written
comments, against the Bill. (A copy each of the written comments, is placed at (Annexure-VI) .
3.5 The Committee in its next sitting held on 24
th January, 2011 further considered the Bill in
the light of the final response of the Ministry of Home Affairs. As no agreement emerged in the
Committee on the provisions of the Bill, it could not proceed with the clause-by-clause
consideration thereof and decided to present its report, incorporating all the view points.
♣ Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 47660 dated 20 th August, 2010.

(iv)
4. The Committee in its sitting held on 14 th February, 2011, considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
5. The Committee has made use of the following documents in finalizing the Report:–
(i) The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010;
(ii) The New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (No. 44 of 1994);
(iii) Background Note on the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010;
(iv) Eleventh Report of the Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) on New Delhi Municipal
Council;
(v) Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) on the
Ministry of Home Affairs – New Delhi Municipal Council;
(vi) The New Delhi Municipal Council Bill, 1994 (as introduced in the Lok Sabha on
13th June, 1994);
(vii) Lok Sabha Deb. dated 14 th June, 1994 on the New Delhi Municipal Council Bill, 1994;
(viii) Rajya Sabha Deb. dated 15 th June, 1994 on the New Delhi Municipal Council
Bill, 1994;
(ix) The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991 (as introduced in the
Lok Sabha on 16 th December, 1991);
(x) Lok Sabha Deb. dated 20 th December, 1991 on the Govt. of National Capital Territory
of Delhi Bill, 1991;
(xi) Rajya Sabha Deb. dated 21 st December 1991 on the Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991;
(xii) The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 (No. 1 of 1992);
(xiii) Report of Committee on Reorganisation of Delhi Set-Up (Balakrishnan Committee),
Parts I and II, December, 1989;
(xiv) Ashok Pradhan Committee Report on Multiplicity of Institutions (dealing with Urban
Development and Civic Amenities) in Delhi, Ministry of Home Affairs, October, 2006;
(xv) Local Governance: An Inspiring Journey Into the Future – Sixth Report of Second
Administrative Reforms Commission, Government of India, October, 2007; and
(xvi) State and District Administration – Fifteenth Report of Second Administrative Reforms
Commission, Government of India, April 2009.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman
14th February, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs

1
REPORT
1. Introduction
1.0 The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 (Annexure-I) seeks to amend
certain provisions of the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (No. 44 of 1994) relating to
composition of the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) and the procedure for presiding over the
meetings of the Council.
1.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in their Background Note stated that the NDMC Area
consists of about three per cent of the area of Delhi and three per cent population of the NCT
of Delhi. It comprises the territory that has been described as Lutyen’s Delhi and which has
historically been referred to as the seat of central authority in the Union of India. The area houses
important buildings like Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament House, Supreme Court, North and South
Blocks and buildings abutting Central Vista and also diplomatic missions which function as
territorial entities under the sovereign jurisdiction of their Flag States. It was further stated that the
Government of India is nearly the sole land owner and also owns about 80% of the buildings in
the NDMC area. Private ownership of property in this area is marginal. According to the Ministry,
on account of these special characteristics it was felt that any scheme for the governance of this
area based on conventional pattern of representative local self-government would be unworkable
and out of place, as the pre-eminent character of this area is that of being the seat of Central
Government.
1.2 The Ministry stated that a special legislation, namely, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act,
1994 was accordingly enacted for the governance of NDMC area. Regarding the composition of
the Council, the provisions of Section 4 of the Act, reads as below:
“(1) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:–
(a) a Chairperson, from amongst the officers, of the Central Government or
the Government, of or above the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi;
(b) three members of Legislative Assembly of Delhi representing
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the New Delhi area;
(c) five members from amongst the officers of the Central Government or
the Government or their undertakings, to be nominated by the Central
Government; and
(d) two members to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation
with the Chief Minister of Delhi to represent from amongst lawyers,
doctors, chartered accountants, engineers, business and financial
consultants, intellectuals, traders, labourers, social workers including
social scientists, artists, media persons, sports persons and any other
class of persons as may be specified by the Central Government in this
behalf.
(2) The Member of Parliament, representing constituency which comprises wholly
or partly the New Delhi area, shall be a special invitee for the meetings of the
Council but without a right to vote.

2
(3) Out of the eleven members referred to in sub-section (1), there shall be at least
three members who are women and one member belonging to the Scheduled
Castes.
(4) The Central Government shall nominate, in consultation with the Chief Minister
of Delhi, a Vice-Chairperson, from amongst the members specified in clause
(b) and (d) of sub-section (1).”
2. Salient features and necessity of Bill
2.0 The Ministry stated that the necessity for amending the NDMC Act, 1994, arose partly as
a result of the delimitation exercise in the NCT of Delhi and partly because of recommendations
of the Estimates Committee of the 14
th Lok Sabha and the Balakrishnan Committee. The Statement
of Objects and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill explains the legislative intent and the salient features of
the Bill, as under:–
“The New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 has been enacted to provide for the
establishment of the New Delhi Municipal Council and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. It provides, inter alia , that there shall be three Members of the
Legislative Assembly of Delhi, whose constituency fall fully or partly in the New Delhi area,
as Members in the New Delhi Municipal Council. After delimitation of Assembly
Constituencies in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, only two such Assembly
Constituencies fall within the New Delhi area and consequently only two Members of the
Legislative Assembly may become the members in the New Delhi Municipal Council.
2. Presently, the Member of Parliament representing the New Delhi area in the Lok Sabha
is a Special Invitee to the meetings of the New Delhi Municipal Council without voting
rights. The Estimates Committee of Fourteenth Lok Sabha in its Eleventh and Thirteenth
Reports recommended, inter alia , that the Member of Parliament should be given voting
rights.
3. In view of the aforesaid, it is proposed to amend the New Delhi Municipal Council Act,
1994 to provide, inter alia , that,—
(a) the Member of Parliament representing the New Delhi area in the Lok Sabha shall be
made a member of the New Delhi Municipal Council with voting rights;
(b) the number of members of the Legislative Assembly, who are members of the Council,
be reduced from three to two;
(c) the number of Members representing certain fields be increased from two to four;
(d) out of thirteen members there shall be at least three members who are women and two
members belonging to the Scheduled Castes in the Council, out of which one shall be from
the nominated Members representing certain fields.
4. In view of proposed inclusion of the Member of Parliament, referred to in sub paragraph
(a) of the preceding paragraph, in the New Delhi Municipal Council and two Members of
Legislative Assembly being the members of the New Delhi Municipal Council, it is further
proposed to amend the aforesaid Act to revise the procedure for presiding over the meetings
of the Council.”
2.1  The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note also stated that the Estimates
Committee of the 14
th Lok Sabha examined the whole issue of composition of the NDMC, and in
its 11 th Report, the Committee, inter alia , recommended that the Government should review the

3
desirability of modifying the composition of the Council, as recommended by the Balakrishnan
Committee. The Estimates Committee recommended as under:–
“The Committee note that Balakrishnan Committee constituted to look into the manner in
which the governance of the Union Territory should be carried on, also looked into the
functioning of the municipal arrangements in the area. That Committee had recommended
that NDMC should consist of a certain number of Members elected on the basis of adult
franchise and an equal number of members appointed by the Lt. Governor and the Vice
Chairman, NDMC should be elected by members themselves. As the area covered by
NDMC includes not only Government offices, Diplomatic Missions, etc., but also about
three lakh resident population, the Committee are of the view that the recommendations of
Balakrishnan Committee in this regard need to be reconsidered by the Government in all
seriousness. This attains even greater significance in view of poor participation of
nominated members of the Council in the meetings of the Council and its committees. The
Committee also note that according to Section 4(2) of the NDMC Act, 1994, the Members
of Parliament representing the constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the New
Delhi area, shall be special invitees for the meetings of the Council without a right to vote.
On the other hand, the MLAs representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly
the New Delhi area enjoy the right to vote in the Council meetings. The Home Secretary
was candid in admission during evidence: ‘I think it stands to reason that Members of
Parliament should also have voting right’. The Committee, therefore, stress that Government
should review the desirability of modifying the composition of the Council as recommended
by Balakrishnan Committee, keeping in view the basic democratic principles and also
granting voting right at the Council meetings to the Members of Parliament representing the
constituencies comprising wholly or partly the area under the jurisdiction of NDMC”
1.
2.2 Responding to the above mentioned recommendation, the Ministry of Home Affairs
furnished its Action Taken Note as under:–
“It has been decided that the aforesaid recommendations made by the Estimates Committee
are required to be looked into in greater detail to come to correct conclusion and for the
present the existing arrangement may be continued.”
2
2.3 The Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) in its 13 th Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in its 11 th Report on New Delhi Municipal Council
(NDMC), reiterated its earlier recommendation as under:–
 “The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry.
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in his deliberation during oral evidence has invariably
(sic) stated: ‘……But I think it stands to reason that Members of Parliament should also
have a voting right’. Apparently no serious efforts appear to have been made in this regard
after the presentation of the Report to the House. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation and desire that recommendations of the Balakrishnan Committee in
regard to modifying the composition of the Council be reconsidered in all seriousness and
Members of Parliament representing the constituencies comprising wholly or partly the area
under jurisdiction of NDMC should be granted right to vote in the Council meetings.”
3
2.4 The Ministry, in its background note, further stated that the Government of India considered
the recommendations made by the Estimates Committee, in consultation with the Government of
NCT of Delhi, the Ministry of Urban Development and the New Delhi Municipal Council and
decided that the existing system may continue, for the following reasons:–
1 Eleventh Report of Estimates Committee (2006-07) (14 th Lok Sabha) on New Delhi Municipal Council, page 43.
2 Thirteenth Report of Estimates Committee (2006-07) 14 th Lok Sabha on New Delhi Municipal Council page 2
3 ibid, pp. 2-3

4
(i) The NDMC area has a special status as the seat of the Central Government, and as
such a different kind of system had to be structured which took into account special
characteristics of the area.
(ii) While deciding composition of the NDMC, the recommendations made by the
Balakrishnan Committee were considered in all seriousness at the highest level.
(iii) The model adopted for the NDMC appears to be close approximation of what was
recommended by the Balakrishnan Committee, taking into account the special
characteristics of the NDMC area.
(iv) There is adequate representation of the public in the Council as almost half of the
total members of the Council are representatives of the public.
(v) The elected Government of the NCT of Delhi is consulted in the appointment of the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and two representatives of the public.
(vi) The Ministry of Urban Development, Government of NCT of Delhi and NDMC, as
also the Ashok Pradhan Committee, set up by Ministry of Home Affairs to study
multiplicity of institutions in Delhi, are in favour of maintaining status quo.
(vii) The role of the Member of Parliament in the Council has been envisaged as ‘Special
Invitee’, and not as a Member. As such, it may be difficult to grant voting rights to
the Special Invitee.
2.5 The Ministry informed this Committee that the Government of India re-considered the entire
issue relating to the composition of NDMC vis-à-vis recommendations contained in the 11
th and
13th Reports of the Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha), Balakrishnan Committee Report and in
the wake of delimitation of constituencies. It was felt that the Member of Parliament representing
the New Delhi area in the Lok Sabha, may be made a member of the Council with voting rights.
2.6 The Ministry stated that sub-section (1) of section 25 of the NDMC Act, 1994 provides
that the Chairperson or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, or in the absence of both, such other
member present, as is decided by the Council, shall preside at every meeting of the Council. It
was, however, felt that this order may be re-arranged so as to ensure public representation in its
correct spirit and perspective. The Ministry, therefore, stated that it was proposed that the
following order may be followed in presiding over the meetings of the Council:
(i) The meeting of the Council should be chaired by the Chief Minister in case he/she
represents the constituency which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area,
and such member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi attends the meeting as a
member of the Council.
(ii) The meeting of the Council should be chaired by the Minister of the Central
Government if he/she happens to be the Member of Parliament representing the
constituency which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area and such Member
of Parliament attends the meeting as a member of the Council.
(iii) The meeting of the Council should be chaired by the Minister of the Government of
NCT of Delhi if he/she represents the constituency which comprises wholly or partly
the New Delhi area and such member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi attends
the meeting as a member of the Council.
(iv) A meeting of the Council should be chaired by the Member of Parliament, not being
a Minister of the Union, representing the Constituency which comprises wholly or

5
partly the New Delhi area, and such Member of Parliament attends the meeting as a
member of the Council.
(v) In all other cases, the Chairperson of the Council may continue to chair the meetings
of the Council as at present.
3. Presentations of Ministry of Home Affairs
3.0 The Home Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs made a
presentation before the Committee on 30 th September, 2010.
3.1 Explaining the special characteristic of NDMC, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home
Affairs stated that it is charged with the municipal governance of New Delhi area, consisting of
about three per cent of area and three per cent of population of NCT of Delhi. It comprises of
important buildings like Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament House, Supreme Court, South Block and
North Block and also houses diplomatic missions which function as territorial entities under the
sovereign jurisdiction of their Flag States. She also stated that the Government of India is nearly
the sole land owner and owns about eighty per cent of the area while private ownership of
property is marginal. NDMC area comprises the territory regarded as the seat of central authority
in the Union of India. She argued that in view of the special characteristics of the area, governance
based on conventional pattern of representative self-government was found unworkable.
Accordingly, a special legislation, namely, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 was
structured for the New Delhi area.
3.2 The Additional Secretary, reiterating the salient features of the Bill, and elaborating the
procedure for presiding over the meetings of the Council, stated that the following order was
proposed for chairing the meetings of the Council to ensure public representation in correct spirit
and perspective:–
(i) Chief Minister of Delhi (In case he/she represents the New Delhi area in the
Assembly)
(ii) Minister of the Central Government (if he/she is an MP representing New Delhi)
(iii) Minister of the GNCTD (if he/she is an MLA representing New Delhi)
(iv) MP representing New Delhi constituency
(v) Chairperson
(vi) Vice-Chairperson
3.4 After the presentation, Members of the Committee felt that the Bill entailed some serious
implications which called for detailed deliberations. The Home Secretary was asked to revisit the
Balakrihanan Committee Report on the ‘Reorganisation of the Delhi Set-Up’, the Estimates
Committee Reports, and reconcile the present amendment Bill with their recommendations. A line
of thinking emerged in the Committee as to why the NDMC could not be restructured to make
it an elected body in place of its nominated character.
3.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs made another presentation on the Bill before the Committee
on 7
th October, 2010.
3.5.1 In the presentation, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs explained the
composition of the NDMC vis-a-vis the proposed changes including the procedure for presiding
over the meetings of the Council. The Committee Members were further apprised of the evolution
of administrative structure of NDMC since 1912 and the implications of the Seventy-third and

6
Seventy-fourth Constitution Amendments. The Committee was also told that the recommendations
contained in the 11 th and 13 th Reports of the Estimates Committee (of 14 th Lok Sabha) and the
recommendations of the Balakrishnan Committee, were taken into consideration while drafting the
present Bill.
3.5.2 Giving the highlights of the NDMC area, a representatives of the Ministry stated that NDMC
area, the seat of governance in India, was reduced from 84 square kms to 43 square kms. He also
reiterated that the area housed diplomatic missions and the proportion of the property of the
Government of India was much more as compared to private property. It was also stated that
NDMC consists of an estimated floating population of ten lakhs which was many times more than
the persons residing in the area.
3.5.3 Giving the background of NDMC area, the representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs
stated that historically the area enjoyed a different system of local governance as all the Members
of the Council were nominated from 1916 to 1994, under the Punjab Municipal Act. In 1994 the
present structure of the NDMC was decided after considering the Balakrishnan Committee Report
followed by a discussion by the Group of Ministers (GoM) and further discussion held among the
Prime Minister, the Home Minister and the Chief Minister of Delhi. The representative of the
Ministry argued that the NDMC Act strived to balance the imperatives of Central Government
control on governance of the capital city and rights of local inhabitants for self governance.
3.5.4 During the course of the oral deposition by the representatives of the Ministry, the
Committee Members were informed that the Ashok Pradhan Committee (2006) extensively examined
the Balakrishnan Committee Report; provisions of the NDMC Act and related developments
thereafter and recommended that NDMC could not function on the conventional system of local
governance i.e., representative local self-government, in view of the special characteristic of the
NDMC area and the need for Central Government’s control on the body.
3.5.5 The representative of the Ministry also stated that the Second Administrative Reforms
Commission (2009) had examined the Balakrishnan Committee Report, Ashok Pradhan Committee
Report vis-à-vis the provision of the NDMC Act and the governance structure in other capital
cities, and recommended that as the Union Government owns eighty per cent of the land and
buildings in the NDMC area and as foreign diplomatic missions are concentrated, it would be
appropriate that the present structure of NDMC was not disturbed.
3.5.6 The Home Secretary added that the Chief Minister of Delhi, the MP and the MLAs from
the NDMC area, do not attend the meetings of the Council, as a Joint Secretary level officer of
the Government of India presides over its meetings. He further added as under:
“What we have seen in the current working is: the Chief Minister herself is MLA from
NDMC area. She is not attending any meetings of the NDMC. A question comes in, when
the Chairman, NDMC, presides over the meeting, how can the CM attend as a Member of
the NDMC. Similarly, local MP also does not attend the meeting as he does not have the
voting rights. He also has the same issue. If he is a Minister in the Union Cabinet, he
cannot come and attend a meeting of the NDMC where a Joint Secretary level officer of
the Government of India presides over the meeting. It was in this light, the Government
thought that there is need for certain amendments to be made. It is not the best of
arrangements. There are a lot of combinations coming in. If you have Chairperson of the
NDMC, how anybody else would preside over that meeting. Taking into account all factors
together, the Union Cabinet made this recommendation saying that if the CM comes for the
meeting, she presides over the meeting, in her absence, if the Cabinet Minister is present,
he will preside. This hierarchy is given. It is the basic background to the proposal.”

7
3.5.7 When asked as to why the Government was not considering to make NDMC an elected
body, the Home Secretary stated that the Central Government was trying to strike a balance
between the Council being an elected body and representation of Central Government therein,
keeping in mind the sensitivity of the area. He observed as under:
“ I think the real issue as to why Governments, in the past, had been little chary of giving
the voting rights, of having an elected body in this area, is, …….that if you include family
members (of the Government servants), they will constitute two-thirds of the population,
and the majority of the Council members will be family members of the Government
Servants. Then, if you have family members of the Government Servants in charge of this
……, then, politicization may come in. Now, there is a feeling as to why it has been kept
under the control of the Central Government, irrespective of the fact that 80 per cent of
the land is owned by the Government. But I agree with the fact that there is a necessity
for residents to have a little say on civic matters, electricity, water, sanitation, so on and
so forth. We need to look at this issue which is now being brought to our notice, in the
light of the 73
rd and 74 th Amendments.”
4. Views of representatives of Residents’ Welfare Associations and MLA from NDMC
area
4.0 In the Committee’s meeting held on 22 nd October, 2010, the representatives of the Ministry
of Home Affairs, with the approval of the Union Home Minister, stated that, keeping in view the
unique characteristics of the NDMC area as the seat of the Central Government and housing the
Diplomatic Mission of the foreign countries, the Ministry would still prefer to stick to the
amendments and not to make any further changes in the proposed Bill. It was reiterated that the
Central Government intended to strike a balance between adopting a system of governance that
takes care of the rights of the residents as well as the concerns of the Central Government to have
predominance in the civic administration of the area being the seat of power of the central authority
and housing the diplomatic missions.
4.1 The Committee, after some deliberations, felt that in view of the serious issues involved in
the Bill, it should hear the representatives of the associations of local self governments, and
Residents Welfare Associations of the colonies in the NDMC area and the MLA representing Delhi
Cantonment Constituency who is also a Member of the NDMC
4.2 Accordingly, the Committee in its sitting held on 20
th December 2010 heard Shri Karan
Singh Tanwar, MLA representing Delhi Cantonment Constituency (including Sarojini Nagar an
NDMC area), the representatives of two Residents Welfare Associations (RW As), one from a private
colony and one from a Government Colony in the NDMC area.
4.2.1 The highlights of the views of the witnesses were as follows:–
(i) Representatives of Golf Links, RWA
• Permanent residents have no stake in the governance of NDMC.
• There should be some kind of elective mechanism to represent the permanent residents
of NDMC in the Council.
• The Chairman of the Council should be a political head as he/she would be more
effective.
• The NDMC should be a non-political elected body. The Chairman could still be the
senior most officer of Central Government and no member of the Council should be
senior to him.

8
• NDMC could also be a partly elected body. The elected members like MLAs would not
help much in looking after day-to-day civic matters. The Council should have members
directly elected by the people.
(ii) Representatives of F ,G & H Block, Sarojini Nagar, RWA
• The Chairman of the Council should be a political person as he would be more
effective.
• Present set up of NDMC is alright and need not be altered.
• There should, however, be some mechanism to protect the interests of Government
Employees residing in an NDMC area. The Government Colonies RW As should be
given some representation in the Council.
(iii) Shri Karan Singh Tanwar, MLA, Delhi Cantt. and Member, NDMC
• The main problem with the functioning of NDMC is that the senior members do not
attend meetings as it is presided over by a chairman who is junior in rank.
• Elected members of the Council do not get facilities which are available to nominated
ones.
• Either NDMC should be made a totally elected body on the pattern of MCD or partly
elected and partly nominated, on the pattern of Cantonment Board.
4.3 The Committee in its sitting held on 20
th December 2010 decided to issue a press release
inviting written memoranda from the Residents Welfare Associations of NDMC and other
stakeholders. Accordingly, a press release was issued. In response, 15 Memoranda were received
on the Bill. A majority of the RW As pleaded for making NDMC an elected body. (list of the
individuals/organizations/RW As who submitted memoranda is at Annexure- ). The Memoranda so
received were circulated to the Members and forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for
furnishing comments thereon.
5. Comments of Government on evidence tendered by non-official witnesses
5.0 In response to the suggestions made by the representatives of RW As, the Ministry of Home
Affairs in its comments stated that the NDMC derives its present structure from the New Delhi
Municipal Council Act, 1994, enacted by the Parliament. In exercise of the powers conferred by
the proviso to Article 243ZB of the Constitution, the President extended the provisions of Part IXA
of the Constitution to the NDMC area with exceptions and modifications. The Ministry asserted
that even under the Punjab Municipal Act, it was all along a nominated body and at the time of
enactment of NDMC Act 1994, these issues were examined in detail and were also deliberated in
the Parliament. The Government had to strike a balance between the special characteristics of
NDMC area and its local self governance. Hence, the present system was adopted by bringing the
barest minimum area, under the special system of local governance. The Ministry, disagreeing with
the argument that present structure of NDMC was unconstitutional, explained that the NDMC was
run on democratic lines and every decision was taken on the basis of majority view in the meetings
of the Council.
5.1 The Ministry further submitted that while deciding the composition of the NDMC, the
recommendations made by the Balakrishnan Committee as well as various other models were
considered in all seriousness at the highest level. It was stated that the model adopted for the
NDMC appeared to be close approximation of what was recommended by the Balakrishanan

9
Committee, taking into account the special characteristics of the NDMC area. It was claimed that
there was adequate representation of the public in the Council as almost half of its members were
peoples’ representatives. Justifying the present set-up, the Ministry stated that the elected
Government of the NCT of Delhi was consulted in the appointment of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and two representatives of the public.
5.2 The Home Secretary, responding to the suggestions made by various RW As in their
memoranda, stated that after consulting the Union Home Minister, the view that had emerged was
that on account of the special character of the area, the Government would not like to bring elected
members into the governing structure of the NDMC and that the Government was not in favour
of changing the current structure of the Council and would like to press for the amendments
proposed in the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010.
5.3 The Committee in the same sitting desired to know the pattern of governance of the Delhi
Cantonment Board. In response to that the Ministry of Home Affairs vide its communication dated
28
th December, 2010 furnished the information which is reproduced below:
“The Cantonment Board is partly elected and partly nominated. The Board consists of the
following members:
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio  or, if the Central Government so
directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command;
(b) The District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the rank of Additional
District Magistrate nominated by him;
(c) the Chief Executive Officer;
(d) the Health Officer ex officio ;
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio ;
(f) three military officers nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the station by
order in writing; and
(g) eight members elected under the Cantonment Act, 2006.”
5.4 The Committee further desired to know the municipal structures in London and New York.
In this context, the Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the following information:–
“Municipal Structure in London
Under the London Council Act of 1963, the Municipal Administration in London consisted
of 32 Boroughs. These boroughs were created in the metropolis to work as the principal
local authorities responsible for running most of the local services in their areas. They
functioned under an apex body called the Greater London Council. In 1986, Margaret
Thatcher abolished the GLC and transferred its strategic functions to bodies controlled by
the Central Government or Joint Boards. For next 13 years, there was no single elected
body at the apex level for the whole of London.
The situation was largely reversed when the Greater London Authority (GLA) Act was
enacted in 1999. A 23-member Greater London Authority headed by a directly elected Mayor
came into existence in the city in the year 2000. Its main activities concern:
(i) Transport (ii) Policing (iii) Fire Services (iv) Economic Development (v) Planning
(vi) Culture (vii) Environment and (viii) Health

10
In 2007, the Act was amended enhancing the powers of the Mayor to include
planning functions in relation to local development schemes and some other planning
applications of strategic importance.
Municipal Structure in the City of New York
The city of New York is governed by a City Council. The New York City Council is a 51
Member body headed by a directly elected Mayor. The Mayor appoints several Deputy
Mayors who are functional heads and assist the Mayor in his functions. There are 5
Boroughs and 51 City Councils in the territory. The City Councils are local bodies enjoying
considerable power and discretion in providing services to the local citizens and can be
compared with the boroughs of the Greater London Authority.”
5.5 In the sitting held on 5
th January 2011, some Members of the Committee, displeased over
the intransigence of the Ministry, despite the strong views of the Committee and the RW As,
wondered whether the people residing in the NDMC area would be convinced by the argument
advanced by the Ministry in favour of retaining the status quo  in so far as the structure of the
NDMC was concerned. The Home Secretary was also asked to give the rationale for depriving the
people of the NDMC area the opportunity to exercise their franchise especially when residents of
all regions of Delhi, outside the NDMC area, exercise their right to vote in the elections to the
MCD and the Delhi Cantonment Board. The attention of the Home Secretary was also brought to
the fact that in the representations received, there was overwhelming support for an elected NDMC
and his views were sought on the suggestion that NDMC should be made an elected body, either
partially or fully. With regard to provisions of revolving Chairmanship of the Council, some
Members wanted to know the rationale behind it.
5.6 The Committee also enquired from the Law Secretary whether there would be any legal
problem in converting NDMC into an elected body. The Law Secretary replied in the negative.
5.7 The Home Secretary then responded to the queries which were not found convincing. The
Home Secretary was told that the Government should give a serious thought to the view which
had emerged in favour of an elected NDMC and furnish an elaborate explanation on the stand taken
by the Government in the matter.
6. Final comments of Ministry of Home Affairs
6.0 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide their OM No. 14011/39/2008- Delhi-II dated 13
th
January, 2011 furnished a detailed response on the final stand taken by the Government in favour
of retaining the status quo  in relation to the governing structure of NDMC. The Ministry
submissions are as follows:
“The matter had been again examined in detail in this Ministry in the light of the views
expressed in the meeting of the Committee held on 5 th January, 2011. After careful
consideration of the entire matter, the Ministry places the following facts for kind
consideration of the Committee:
(i) The NDMC area has special characteristics as is evident from the following facts:
• The NDMC, which caters to about 3% of area and 3% of population of Delhi,
is also seat of the Central Government in the Union Of India. Important buildings
like Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament House, Supreme Court, North Block, South
Block, etc are situated in its area. It also houses diplomatic missions. Thus, the
area has national as well as international importance. Unlike other municipalities,
the stakes here are not only local, but also national and international. As such, the
NDMC has to be kept on a different footing.

11
• Government of India is nearly the sole landowner. Private ownership of property
is marginal. Majority of the population is from Government Colonies and
Diplomatic Missions. The Central Government needs to have a direct role in the
maintenance and upkeep of these areas.
• Besides the resident population, the NDMC also provides services to floating
population, which is many times more than the residents. Their interests need to
be protected.
• Historically, NDMC area has enjoyed a different system of Local Government.
• The other municipality in the National Capital Territory, namely, the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi, which caters to almost 94% of area and population, is fully
democratic. A conscious decision was taken by the Government, which was
approved by the Parliament, that functional pattern of local self-government would
be unworkable for the NDMC area.
(ii) It is true that no direct elections are held for the Members of the Council. However,
the people’s representation in the NDMC is achieved through the Members of
Legislative Assembly, elected to the Delhi Legislative Assembly from the area.
Representation is also given to persons having special knowledge in different fields.
Further, the elected Government of the National Capital Territory is consulted in the
matter of appointment of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and two non-official
nominated members. It is also proposed to make the Member of Parliament
representing New Delhi as Member of the Council. Thus in the proposed Council, out
of 13 members, there would be 3 persons directly elected by the people (2 MLAs
and 1 MP), 4 persons of various fields nominated in consultation with the elected
Government of the NCT of Delhi plus consultation with the elected Government of
the NCT of Delhi in the matters of selection of Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson.
Thus even the balance is getting tilted from official to non-official members.
(iii) Delhi, being the capital of India, always had a unique governance structure compared
to other cities in India. There has been substantial evolution of administrative and
governance structures in last 60 years. However, Delhi still retains the status of a
Union Territory with Legislative Assembly. The critical subjects of law and order,
public order and land are still under the domain of the Central Government. Even in
case of municipal functions, specialized boards/utilities have been constituted for
power, water supply, transport, shelter viz Delhi Vidyut Board (now DPCL), Delhi Jal
Board, Delhi Transport Corporation and Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board.
These unique governance structures in Delhi arise from the fact that Delhi is the
national capital and the Central Government needs to have oversight on administration
in the capital.
(iv) W ithin overall Delhi area, New Delhi is the seat of the Central Government.
Simultaneously, it is also a sub-city in its own right, with a legitimate need of citizens
for local self government. Thus, the critical question is how the national interests in
the capital city are protected within the context of local self-governance for its
citizens.
(v) Being the seat of Union Government, the municipal government of New Delhi has to
ensure higher standards of services and infrastructure and has to meet the
expectations of the national government. Further, the Union Government owns almost
80% land and properties in the NDMC area. Most of the citizens in NDMC area are
government servants and their families. Further the foreign diplomatic missions are

12
territorial entities under respected sovereign jurisdictions. Hence, the NDMC Act
provides for greater national oversight through nomination of officers on the Council.
(vi) It is mentioned that the estimated population residing in various colonies in NDMC
and Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) areas on either side of the NDMC
boundary is as under:
S. No. MCD NDMC
Name of Colony in Population as per Name of Population as per
MCD area. Census 2001 adjoining Colony Census 2001
in NDMC area
1 R.K. Puram 82,585 Moti Bagh 10,356
2 Karol Bagh (including 49,396 DIZ Area 10,224
Faiz Road, Pusa Road,
Bedanpura)
3 Defence Colony Sub- 5,97,843 Sarojini Nagar 30,588
Divisionλ
4 South Extn. (including 42,759 Jor Bagh 1,819
Tyagraj Nagar, INA,
Aliganj and Kotla
Mubarakpur)
λAs per the information furnished by NDMC Secretariat vide  letter no. F.25(i)/CS/175/2010/D-582 dated 13.12.2010,
total population of Defence Colony only is 10,334.
The estimated number of voters in the NDMC area and the Delhi Cantonment Board area,
as indicated by the NDMC, is as under:
(a) Number of voters in NDMC area from New Delhi Constituency 1,35,600
Number of voters in NDMC area from Delhi Cantonment Board area 35,910
TOTAL 1,71,510
(b) Number of voters in Delhi Cantonment Board area from 39,407
Delhi Cantonment Constituency
It may be seen that the adjoining area of NDMC with substantial population in private
colonies were taken out of NDMC in 1958 and merged in MCD to bring maximum area and
population under the conventional system of municipal governance. Barest minimum population and
area have been kept under the NDMC area.
(vii) So far as the government officials are concerned, the Conduct Rules and Service
Rules prescribe that every government official shall be politically neutral. However,
the family members of government employees are not legally debarred from
contesting elections. In the present NDMC Governance system, two MLAs, elected
from NDMC area are members and represent the interests of government servants as
well. Therefore, it is not the case that the govt. servants and other residents of
NDMC area are completely deprived of elected representation in NDMC affairs. It
may also be noted that only about 20% NDMC population resides in private colonies,
while almost 70% Cantonment Board population resides in private colonies.

13
(viii) The suggestion of nominating at least 2 members from RW As can be accommodated
within the provisions of section 4 of NDMC Act, 1994. This needs to be examined
in consultation with Government of NCT of Delhi, the Ministry of Law and Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension, Government of India.
(ix) The existing system of having area MLAs as Members of NDMC gives representation
to private colony residents also in the affairs of NDMC. In addition, two non official
members are also nominated in NDMC from amongst various fields. This is done in
consultation with elected Government of NCT of Delhi. Hence the existing
mechanism provide for representation of the residents of NDMC area.
(x) It may be clarified that reduction in the number of MLAs is based on delimitation
exercise undertaken by Election Commission of India. Before delimitation exercise
undertaken by Election Commission of India, there used to be 3 Assembly
Constituencies. After electoral delimitation, this is reduced to 2 Assembly
Constituencies in NDMC area. The NDMC Act provides that MLAs elected from
NDMC area (wholly or partly) are also members of NDMC. Therefore, the
membership of MLAs in NDMC is reduced from 3 to 2 after de-limitation. This has
been captured in the proposed amendment.
(xi) While the political aspirations and rights of citizens of New Delhi are well recognized
and are important, they need to be weighed against the interests of states in the
federation, against the special symbolic value to the nation of its lead city, and against
the need to ensure the smooth running of the federal government itself. While the
present governance structure of NDMC may appear incongruous with 73
rd and 74 th
Constitutional Amendments, this aspect was considered by the Parliament in detail.
The Government, accordingly, made specific exceptions and modifications, as per
Article 243ZB while giving special dispensation under NDMC Act, 1994.
(xii) Further, in the year 1958, the Government reduced the geographical area of NDMC
by 50% from 86 sq. km to 43 sq. km. In this very limited NDMC area, the citizens
are assured representation on the Council through their directly elected MLAs and MP
from the area.
(xiii) Thus, the NDMC Act, 1994 strives to balance and reconcile the competing needs of
the Union Government for better control and of the citizens of New Delhi for
representative self government. This is a difficult task as the national government
wishes to control and develop the capital in the interests of the nation as a whole,
while the people of the city naturally wish to govern themselves to the greatest extent
possible. Accordingly, the NDMC Act provides for nominated non-official members,
including the directly elected MLAs and MP from the area, rather than elected
councillors as also for nominated government officers on the Council.
(xiv) For meeting its expectations, the Union Government needs to have direct capacity to
influence the decision making structure of NDMC. If direct elections are allowed at
municipal level in NDMC, the capacity of the Union Government to influence the
performance of municipal functions will be substantially reduced. It may not be
possible to reach expected standards of municipal services due to competing demands
on the municipal body.
(xv) New Delhi houses a large number of government buildings, residential areas and
foreign missions. The national government is responsible for ensuring high standard
of security and local services in the area. But with local councillors, who are
accountable to their voters, these needs may be compromised for populist policies.

14
The expectations of the national government and the elected councillors may not
match leading to confusion and administrative chaos at cutting edge level of municipal
government. This may have negative influence on quality of municipal services
(roads, water supply, heritage conservation, hospitals, etc). This may have serious
impact on national image as most of the foreign missions are situated in NDMC area.
(xvi) Thus, the national government needs to have a definite role in developing New Delhi
in the interest of the nation as a whole. The constitutional and legal powers to do this
in NDMC area may get limited with governance structure based on direct elections
and with councillors more accountable to their voters. The Central Government may
not be able to influence or ensure compliance of municipal government on critical
issues. It may not be able to preempt the elected local body on critical policy areas,
such as transportation, design and construction, land-use, heritage conservation, etc.
(xvii) Keeping these factors in mind, during the debate in the Rajya Sabha on the NDMC
Bill, 1994, the then Hon’ble Home Minister, Govt. of India had stated on 15.6.1994:–
“If I give a directive, the directive will be binding on the nominated person. He
cannot possibly have any kind of excuse to say I won’t do this or I won’t do
that. If he were to say this, he will have to quit. In fact, it is that power which
we have provided.”
(xviii) The compulsions of electoral politics may end up posing the national government
against the municipal government on key issues. The compulsions of electoral politics
and intense political rivalry may create very awkward situations before the national
government in cases involving huge political gains or losses. Similarly, the municipal
services and infrastructure projects in New Delhi could be held hostage to populist
demands at ward level. This may have adverse impact on national image as most of
the foreign missions are situated in NDMC area.
(xix) Further, in many state capitals of India, the State Governments have preferred to
constitute various parastatals or parallel governance structures over and above the
municipal body. Thus creation of MMRDA (Mumbai), BWSSB (Bangaluru), CWSSB
(Chennai), HUDA (Hyderabad), etc also reflects the need of respective state
governments to have clear command on critical infrastructure projects or municipal
services in the capital cities.
(xx) Under the constitutional scheme, the Indian Union has strong federal characteristics.
Accordingly, the municipal governance structure of New Delhi, the seat of
governance of the Union, is a symbolic representation of this. Thus, the municipal
government of New Delhi must represent the federal reality and cultural diversity of
various states and territories. If direct elections are allowed at municipal level, it may
not be possible to ensure federal or regional neutrality of the elected structure. Thus
in view of trend of competitive electoral politics, the decision-making authority may
end up in having a strong regional or lingual bias.
(xxi) Governance structure of NDMC area historically provided for strong influence of the
national government. Thus even under the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, the NDMC
had all nominated members. Thus the tradition of the Union Government nominating
members to the Council continues from 1920’s.
(xxii) It is also mentioned that while deciding composition of the NDMC, the
recommendations made by the Balakrishnan Committee as well as various other
models were considered in all seriousness at the highest level. The model adopted for

15
the NDMC appears to be close approximation of what was recommended by the
Balakrishnan Committee, taking into account the special characteristics of the NDMC
area. Further, there is adequate representation of the public in the Council as almost
half of the total members of the Council are representatives of the public. The elected
Government of the NCT of Delhi is consulted in the appointment of the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and two representatives of the public.
(xxiii) It may also not be out of place to mention here that regarding the NDMC, the Ashok
Pradhan Committee set up by Ministry of Home Affairs to study multiplicity of
institutions in Delhi and the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, are in
favour of maintaining status quo .”
7. Deliberations of Committee
7.0 The Committee held detailed discussions on the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2010. The deliberations held on 30
th September and 7 th October, 2010 were mainly devoted to
the presentation of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the Bill highlighting the special character of
the NDMC area, existing structure of NDMC and the amendments proposed in the Bill and related
queries of Members of the Committee thereon.
7.1 As mentioned earlier in the Report, the Ministry of Home Affairs repeatedly stressed on the
need for the NDMC being composed of nominated Members. The Ministry of Home Affairs cited
the recommendations contained in the Balakrishanan Committee Report, the Ashok Pradhan
Committee Report, the Sixth Report of Second Administrative Reforms Commission to justify their
stand on maintaining the status quo  concerning the governing structure of NDMC.
7.2 Initially, a majority of the Members of the Committee supported the idea of NDMC being
an elected body, to endow the democratic rights to the people, to enable them to participate in
decision-making process relating to civic matters. Members expressed strong reservations on the
concept of nominated Members in the NDMC and the proposed procedure of revolving
chairmanship of the Council, in the Bill.
7.3 Participating in the discussion held on 30
th September, 2010, a Member expressed his views
in support of an elected structure of the NDMC, as under:
“By and large, Delhi should be administered completely by the Central Government, had
been the approach so much so that it was a continuous effort by the people of Delhi to
have some kind of representation that led to the formation of the Metropolitan Council.
Earlier, there was no Metropolitan Council and Assembly. Later on, the Metropolitan Council
was the first step and then came the Assembly, though Delhi continues to be the Union
Territory. It continues to be even today. Similarly, in the case of NDMC also, I would think
that it is desirable. After all, there is three percent of population of the Delhi residing in
NDMC area. You cannot deny them the right to franchise. They must have the
representation. So, the approach has to be that. And, as the Chairman has rightly said, while
considering this Bill itself, the recommendations made in those Reports should be taken
cognizance of. It has been said, at one place, that as many Members, who are elected,
should be nominated. So, all these factors should be taken into account.”
7.4 In the Committee’s sitting held on 7
th October, 2010, detailed deliberations took place in the
light of the recommendations contained in the Estimates Committee and Balakrishnan Committee
Reports and the issues raised by Members in its sitting held on 30
th September, 2010. During the
course of further presentation on the Bill, the Home Secretary, as discussed in detail earlier,
reiterated that as the Chief Minister of Delhi, MPs and MLAs from NDMC area do not attend the
meetings of the Council because of the fact that a Joint Secretary level officer of Government of

16
India presides over its meetings and it became necessary to amend the NDMC Act to inter alia
provide for a revised procedure concerning the presiding over of the meetings of the Council,
keeping in view the seniority and the protocol requirements.
7.5 Refuting the arguments put forth by Government that it was necessary to retain the present
structure of NDMC, a Member of the Committee, while observing that three lakh people residing
in the NDMC area are being denied active role in civic matters, made the following observations:
“What is being said about NDMC, today, was, at one time, the accepted fact about the Union
Territory of Delhi. It is only the result of continuing agitations on the part of the people that
how they can be denied self-governance. First, the very concept of having an Assembly for
Delhi was supposed to be atrocious. How can you have it? If the Government of India rules
here, the entire administration of UT of Delhi has to be looked after by the Central
Government. All kinds of arguments were given. Gradually, things moved. Ultimately, we
came to the concept of a Metropolitan Council and an Executive Council which were
supposed to be equivalent to a State Assembly and a Ministry in the State; one by one. Now,
in other UTs we have had Assemblies for a long time, for example, Pondicherry and Goa.
But, in Delhi, there was no Assembly for a long time. Ultimately, it came and is similar to
what we have in other UTs. My emphasis is that the population is so large that you cannot
deny it. We have three lakh population in the NDMC area and this large chunk of population
is denied an active role in the civic services of that region. It is not fair. This is the question.
Therefore, there is recommendation to move towards democracy. All that democracy has been
given is, you allow the MP there to vote, not the citizens.”
7.6 Commenting on the concept of revolving Chairmanship of NDMC, as proposed in the Bill,
the Member commented as under:
“You have a revolving Chairman for the NDMC which is something I cannot reconcile. You
have four persons —including the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman and if they come to
meeting they will vote — entitled to vote. I prefer that they do not come to the meeting.
Or, rather, they may be nominated but they may not have the voting right as has been the
position earlier with the MP. But, this situation, I feel, is anomalous. In fact, I enquired
from the Cantonment. They said that they do not have such a provision…… Furthermore,
in case of the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, who are the nominees of the Central
Government, I see no reason why their posts should be revolving posts.”
7.7 On a note of dissatisfaction over the present structure of NDMC, another Member desired
that the people of NDMC area should be represented on the body by Members directly elected so
that decisions could be taken by the people’s representatives.
7.8 Participating in the deliberations, another Member highlighting the importance of local self
government, underlined the fact that the functions of a civic body were different from those of
the State Assembly or Parliament. The Member felt that a Councillor’s work was different from
that of the MLA or the MP. Therefore, the importance of grassroot representation in a body like
NDMC needs hardly be emphasized. He flagged the point that there should not be any interference
from the Government in the municipal administration, and NDMC should be allowed to function
as a true local self governing body. He then suggested that NDMC should be as democratic as the
Delhi Cantonment Board. The Member also desired that the families of the Government servants
living in the NDMC area should not be denied the right to participate in and contest elections to
the NDMC.
7.9 However, one Member felt that Government should keep in mind the importance and
sensitivity of the areas falling under the NDMC, as it housed Central Government establishments
and diplomatic areas.

17
7.10 The Committee in its meeting held on 22 nd October 2010, took note of the views expressed
by the Home Secretary that in view of the unique characteristics of the area as the seat of the
Central Government with very important buildings and eighty percent of the area comprising of
Government colonies besides Diplomatic Missions and other factors, Government would, at the
moment, still prefer to stick to the amendments and not to make any further changes in the
proposed Bill.
7.11 The Committee further noted that the Home Secretary, while contending that making NDMC
an elected body would lead to politicization in the ranks of government servants, however,
conceded that there was a necessity for residents to have a little say on civic matters, electricity,
water, sanitation, in the light of the Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth amendments of the
Constitution. On this contention of the Home Secretary, the Chairman and majority of the Members
of the Committee, while reiterating the need for an elected structure for the NDMC, made the
following points:–
(i) The Bill is against the spirit of the Seventy-third and the Seventy-fourth Amendments
to the Constitution.
(ii) There is a contradiction in the argument put forward by the Government. The
Government Servants are legally debarred from contesting elections but the families
of the Government Servants are not. They have the right to vote as well as to run
for an election.
(iii) The position of the Chairman, NDMC should not be a revolving one, as proposed in
the Bill.
(iv) Worldwide, the trend is towards more and more democratization even at the local
level but the proposed Bill intends to take away from the people residing in the
NDMC area, the right to franchise and get elected to the body.
(v) In the Cantonment areas of the country, the family members of Defence personnel
are allowed to contest elections to the Cantonment Boards.
(vi) Representation of women and Scheduled Castes should be increased in the Council.
7.12 Some Members, however, while supporting the Bill, in its present form, felt that the
Chairman of the NDMC should be an elected person and the present Bill in a way served that
purpose. They also felt that in view of the special characteristics of NDMC area, it should not be
made an elected body.
7.13 However, at a later stage, when the discussions on the Bill were drawing to a close, some
Members of the Committee wrote letters to the Chairman of the Committee stating that they were
in favour of the present structure of the Bill. These Members, while supporting the proposed
changes in the composition of the NDMC and the order of precedence in presiding over the
meetings of NDMC, stated inter-alia  as under:–
(i) There is no change in the governing structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council.
However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the representative character of the
NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by increasing the number of
members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily stipulating
that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee
to the Council without any voting rights.
(ii) In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements

18
since in the absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected
Member of Parliament in the past have been able to attend the meetings of the
Council.
(iii) The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the
issue of direct elections and the issue of direct elections should no be used as a ploy
to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect, inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
(iv) The amendments in the current form as proposed by MHA may be accepted in larger
public interest.
7.14 In the Committee’s sitting held on 5
th January, 2011, while taking note of the views of the
Home Secretary that the Government would still like to retain the present structure of the NDMC,
some Members strongly felt that NDMC should be an elected body as they were not convinced
by the rationale put forth by the Ministry in favour of retention of the existing structure of NDMC
specially when residents of all regions of Delhi outside the NDMC area exercise their right to vote
in elections to MCD. Members pointed out that the Residents’ Welfare Associations were
overwhelmingly in support of an elected body for NDMC.
7.15 One Member, who supported the demand for an elected structure for the NDMC, observed
as under:
“We would like to register this view that the entire Committee is unanimous that it should
be an elected body, and we are really pained to see that the Ministry has been adamant in
its original stand and sticking to it. I would like to register this very clearly that the entire
Committee is unanimous on this view.”
7.16 Another Member, in support of an elected NDMC, observed as under:
“To felicitate civic amenities, residents of the NDMC area want their elected representatives,
as proposed by the different residents associations. The functions of a legislator are quite
different from the functions of a corporator or a councillor as……. So I think I cannot
agree with the present structure proposed by the Ministry. There must be elected
representatives in the NDMC so that the peoples’ views can be raised in the proper form.”
7.17 Responding to the viewpoints of the majority of the Members of the Committee, the Home
Secretary responded as under:
“…..almost the world over, people have made sure that the Central Government in capitals
are keeping control. Why they keep this control? Not only because you have the Central
Government offices, you have President’s Estate, you have Prime Minister’s Office, you
have Foreign Missions, you have State Bhavans and so on and so forth. You do not want
a situation in the State, in the Federal Capital where a Council itself—if it is a majority run
council— I am just giving a worst case scenario— X party has a majority in it; that X
party has some problems with either the Central Government or even with another State
belonging to another party. In that case, it can decide, okay, we will cut off the water
supply to a particular State Bhavan or a Councillor applies to the US mission, does not get
a visa, for whatever reasons his application is rejected, the Councillor then decides that
okay, we will cut off water supply to the US Mission. I am just giving an example.”
7.18 T aking exception to the hypothetical argument of the Home Secretary, a Member of the
Committee stated as under:
“It is this rationale and this apprehension that we expressed in respect of a Councillor of
the NDMC if it were an elected body, which made all Governments, in India, from the very

19
beginning, deny an Assembly and a Chief Minister to Delhi. How can you have a Chief
Minister, in Delhi, who can dictate to these Foreign Missions and who can do what he
wants? And one does not know which party may come to power. It is this kind of a logic
that denied to the Capital any kind of representation even at the level of the Assembly. In
comparison to what the Chief Minister or a Minister can do, what can a poor Councillor
do? So, you gave authority to the people of Delhi, much greater authority than could ever
be enjoyed by an elected New Delhi Municipal Committee. Much greater authority. This is
because over a period of time, everyone started accepting that unless you have
representative bodies, the people’s wishes cannot be duly taken cognizance of. But now, we
want to confine that New Delhi area not having representation only in respect of civic
matters in this body. In fact, even on the issue of police, there have been different views.
After all, you have, in New York, the Mayor controlling the Police. Things have been
changing fast. And here, we are not willing to change even the civic affairs of New Delhi!
Therefore, I plead with you that the Committee should be given an elaborative explanation
as to why the people of New Delhi must be denied their representation so far as civic
matters are concerned.
Frankly speaking, every Member of this Committee and even, perhaps, the residents
of New Delhi would not be convinced by these arguments. I can even understand that in
the process, let us not jump and let us have partly elected and partly nominated
representatives.”
7.19 The Committee in its next sitting held on 13
th January 2011 directed the Rajya Sabha
Secretariat to find out from the Ministry of Home Affairs whether at any point of time during the
formulation and consideration of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991
(as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 16.12.1991), the issue of a suitable structural arrangement for
local self governance of the NDMC area with a view to maintaining special characteristics of that
area, was discussed or not.
7.20 Responding to the query of the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its
communication No. 14011/39/2008-Delhi-II dated 24 January 2011 stated as under:
“the recommendations made by the Balakrishnan Committee on ‘Reorganization of Delhi Set
Up’ formed the basis of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991.
The report of the Balakrishnan Committee runs into two parts. Part-I contains the
recommendations on restructuring of Government set-up in Delhi and Part-II deals with
municipal and other authorities functioning in Delhi. The Committee has made
recommendations regarding structural arrangement for the NDMC area in Part-II of its
Report.
While introducing the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991 in the
Parliament, the then Home Minister stated in the Parliament that the recommendations
contained in Part-II were under consideration of the Government and that the Government
would come before Parliament in due course for enacting legislation for implementing such
of the recommendations contained in Part-II of the Report of the Balakrishnan Committee
as were found to be acceptable. Subsequently, the Government introduced the New Delhi
Municipal Council Bill, 1994, during discussion on which the recommendations of the
Balakrishnan Committee regarding NDMC as also the special characteristics of the area
were discussed in the Parliament and the present structure of the NDMC was adopted.”
7.21 Meanwhile, a Member of the Committee, in his written communication dated 24
th January,
2011, addressed to the Chairman of the Committee, while opposing the Bill, expressed his views,
as under:

20
“The views of majority of Members of the Committee on this Bill during the discussions
in various meetings, have been overwhelmingly for an elected body for NDMC instead of
a nominated one. The representatives of various resident associations and bodies also
supported the concept of an elected body for NDMC. The views of the Ministry in this
regard are vague and evasive and do not reflect the concept of devolution of power to
people which is the core essence of a vibrant democracy. Had the Ministry adopted a
similar attitude in the 90s, the statehood for New Delhi would have remained a dream only.
Under such circumstances, I strongly urge that the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be
returned with the recommendation for a new Bill incorporating fully or substantially elected
members, keeping the number of nominated members to the essential minimum.”
7.22 During the meeting of the Committee held on 24
th January 2011, the Chairman observed that
going by the discussions held in the Committee and the views expressed by the RW As and the
elected Member of the Delhi Legislative Assembly from New Delhi area and the spirit of the
Constitution Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Amendments, the view that had emerged was that the
Committee should recommend to the Government that it would be better if NDMC was made an
elected body, somewhat on the lines of the Cantonment Boards. At the same time, the Chairman
also observed that another view had emerged, expressed by certain Members, in support of the Bill
and in favour of retaining the present governing structure of the NDMC. The Chairman then
announced that as there was no agreement on the Bill in the Committee, it would not proceed with
the clause-by-clause consideration thereof.
7.23 Agreeing with the views of the Chairman, a Member of the Committee stated as under:
“On the basis of the evidence presented to us by various RW As and also on the basis of the
discussion that we have had, we should stress that the Committee is in favour of an elected
body. Suppose the Home Ministry takes a stand that it is not willing to accept it and it would
like to pass the Bill as was presented…….the post of the Chairman, NDMC, should not be
a revolving post. It does not happen even in the cantonments. If the Chairman, NDMC, is
not there, the Vice Chairman will be there. You cannot have the Chief Minister presiding over
the NDMC meeting only because she happens to be elected from that area. You cannot have
a Minister of the Central Government presiding over the NDMC body. I am of the view that
the post of the Chairman, NDMC, should not be a revolving post….. But the purpose of the
Bill is that where the Chief Minister or a Minister of the Government is there, they will preside
over it. I am of the view that this should not be there.”
7.24 The Committee then took exceptions to certain statements contained in the Ministry of Home
Affairs OM dated 13
th January 2011 which appeared to the Committee to be anachronistic as those
were contrary to the spirit of the Constitution Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Amendments.
7.25 In this context, the Committee took note of the following comments made in DD Basu’s
Shorter Constitution of India, dwelling on the objective of introducing Part IXA in the Constitution
dealing with the municipalities:
“The object of introducing Part IX-A in the Constitution was that in many States the local
bodies were not working properly and the timely elections were not being held and the
nominated bodies were continuing for long periods,. Elections had been irregular and many
times unnecessarily delayed or postponed and the elected bodies had been superseded or
suspended without adequate justification at the whims and fancies of the State authorities.
The new provisions were added in the Constitution with a view to restore the rightful place
in political governance for local bodies. It was considered necessary to provide a
constitutional status to such bodies and to ensure regular and fair conduct of elections.”
4
4 D.D Basu, Shorter Constitution of India, 14 th Edition 2009, V ol. II, LexisNexis Butterworths Wadwa, Nagpur.

21
7.26 The views of Members expressed in various sittings of the Committee, the deposition of
witnesses before it and the letters addressed to the Chairman of the Committee, are summarized
as under:
Views in favour of making NDMC an elected body
■ The Committee should stress upon the point that NDMC should be an elected body
and that the citizens could not be denied their civic rights and discharge their
responsibilities.
■ While making structural changes in the NDMC, the model of the Cantonment
Boards should be kept in mind wherein there were components of both elected and
nominated members.
■ The functioning of MPs and MLAs is completely different from the duties and
responsibilities of Councillors. The former cannot effectively discharge the
functions of a corporator, as the former has larger constituency to cater who
neither has time nor the understanding of local ward level neighbouring issues
which is the area cut out for a corporator.
■ The post of the Chairman, NDMC should not be a revolving one. In case the
Chairman, NDMC was not present, there could be a Vice Chairman to preside over
the body. It would not be in order for the Chief Minister or for that matter a
Minister of the Central Government to preside over the NDMC, only because of
protocol requirements.
■ The residents must have a say in the functioning of NDMC, particularly on civic
matters.
■ If NDMC is not made an elected body then at least its name should be changed
to ‘New Delhi Municipal Board’.
Views in favour of Bill
■ Keeping in view, the special character of NDMC area, the amendments proposed in
the Bill should be accepted.
■ The Bill is more in the nature of making procedural changes necessitated by recent
developments and protocol requirements and providing additional representation in
the body, by making it broad based.
■ The issue of direct election should not be used as a ploy to derail the passing of
the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting reform measures proposed for the
NDMC.
8. Analysis of Government’s justification for retaining status quo  of NDMC
8.0 It has been noticed that time and again the Government has cited the recommendations
made by the Balakrishnan Committee, the Ashok Pradhan Committee, debates in both Houses of
Parliament on the NCT of Delhi Bill, 1991 and the NDMC Bill, 1994 and the recommendations
made by the Second Administrative Reforms Commission in its Fifteenth Report, for retaining the
status quo  of governance structure of NDMC. An attempt has, therefore, been made to critically
analyse the policy of the Government in relation to the NDMC, in the light of the reports and
deliberations cited above and the spirit of the Constitution (Seventh-third) and (Seventy-fourth)
Amendments Act, 1992.

22
8.1 Shri S. Balakrishnan, the then Advisor in the Union Ministry of Home Affairs, in his
communication dated the 14 December 1990 to the then Union Minister of Home Affairs, while
presenting the report of the Committee on ‘Reorganization of Delhi set-up’, chaired by him, made
the following general observations:
“The task of designing a proper structure of Government for the national capital particularly
for a country with a federal set up like ours, has always proved difficult because of two
conflicting requirements. On the one hand, effective administration of the national capital is
of vital importance to the national Government not only for ensuring a high degree of
security and a high level of administrative efficiency but also for enabling the Central
Government to discharge its national and international responsibilities; to ensure this, it must
necessarily have a complete and comprehensive control over the affairs of the capital. On
the other hand, the legitimate demand of the large population of the capital city for the
democratic right of participation in the government at the city level is too important to be
ignored.”
5
8.2 The Balakrishnan Committee made the following recommendations with regard to the New
Delhi Municipal Council:
“We have already stated a number of times that the Centre is vitally concerned in
maintaining high level of efficiency in civic services in the capital. We have also stressed
at the same time that with the establishment of a democratic government for the people’s
representatives in the administration should have a say in the proper delivery of services.
These two considerations can, in our views, best be reconciled by making the following
arrangements:
(i) The Central Government should have control over NDMC, the area in which many
of the important offices of the Union Government and Embassies are located.
(ii) The general control and supervision over other municipal bodies as provided for
under the law can be with the Delhi Administration as the subject of local self
government is a matter within the purview of the representative Government of Delhi,
but to issue directives and to supersede a decision of the Corporation should be only
with the Central Government.
It would be appropriate to provide that the powers of the Central Government under
item (i) and (ii) above should be exercised in consultation with the Government of
Delhi and that such powers can be exercised on the initiative of the Government of
Delhi or on its own.
We are clearly of the view that it is high time that the archaic Punjab Municipal
Act 1911, as applied to New Delhi Municipal Committee, is replaced by appropriate
provisions in a law of Parliament for organizing and functioning of the NDMC…….
The area covered by NDMC consists not only of Government Office and employees
but also a sizable population of others. It is, therefore, quite necessary that the
NDMC should be run on democratic lines.
The NDMC should consist of a certain number of members appointed by Lt.
Governor either by name or by office and equal number of members elected from
among the inhabitants of NDMC area……..the elected members may be chosen by
direct election on the basis of adult franchise from various wards into which New
Delhi may be divided.”
6
5 Balakrishnan Committee Report on Reorganisation of Delhi Set-Up, page (i)
6 op cit , paras 11.9.1. 12.3.1, 12.3.2 and 12.3.3

23
8.3 The Committee notes that contrary to the claim of the government, the present
structure of NDMC as well as the proposed amendments in the NDMC (Amendment) Bill,
2010 are not in consonance with the recommendations contained in para 12.3.3 of the
Balakrishnan Committee Report which inter-alia has recommended for a certain number of
members to be elected on the basis of adult franchise. Therefore, the refrain of the
Ministry of Home Affairs that the existing structure of NDMC is in tune with the
recommendations of the Balakrishnan Committee Report, does not hold ground in view of
the fact that the membership of the MP and MLAs in the NDMC is more in the nature of
ex-officio rather than being directly elected by the people at the ward level and that the
sphere of functioning MPs and MLAs is altogether different from the directly elected
councillors/corporators.
8.4 It is noteworthy to mention that during the consideration of the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991 (as introduced in the Lok Sabha in 16.12.1991) a reference
was made by a Member regarding the NDMC structure. Responding to that, the then Home
Minister stated as under:
“…..we will come before this Parliament with a legislation so that the set up of the different
kinds of corporations that we are going to have and also the NDMC and Delhi Municipal
Corporation, all these corporations and also the Power Corporation, Water Corporation, all
other corporation that we have, will be decided. What is going to be the relationship
between the Members of the Assembly and the different corporations? They are definitely
autonomous but at the same time, whether it is proper or improper to give representation
to Assembly Members is a point which will have to be considered by Government and
thereafter the entire matter is going to come up before this House. So, there should be
nothing to worry on that score.”
7
8.5 During the consideration of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Bill, 1991
in the Rajya Sabha on 21.12.1991, in response to the query of a Member regarding absence of
provision in the said Bill on the structural and functional system of NDMC and whether Delhi
Assembly would change the related laws, the then Home Minister, made the following observations:
“Another point which was made was about part 2 of Balakrishnan Committee report with
regard to the entire set-up of different corporations the municipal corporation and the other
corporations, like the road transport corporation, etc. This is going to be dealt with by a
separate legislation. We are going to bring those before the Parliament. This is not going
to be by an executive order; it is going to be through a regular Bill. The hon. Members
are going to get the full opportunity of putting forward their points of view on the
multiplicity of agencies, which in fact is one of the factors due to which we do not have
the kind of efficiency that we need in Delhi.”
8
8.6 It would be appropriate to go back to the legislative history and intent of the Constitution
Seventh-third and Seventy-fourth Amendments which sought to restore the rightful place in political
governance for local bodies and to provide a constitutional status to such bodies.
8.7 The Government introduced the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Bill, 1991 in the
Lok Sabha on 16.9.1991. The Bill sought to insert Part IX and Eleventh Schedule to the
Constitution for the constitution of panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels. The
Bill was referred to the Joint Committee which presented its report on 14.7.1992. The Bill as
reported by the Joint Committee was debated in the Lok Sabha on 1
st, 2 nd, 4 th, 21 st and 22 nd
December, 1992 and on 23 rd December, 1992 in the Rajya Sabha. The Bill, after being passed by
7 L.S. Deb dated  20.12.1991, c. 1189
8 L.S. Deb dated 21.12.1991, c. 263

24
both the Houses was ratified by the State Legislatures as per the requirement of proviso to Article
368 (2). After receiving Presidential assent, the Bill was enacted as the Constitution (Seventy-third
Amendment) Act, 1992 and came into force on 24.4.1993.
8.8 The relevant extracts from the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill are reproduced
below:
“Article 40 of the Constitution which enshrines one of the Directive Principles of State
Policy, lays down that the State shall take steps to organize village panchayats and vest
them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as
units of self-government. In the light of the experience of the last forty years and in view
of the shortcomings which have been observed, it was considered that there was an
imperative need to enshrine in the Constitution certain basic and essential features of
Panchayati Raj Institutions to impart certainty, continuity and strength to them.
Accordingly, it was proposed to add a new Part relating to Panchayats in the
Constitution to provide for, among other things, Gram Sabha in village or group of villages,
constitution of Panchayats at village and other level or levels, direct elections to all seats
in Panchayats at the village and intermediate levels, if any.”
9
8.9 Subsequently, the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Bill, 1991 was introduced in the
Lok Sabha on 16
th September, 1991. The Bill sought to insert part IXA and Twelfth Schedule in
the Constitution relating to the constitution and composition of urban local bodies. The Bill was
referred to the Joint Committee which presented its report on 14
th July, 1992. The Bill, as reported
by Joint Committee, was debated in both the Houses of Parliament, along with the Constitution
(Seventy-second Amendment) Bill, 1991. After being passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Bill
was ratified by the State Legislatures as per the requirement of proviso to Article 368(2). After
receiving the Presidential assent, the Bill was enacted as the Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1992 and came into force on 1.6.1993.
8.10 The relevant extracts from the SOR of the Bill are reproduced below:–
“In many States, local bodies have become weak and ineffective on account of a variety
of reasons, including the failure to hold regular elections, prolonged suppression and
inadequate devolution of powers and functions. As a result, Urban and Local Bodies are not
able to perform effectively as vibrant democratic units of self-government.
Having regard to these inadequacies, it was considered necessary that provisions relating
to Urban Local Bodies be incorporated in the Constitution, particularly, for:
(i) putting on a firmer footing the relationship between the State Government and the
Urban Local Bodies with respect to:
(a) the functions and taxation powers; and
(b) arrangements for revenue sharing;
(ii) ensuring regular conduct of elections;
(iii) ensuring timely elections in the case of supersession; and
(iv) providing adequate representation for the weaker sections and Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and women.
Accordingly, it was proposed to add a new Part relating to the Urban Local Bodies in the
Constitution to provide for……”
10
9 Constitution Amendment in India, P .D.T Achary (Ed.), Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi, 2008 p. 260
10 op cit, p. 275

25
8.11 Coming to the NDMC Bill, 1994, the then Home Minister observed as follows, during the
debate in the Lok Sabha on 14 th June 1994, with regard to the Constitution (Seventy-fourth)
Amendment Act 1992 , as under:
“With the insertion of Part IX-A, Municipalities in States/Union Territories are to be
constituted in terms of provisions of Part IX-A. The provision of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act, 1957 have already been brought in conformity with the provisions of Part
IX-A in August, 1993. Article 243ZB provides that the provisions of IX-A shall apply to the
Union Territories. It also provides that the President, by public notification, direct that the
provisions of this part shall apply to any Union Territory or part thereof subject to such
exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification. On the question whether
any part of the Union Territory can be exempted from the application of the provisions of
Part IX-A of the Constitution, the opinion of the Attorney General of India was sought. The
Attorney General has opined that it is constitutionally and legally feasible to modify the
provisions relating to Municipalities included in the Constitution in respect of NDMC.”
It is therefore proposed that the application of the provisions of Part IX A of the
Constitution was proposed to be modified in respect of the following Articles:
(1) with regard to Article 243R on composition of the Municipalities, it is proposed that
the provisions of this article may be modified under article 243ZB to provide that the
NDMC may have a Chairperson appointed by the Central Government in consultation
with the Chief Minister, Delhi……….
(2) with regard to Article 243W on functions, the functions of NDMC are proposed to
be the same as those in respect of MCD. In addition the NDMC continue to receive
water and electricity in bulk and be responsible for their distribution.
(3) With regard to Article 243Y regarding Finance Commission, it is proposed that the
Finance Commission constituted under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
may also be responsible for the functions assigned to them in respect of NDMC.
(4) As regards control, the Central Government may be empowered to issue directions
to NDMC regarding the efficient delivery of services to the public and generally in
regard the municipal administration. Failure to comply with such directions may be
a ground for its dissolution, after observing necessary procedure.
(5) In all other matters there may be uniformity as far as possible, between the NDMC
and the MCD.
(6) Setting-up of Committees: The NDMC may constitute a committee or committees
under the Chairmanship of the Chairperson of the Council to advise it on any matter
which the Council may refer or for discharging any power or any function of the
Council or for exercising power which the Council may, by resolution,
delegate…….”
11
8.12 Advocating for an elected NDMC, a Member (Shri Kalka Das-Karol Bagh) while
participating in the debate in the Lok Sabha on the NDMC Bill, 1994, stated as under:
“Every political party has promised the people of Delhi that there will be an elected body
in the NDMC which will solve the problems of the people here. But a totally a new
structure has been provided here. In the past, also, the administrator used to be a serving
officer of the Government of India and even today its chairperson will be a serving officer
11 LS Deb, cc. 446-449

26
of the Government of India. Then what is the difference now. There had been a Sarkaria
Commission and a Balakrishanan Committee who had studied it elaborately and concluded
that half of the Members of the NDMC should be elected representatives and the other half
should be nominated members……. While going through this Bill we find that the
recommendation of the Sarkaria Commission which took two years to submit its report
have not been adopted. That is why this body does not comprise of a single elected
member. I would like to point out here that it was not only the suggestions of the
Balkrishan Committee, but our Constitution has also directed to have a democratic system
in the country.
In a democratic system, elections should be held but here there are no elected
representatives. The main feature of the democracy is that elected representatives are
accountable to the people They formulate policies because the people have direct access to
them and they are well acquainted to the difficulties of the people. Every man can see them
and they know the difficulties of the people. Therefore, elected representatives formulate
policies and the officials execute them but, here it is found the opposite. Here Government
official will be the Chairman and the remaining Members will be nominated from three
Legislative Assemblies. Members will be selected from amongst Government officials”.
12
8.12.1 Another Member of the Lok Sabha, (Shri Tej Narayan Singh- Buxar) pleaded for an elected
NDMC as under:–
“I oppose the way this Bill has been brought. Municipal Council must be there in Delhi but
its proposed structure is contrary to the very objective of the Bill. Even after 46 years of
Independence, the elected representatives of the people do not find a place in the Municipal
Council. It will not be democratic, if only the Government employees the Chair. I think that
if the elected representatives of the people hold the chair, the people will have much faith
on it but God knows why the Government does not rely on the elected representatives. Had
the Government faith on them, it would not have made a Government officer the
Chairman.”
13
8.12.2 A Member of the Lok Sabha (Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal- Chandigarh), spoke in support of
the Bill, as under:–
“I think the only course which could be chosen to govern the territory is the one over
which the Central Government has the control. I, like anybody else who has spoken earlier,
have firm belief that democratic principles have to be given primacy. But, given the situation
that prevails in this area, with almost all the land owned by the Government of India, that
is the Central Government, and over 80 per cent of the buildings being the property of the
Government of India, if in that situation we were to have some sort of what you call the
local self-government as we are setting up in almost all the cities of the country, a
somewhat incongruous situation would develop. In that case a situation could be faced
where members of that committee could say and I am sure such a situation would definitely
arise where these members would say that their writ does not run large over this area. To
avoid such a situation, I suppose the best course is what the Government of India has
chosen for this area.”
14
8.13 The then Home Minister made an identical speech on the Bill, in the Rajya Sabha on
15.6.1994. Some Members of the Rajya Sabha raised the issue that there had been gross violation
of the provision of the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act 1992 and the cardinal
principle of local self Government at the grass root level.
12 LS Deb dt. 14.06.1994, cc 451-452
13 LS Deb dt. 14.06.1994, cc 461-462
14 LS Deb dt. 14.06.1994 c 464

27
8.13.1 Participating in the debate in the Rajya Sabha, a Member (Shri Vijay Kumar Malhotra-Delhi)
spoke as under:
“...;g tks fcy cuk;k x;k gS blesa iwjh rjg] 100 ijlsaV ukehusVsM ckMh bldks
cuk fn;kA xouZesaV us ,d ckyÑ’.k viuk ljdkfj;k deh”ku ,IokbaV fd;k FkkA budh
fjdesaMs”kal xouZesaV us ekuh gS] mudh fjdesaMs”kal xouZesaV us ,DlsIV dh gSA muds fjdesaMs”ku
Hkh dksbZ cgqr vPNs ugha Fks ijUrq mUgksaus Hkh ;g dgk FkkA 
............ VksVy esEclZ esa ls
vk/ks bysDVsM gksa] vk/ks ukehusVsM gksa] ;g ckyÑ’.k desVh ;k ljdkfj;k deh”ku us dgkA
fQj mUgksaaus dgk fd blds fy, lsaVªy xouZesaV vius ikl MkbjsfDVo nsus dk ,d jkbV j[k
ldrh gSA ml ckyÑ’.k desVh dh flQkfj”k dh /kfTt;ka mM+k nhaA ,d Hkh esEcj bysDVsM
ugha gSA ,d Hkh bysDVsM esEcj dks mlesa ugha j[kk gSA blds lkFk
-lkFk bUgksaus dkaLVhVîw”ku
dh Hkh /kfTt;ka mM+k nhaA tc vaxzst fgUnqLrku esa jkt djrs Fks rc ;g ,u-Mh-,e-lh- vaxzstksa
ds tekus esa 1913 esa cuk tcfd fganqLrku dh dSfiVy fnYyh esa vk x;hA 25 ekpZ] 1913
dks fnYyh esa ,d E;wfufliy desVh cuk;h x;hA 1916 esa mls jk;lhuk E;wfufliy desVh
djkj fn;k x;kA fQj 1927 esa ubZ fnYyh E;wfufliy desVh cu x;hA rc Hkh bysDVsM
esEcj FksA rc dksbZ fnDdr ugha gqbZA 
............ csfld Do”pu ;g gS fd vkius dkaLVhVîw”ku
dh gR;k dh] tura= dh gR;k dh] fnYyh dh turk ds fgrksa dh gR;k dh vkSj iwjh rjg
ls ;gka C;wjksØsfVd fjthe LFkkfir djus dk QSlyk fd;kA
 ...” 15
8.13.2  T aking part in the debate in the Rajya Sabha, another Member (Shri O.P. Kohli-Delhi)
spoke as under:–
“eSa ubZ fnYyh E;wfufliy dkSafly fcy] 1994 dk fojks/k blfy, djrk gwa fd bl
fcy dh ekQZr tks <kapk fn;k x;k gS og vyksdrkaf=d gSA bysDVsM ,yhesaV vkSj uksfeusVsM
,yhesaV esa dksbZ larqyu ugha j[kk x;k gSA blesa 11 yksxksa esa ls 8 yksx uksfeusVsM gksaxsA
fnYyh ds eq[;ea=h dh dkUÝsUl Hkh ugha] dsoy dalyVs”ku gksxh vkSj 3 yksx ubZ fnYyh {ks=
ds fo/kk;d gksaxsA ljdkj dg ldrh gS fd geus fuokZfpr fo/kk;dksa dks LFkku ns gh fn;k
gSA rks fQj loky ;g iSnk gksrk gS fd vxj ,d cksMh ds fy, fuokZfpr yksxksa dks gh
txg
-txg bLrseky djuk gS rks fo/kkulHkk ds fy, 70 yksx rks pqus gh x, gSa] mUgha dks
vki fnYyh uxj fuxe ds fy, bLrseky dj yhft,] mUgha esa ls vki fnYyh ds.VksuesaV cksMZ
ds fy, bLrseky dj yhft,A fnYyh d.VksuesaV cksMZ ds fy, vkidks vyx ls fuokZfpr
yksxksa dh vko”;drk ugha jguh pkfg,] uxj fuxe ds fy, Hkh vyx ls pquko djkus dh
dksbZ t:jr ugha gksuh pkfg,] ysfdu yksdra= dk rdktk gS fd vyx
-vyx cksMh ds fy,
yksx pqus tk,a] ftlls turk dh Hkkxhnkjh gksA eSa ;g eglwl djrk gwa fd tks ckMh xfBr
dh xbZ gS] ;g ckMh iwjh rjg ls larqyu dks rksM+rh gSA blesa bysfDVM ,yhesaV~l gSa gh
ughaA ukfeusfVM ,yhesaV~l ls iwjh rjg ;g ckMh gkoh gSA
;g lc og ljdkj dj jgh gS ftlus lafo/kku ds 74osa la”kks/ku esa yksdy lSYQ
xouZesaV ds fy, fjçtsaVsfVo ckMht+ gksus dk çko/kku fd;k gS vkSj ,uMh,elh dks dkaLVhVîwV
djrs le; bl çko/kku dh iwjh rjg ls vuns[kh dh gSA 
……vxj ogka ij 50 ijlSaV
ukfeusfVM vkSj 50 ijlSaV bysfDVM yksx gks ldrs gSa] daVksuesaV cksMZ esa] rks ubZ fnYyh esa
bl çdkj dk larqyu D;ksa ugha gks ldrk\ bl larqyu dks rksM+us dh D;k vko”;drk gS\
……milHkk/;{k egksn;] blfy, esjk ;g vkjksi gS dsUæ ljdkj ij fd yksdy lSYQ
xouZesaV ds ek/;e ls lÙkk ds fodsUæh;dj.k dk tks ,d loZ LohÑr fl)kar vkSj n”kZu gS
15 RS Deb dt. 14.06.1994, cc. 436-441

28
mldh /kfTt;ka mM+kbZ xbZ gSa] igyh ckrA nwljh ckr] ubZ fnYyh ds fuokfl;ksa dh yksdra=
vkdka{kkvksa vkSj vf/kdkfj;ksa ¼,oeso½ dh iwjh rjg mis{kk gqbZ gSA rhljh ckr] fnYyh dh
turk }kjk pquh xbZ yksd çfrfuf/k ljdkj dh ubZ fnYyh E;wfufLiy desVh ds xBu esa dksbZ
jksy] dksbZ Hkwfedk ugha j[kh vkSj dsoy ukeek= ds fy, dalyVs”ku fon fn phQ fefuLVj
bruk Hkj fd;k gSA fnYyh ljdkj dks bl rjg ls ubZ fnYyh E;wfufLiy dkSafly ds ekeys
esa VksVyh ektZuykbt dj nsuk ;g yksdra= dk e[kkSy gS vkSj tura= dh gR;k gSA
”16
8.13.3  Another Member (Shri R.K. Dhawan-Andhra Pradesh), while participating in the debate in
the Rajya Sabha lent his support to the proposed structure of NDMC in the Bill, as under:–
“…..the area that is covered by the NDMC has its own special features…..and the people
of this area expect a special treatment to this area……keeping all these necessities in mind,
the local administration of this area can, by no stretch of imagination, be treated on a par
with the local administration, of other parts of the country. It is very essential, keeping in
view the national interest…….the New Delhi Municipal Council strikes a balance between
the democratic aspirations of the people of the area and the requirement of the
administration……..and fulfils the democratic aspirations of the people. Apart from that, this
composition of the Council is very essential in view of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act. It has to make the NDMC in consonance with the provisions relating to
the local bodies.”
17
8.13.4  Y et another Member, (Dr. Biplab Dasgupta- West Bengal) opposing the Bill in Rajya Sabha,
spoke as under:–
“……..the Government have treated the people of Delhi as inferior citizens. Not only that,
there has been a gross violation of the provisions of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth)
Amendment Bill. It talks about autonomy to the municipalities. The excuse given by the
Home Minister for accepting this violation was that some recommendation had come from
the Attorney-General. This does not appear to be convicting to me…..Government is
bringing forward a Bill which gives no role to the elected representatives. It is zero.
Everything is being given to the bureaucrats. I do not know what kind of democracy they
are talking about…..And I would request the Home Minister to completely redraft the law
and make it conform to the Seventy-fourth Amendment of the Constitution so that the real
democratic rights are given. Exclude all the nominated people and give the people of Delhi
the real democracy which they deserve.”
18
8.14 The Ministry of Home Affairs has repeatedly referred to the recommendations contained in
the Eleventh and Thirteenth Reports of the Estimates Committee of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha, as
justification for the proposed amendments in the NDMC Act, 1994. The Estimates Committee
(14
th Lok Sabha) had considered the Balakrishnan Committee Report and recommended in its
Eleventh Report, that the Government should review the desirability of modifying the composition
of the Council as recommended by the Balakrishnan Report, keeping in view the basic democratic
principle.
19 The Estimates Committee, in its Fourteenth Report, reiterated their earlier
recommendation and observed that the recommendation of the Balakrishnan Committee in regard to
modifying the composition of the Council, be reconsidered in all seriousness.
20
18.15 The Ashok Pradhan Committee set up in the year 2006 to study the “Multiplicity of
Institutions (dealing with Urban Development and Civic Amenities) in Delhi” noted the following:
16 RS Deb. dt. 15.06.1994, cc. 446-448
17 RS Deb. dt. 15.06.1994, cc. 451-452
18 RS Deb. dt. 15.06.1994, cc. 461-465
19 Eleventh Report of Estimate Committee (2006-07) of 14 th Lok Sabha on New Delhi Municipal Council p. 43
20 Thirteenth Report of Estimate Committee ibid,  p. 2

29
“the Balkrishnan Committee on the Reorganisation of Delhi Set-up (1989) recommended the
replacement of Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 as applied to the New Delhi Municipal Committee, by
fresh enactment, creating New Delhi Muncipal Council and the NDMC should continue to receive
special dispensation but should be run on the democratic lines. However, the Central Government
decided to retain the nominated character of the local body.”
21
8.15.1 That Committee had, however, in its report made the following observation regarding
NDMC:
“a close look at the Statement of Objects and Reasons mentioned at length at the time of
introduction of NDMC Bill, 1994 reveals that special dispensation has been given in regard
to establishment of NDMC, by providing exemptions and modifications in terms of article
243 ZB in the matter of application of the provisions of articles 243R, 243T, 243U and
243V of the Constitution. The overriding consideration in this regard has been that a
different kind of a local system was to be structured for NDMC on account of special
characteristics of NDMC area, which historically has come to be regarded as a seat of
Central Authority in the Union of India, rendering a scheme of governance for this area
based on a conventional pattern of representative local self-government, unworkable and out
of place. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommends status quo  in regard to its
status, control and functioning.”
22
8.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs made a reference to the recommendation of the Second ARC
contained in the Fifteenth Report on “State and District Administration”, which favoured the
continuation of the existing structure of the NDMC. The relevant recommendation of the said
Commission reads as under:–
“In view of the fact that the Union Government owns 80 per cent of the land and buildings
in the NDMC area, many of which are important Union Government offices and residences
as well as a concentration of foreign diplomatic missions it would be appropriate that the
present structure of NDMC is not disturbed.”
23
8.16.1 However, it is interesting to note that in its Sixth Report on “Local Governance: An
Inspiring Journey into the Future”, the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, considered and
emphasized the core principles of local governance i.e. application of the principle of subsidiarity
in the context of decentralization; clear delineation of functions of local governments vis-à-vis State
Governments and among different tiers of local governments; effective devolution of these
functions and resources accompanied by capacity-building and accountability; integrated view of
local services and development through convergence of programmes and agencies and above
all, ‘citizen-centricity’.
24 The Commission in this regard made the following observation/
recommendation:
“Article 243C(3)(c) and (d) stipulates that the State Legislature may by law provide for the
representation of the Members of Parliament and State Legislature of the State at levels
other than the village level. The Commission is of the view that the imposing presence of
Members of Parliament and the State Legislature in the Panchayats would subdue the
emergence of local leadership which is a sine qua non  for development of vibrant local
governments. Therefore, the Commission is of the view that Members of Parliament and
State Legislatures should not become members of local bodies. This would endow the local
bodies with decision-making capabilities.”
25
21 Ashok Pradhan Committee Report, p. 107
22 ibid, p. 87
23 15 th Report of Second Administrative Reforms Commission:- State and District Administration, p. 125
24 6 th Report of Second Administrative Reforms Commission on Local Governance : An inspiring journey into the future, p.13
25 15 th Report of Second Administrative Reforms Commission:- State and District Administration p. 125

30
8.16.2  The Committee finds that the observations and recommendations of the Second
ARC, made in its 6 th and 15 th Reports, contradict each other.
8.17 Be that as it may, it is ironical that while the government has heavily relied on the
Balakrishnan Committee Report in justifying the stand taken by it that in view of the
special characteristics of the NDMC area, the Council cannot be made an elected body, it
has ignored the spirit of the recommendations of that Committee for restructuring the
composition of the Council with nominated as well as equal number of elected members on
the basis of adult franchise. It needs also to be observed that while citing the
recommendations of the Estimates Committee (14
th Lok Sabha) as one of the grounds for
bringing in the amendment Bill, the Government has bye-passed the essence of that
Committee’s recommendation for reviewing the desirability of modifying the compositions of
the Council as recommended by the Balakrishnan Committee keeping in view the basic
democratic principles. It needs further to be pointed out that the Government has
conveniently used the recommendations made by the Second ARC in its Fifteenth Report
in taking the stand that the present governance structure of NDMC should not be changed
while disregarding the observations made by the said Commission in discussing the core
principles of Local Governance and the recommendations made by it in the context of
discussion on common issues, as contained in its Sixth Report.
8.18 For seventy eight long years i.e., from 1916 till the enactment of the NDMC Act 1994,
NDMC was governed by the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911. In discussing the
history of the NDMC, the Balakrishnan Committee Report, has referred to Section 11 of the Punjab
Municipal Act, 1911. The relevant extracts from the Balakrishnan Committee Report are in this
context, reproduced below:
“ ….under Section 11 of that Act a Municipal Committee is to consist of not less than five
members either appointed by the State Government or elected from among the inhabitants
of partly of the one and partly of the other. However, the appointed members shall not
ordinarily be more than one fourth of the total members. One of its members is to be
elected as President of Committee, and one or two of its member as Vice-President or Vice-
Presidents……”
26
8.19 The Committee would like to point out that the law which formed the basis of the
composition and functioning of the NDMC for nearly eight decades, provided for a substantial
component of members elected from amongst the inhabitants of the area. On the contrary,
the Government’s policy all along has been to retain the nominated character of the NDMC.
8.20 Time and again, the Ministry of Home Affairs have argued that in the event of
NDMC being made an elected body, composed of Councillors, accountable to the voters, the
Central Government may not be able to influence and ensure compliance of municipal
governance on critical issues. The Ministry feels that Central Government may not be able
to pre-empt the elected local body on critical policy areas. These arguments of the Ministry
are as fallacious as others, inasmuch as Chapter-XXII of the NDMC Act 1994 contains
adequate provisions empowering the Central Government to exercise oversight of the
functioning of NDMC. Thus, Sections 393-398 of the said Act give powers to the Central
Government to require production of documents; inspection; issue of directions and
enforcement thereof; and dissolution of the Council.
Recommendations of Committee
9.0 The Committee has deliberated on the Bill at length. However, on the question of
making NDMC an elected body, rather than a nominated body as at present, the Committee
26Balakrishnan Report on Reorganisation of Delhi Set-up, Part-II, p. 15

31
is divided. There is no consensus in the Committee either in favour of or against the Bill.
A section of the Members are of the view that the Bill should be passed in its present form.
The other section of the Members strongly feel that keeping in view the spirit of the
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992, the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1992, the structure of the Cantonment Boards and the aspirations of the
residents of the NDMC area, the Council should be made into an elected body, at least
partially, on the lines of the Cantonment Boards, to subserve the core principles of local
self governance as enshrined in the Constitution.
9.1 The issue of revolving Chairmanship of the NDMC, for the purpose of presiding over
the meetings of the Council, repeatedly came up for discussion in the Committee. The
majority view in the Committee disagreed with the concept of revolving Chairmanship.
9.2 Be that as it may be, in view of the divergent perception in the Committee on the
subject matter of the Bill, and the persistent stand of the Government of making no change
in the governance structure of NDMC, the Committee is of the considered view that the
Government should take up the issue at the larger level with major political parties and
other stakeholders to reconcile the differing viewpoints and to explore the possibility of
evolving a consensus on this issue, before piloting the Bill in Parliament.

32
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee finds that the observations and recommendations of the Second ARC,
made in its 6 th and 15 th Reports, contradict each other. (Para 8.16.2)
Be that as it may, it is ironical that while the government has heavily relied on the
Balakrishnan Committee Report in justifying the stand taken by it that in view of the
special characteristics of the NDMC area, the Council cannot be made an elected body, it
has ignored the spirit of the recommendations of that Committee for restructuring the
composition of the Council with nominated as well as equal number of elected members on
the basis of adult franchise. It needs also to be observed that while citing the
recommendations of the Estimates Committee (14
th Lok Sabha) as one of the grounds for
bringing in the amendment Bill, the Government has bye-passed the essence of that
Committee’s recommendation for reviewing the desirability of modifying the compositions of
the Council as recommended by the Balakrishnan Committee keeping in view the basic
democratic principles. It needs further to be pointed out that the Government has
conveniently used the recommendations made by the Second ARC in its Fifteenth Report
in taking the stand that the present governance structure of NDMC should not be changed
while disregarding the observations made by the said Commission in discussing the core
principles of Local Governance and the recommendations made by it in the context of
discussion on common issues, as contained in its Sixth Report. (Para 8.17)
The Committee would like to point out that the law which formed the basis of the
composition and functioning of the NDMC for nearly eight decades, provided for a
substantial component of members elected from amongst the inhabitants of the area. On
the contrary, the Government’s policy all along has been to retain the nominated character
of the NDMC. (Para 8.19)
Time and again, the Ministry of Home Affairs have argued that in the event of
NDMC being made an elected body, composed of Councillors, accountable to the voters, the
Central Government may not be able to influence and ensure compliance of municipal
governance on critical issues. The Ministry feels that Central Government may not be able
to pre-empt the elected local body on critical policy areas. These arguments of the Ministry
are as fallacious as others, inasmuch as Chapter-XXII of the NDMC Act 1994 contains
adequate provisions empowering the Central Government to exercise oversight of the
functioning of NDMC. Thus, Sections 393-398 of the said Act give powers to the Central
Government to require production of documents; inspection; issue of directions and
enforcement thereof; and dissolution of the Council. (Para 8.20)
The Committee has deliberated on the Bill at length. However, on the question of
making NDMC an elected body, rather than a nominated body as at present, the Committee
is divided. There is no consensus in the Committee either in favour of or against the Bill.
A section of the Members are of the view that the Bill should be passed in its present form.
The other section of the Members strongly feel that keeping in view the spirit of the
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992, the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1992, the structure of the Cantonment Boards and the aspirations of the
residents of the NDMC area, the Council should be made into an elected body, at least
32

33
partially, on the lines of the Cantonment Boards, to subserve the core principles of local
self governance as enshrined in the Constitution. (Para 9.0)
The issue of revolving Chairmanship of the NDMC, for the purpose of presiding over
the meetings of the Council, repeatedly came up for discussion in the Committee. The
majority view in the Committee disagreed with the concept of revolving Chairmanship.
(Para 9.1)
Be that as it may be, in view of the divergent perception in the Committee on the
subject matter of the Bill, and the persistent stand of the Government of making no change
in the governance structure of NDMC, the Committee is of the considered view that the
Government should take up the issue at the larger level with major political parties and
other stakeholders to reconcile the differing viewpoints and to explore the possibility of
evolving a consensus on this issue, before piloting the Bill in Parliament. (Para 9.2)

MINUTES

36

37
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Tuesday, 21 September 2010 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
11. Shri Jintender Singh Malik
12. Adv. A. Sampath
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
16. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the re-
constituted Committee. The Chairman sought active participation and co-operation from all the
Members in carrying out the responsibilities entrusted to the Committee.
2.1 The Chairman then, apprised the Members about the agenda of the day. He mentioned that
the meeting had been scheduled to decide future programme of the Committee and hold preliminary
discussion on the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010, the Arms (Amendment)
37

38
Bill, 2010 and the Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010, which had been referred to
the Committee on 20 th August, 1 st September and 15 th September, 2010, for examination and report
on or before 19 th October, 30 th November and 14 th December, 2010, respectively.
2.2 The Chairman giving a brief introduction on Bills, stated that the Committee had little time
at its disposal for presentation of the report on the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010. Regarding the
Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010 which had only one clause proposing an
innocuous amendment, he stated that the Committee may finalize its report and present it in time.
In the case of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010, the Chairman stated that the Committee may take
a little more time as there are several issues which have to be deliberated.
2.3 The Members of the Committee, thereafter discussed the future programme and
unanimously decided to hear the presentation of Home Secretary on the Repatriation of Prisoners
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and also to take up the clause-
by-clause consideration of the Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010 in the next sitting.
3.0 The Committee then decided to meet again on 30
th September, 2010 to hear the presentation
of Home Secretary on the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the Repatriation of Prisoners
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
4.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.

39
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Thursday, 30 September 2010 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Javed Akhtar
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
9. Shri L.K. Advani
10. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Dr. Nilesh Narayan Rane
14. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
15. Adv. A. Sampath
16. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
17. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati B. Bhamathi, Additional Secretary (UT)
3. Shri N.S. Kalsi, Joint Secretary (CS)
4. Shri Neeraj Kansal, Director
5. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Director
39

40
Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council
1. Shri Santosh D. Vaidya, Secretary
2. Shri V .C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor
3. Shri S.P. Sanwal, Director (GA)
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary
3. Shri D. Bhardwaj, Additional Legal Advisor
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The
Chairman also welcomed Shri Javed Akhtar, Member, Rajya Sabha, the newly nominated Member
of the Committee.
2.1 The Chairman apprised the Members that the Home Secretary had made a request to him
that he would not be able to attend the meeting for long because of his pre-occupation with
preparations for security arrangements for Commonwealth Games and security measures across the
country in the light of the judgment on the Ayodhya issue. The Chairman informed the Members
that the Committee may consider the Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010, which is
an innocuous Bill and clear it that day and hear the presentation of Home Secretary on the NDMC
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. He also suggested that further discussion on the NDMC (Amendment) Bill,
2010 may be held later. The Committee, after some discussion, agreed to his proposals.
[At this stage witnesses were called in]
3.0 The Chairman thereafter welcomed the Home Secretary, Law Secretary, Legislative
Secretary and other senior officers of the above said ministries and NDMC to the meeting of the
Committee. The Chairman and Members of the Committee took a serious view of the fact that the
Chairman, NDMC did not appear before the Committee. The Secretary, NDMC apologizing to the
Committee for the non-appearance of the Chairman, NDMC stated that he could not come due to
the hosting of the Queen’s Baton relay at the OC Headquarters. The Chairman informed him that
permission seeking exemption from appearing before the Committee should have been sought.
4.0 * * * *
4.1 * * * *
The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
5.0 The Chairman then informed the Members that the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 referred
to the Committee on 20
th August, 2010 for examination and report within two months, needs to
be studied and should hear various stakeholders. The Committee, agreeing to his suggestion, felt
that it would not be possible for it to complete all stages of consideration of the Bill and present
report within the stipulated time, i.e., by the 19
th October, 2010. The Committee unanimously
decided to seek extension of time up to the end of the winter session, 2010 of the Parliament from
*** Relates to other matter.

41
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for presentation of report on the said Bill. The Committee,
accordingly, authorized its Chairman to request Hon’ble Chairman for extension of time up to the
end of the winter session, 2010 of Parliament to present report on the said Bill.
5.1 The Chairman then asked the Home Secretary to make a presentation on the NDMC
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
5.2 The Additional Secretary, MHA made presentation before the Committee on the said Bill. The
highlights of the presentation are as follows:
(i) NDMC consists of about 3% of area and 3% of population of the NCT of Delhi. It
comprises the territory regarded as the seat of central authority in the Union of India.
(ii) In view of special characteristics of the area, governance based on conventional
pattern of representative self Government was found unworkable. Accordingly, a
special legislation, namely, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 has been
structured for New Delhi area.
(iii) The composition of the NDMC, as per the existing law is following:
• The Chairperson of the NDMC would be an officer of Central Government or
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), not below the rank
of Joint Secretary to the Government of India- to be nominated by the Central
Government in consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi.
• Three MLAs of Delhi Legislative Assembly representing New Delhi area.
• Five officers of the Central Government or GNCTD.
• Two members from various fields to be nominated by the Central Government in
consultation with Chief Minister of Delhi.
• MP representing New Delhi area as special invitee.
• At least three women members.
• At least one SC member.
• A Vice Chairperson from amongst non-official members to be nominated by the
Central Government in consultation with the Chief Minister, Delhi.
5.3 Explaining about the main features of the Bill, the Additional Secretary of the Ministry stated
that the Bill contains mainly the following proposals:
(i) To reduce the number of MLAs from three to two and increase the number of
members belonging to various categories like lawyers, teachers, businessmen etc. from
two to four.
(ii) To make the MP representing New Delhi area as Member of the Council with voting
rights.
(iii) At least, two Members should be from SC, of which at least one should be from non-
official category.
(iv) The procedure for presiding over meetings of the Council has also been changed.
5.4 The Chairman felt that the Bill had a lot of implications and the Committee should hear the
views of people concerned with NDMC and Delhi. The Chairman asked the Home Secretary to go
through the reports of the Reorganisation Committee and Estimates Committee and come prepared
for further discussion on the Bill in the next meeting.

42
5.5 The Committee then decided to meet again on 7 th October, 2010 to further hear the views
of Home Secretary on the Bill.
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 P.M.

43
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 7 th October 2010 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri D. Raja  — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Javed Akhtar
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
13. Adv. A. Sampath
14. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
15. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
16. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati B. Bhamathi, Additional Secretary (UT)
Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council
1. Shri Parimal Rai, Chairperson
43

44
2. Shri Santosh D. Vaidya, Secretary
3. Shri V .C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor
4. Shri S.P. Sanwal, Director (GA)
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri D. Raja was voted to the Chair. The Chair welcomed
the members to the meeting of the Committee. He then apprised them about the agenda of the day.
3. The Chair then welcomed the Home Secretary and other officers to the sitting of the
Committee. He asked the Home Secretary to respond to the issues raised by the Members in the
meeting held on 30
th September 2010 in regard to the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010.
4. Thereafter, the Additional Secretary, in the Ministry made a presentation. The Home
Secretary, explaining about the need for the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010, stated that the Chief
Minister of Delhi, MP and MLAs from the NDMC area, do not attend the meeting of the Council,
as a Joint Secretary level officer of the Government of India presides over its meetings.
5. One Member then observed that three lakh people residing in the NDMC area were being
denied active role in civic matters. He also objected to the concept of revolving chairmanship of
NDMC as proposed in the Bill.
6. Another Member highlighted the importance of local self government; underlined the fact
that the duties of that government were different from those of the State Assembly or Parliament.
Consequently, a Councillor’s work was different from that of the MLA or the MP. Therefore, the
importance of grassroot representation in a body like NDMC need hardly be emphasised. He also
stressed upon the point that there should not be any interference from the Government in municipal
administration, which should be allowed to function as a true local self governing body. He then
suggested that NDMC should be as democratic as the Delhi Cantonment Board. The Member also
stressed upon the point that families of the Government servants living in the NDMC area should
not be denied the right to participate in and contest elections to NDMC.
7. A Member felt that Government should keep in mind the importance and sensitivity of the
areas falling under the NDMC as it housed Central Government establishments and diplomatic
areas.
8. The Home Secretary informed the Committee that the Central Government was trying to
strike a balance between the Council being an elected body and representation of Central
Government therein, keeping in mind the sensitivity of the area.
9. A few more queries were put by Members which were replied to. The Chair then asked
the Home Secretary to study the issues raised during the meeting and come prepared with
clarifications in the next meeting. He also asked the Home Secretary to provide a note on the status
of Local Self Governments in major capital cities of the world.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.

45
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Friday, 22 nd October 2010 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
11. Dr. Nilesh Narayan Rane
12. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
13. Adv. A. Sampath
14. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
15. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati B. Bhamathi, Additional Secretary (UT)
3. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Joint Secretary
Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council
1. Shri Parimal Rai, Chairperson
45

46
2. Shri Manish Kumar, Financial Advisor
3. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor
4. Shri S.P. Sanwal, Director (GA)
New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
2.0 The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and apprised them
that the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010, was referred to the Committee on
20th August, 2010, for examination and report on or before 19
th October, 2010. The Chairman
mentioned that in the meeting held on 30 th September, 2010, the Committee felt that it would not
be possible for it to complete all stages of consideration of the Bill and present its report thereon
within the stipulated time and in view thereof it was decided to seek extension of time from
Hon’ble Chairman for submitting report on the said Bill, up to the end of the winter session of
Parliament. The Chairman informed the Members that in pursuance of the decision of the
Committee, he had approached Hon’ble Chairman for grant of extension of time. However, Hon’ble
Chairman had granted extension upto 15
th November, 2010 only for presentation of report by the
Committee on the Bill.
2.1 The Chairman mentioned that a presentation on the Bill had been made by the
representatives of the Home Ministry on 30 th September, 2010 and the Committee had again heard
the Home Secretary and the Chairman, NDMC on 7 th October, 2010 and sought some clarifications
from them on the said Bill.
2.2 The Chairman added that in the Committee’s meeting held on 7 th October, 2010 certain
issues were raised by the Members, and the Home Secretary was requested to have detailed
consultations within the Ministry on the issues raised by the Members and revert to the Committee
in its next sitting. Consequently, the Home Secretary and the Chairman, NDMC have been invited
for further clarification on the Bill.
[At this stage the witnesses were called in]
3.0 The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary, the Chairman, NDMC and other senior
officers of the Ministry. The Chairman asked the Home Secretary to respond to the issues raised
in the meeting held on 7
th October, 2010.
3.1 The Home Secretary stated that he had consulted the Union Home Minister on the issues
related to the Bill and the views of the Government of India are as follows:
• The NDMC area has unique characteristics of being the seat of the Central Government
which houses Parliament, Rashtrapati Bhavan, Supreme Court of India, the residences
of Prime Minister, all Central Ministers, MPs, Judges of Supreme Court, Government
Officers.
• There are only a few private colonies in the NDMC area.
• Eighty per cent of the area comprises of Government colony buildings.
• Out of the population of 302360, 220000 are residing in Government colonies and
71,000 are residing in private colonies, including about 12,000 in jhuggies and temporary
huts and about 11,000 in the diplomatic and restricted areas.
• Diplomatic missions of foreign countries are also located in the NDMC area.
• Every State has its Resident Commissioner in the capital and all State Bhavans are
located in the NDMC area.

47
• The Central Government has, therefore, to strike a fine balance between adopting a
system of governance that takes care of the rights of the residents as also the rights
of the foreign missions.
• Implementation of policy decisions taken by locally elected body in the NDMC area may
have a far reaching impact, even impacting the country’s reputation at the international
level.
• The Government servants and their families residing in the Government colonies located
in the NDMC area are in majority. Thus, the Government does not want politicization
of Government officials and their families.
• The amendments which have been proposed in the present Bill are, basically, three. The
first one is with regard to reducing the number of MLAs from three to two due to
delimitation. The second one is to increase the number of nominated Members from two
to four. And the third one is that the MP representing the New Delhi area has been given
full-fledged Membership with voting rights because it has been found that the Chief
Minister, who is currently an MLA from that region, and the local MPs, are not
attending the meetings, partly because they feel that they do not enjoy proper status in
NDMC.
• There are private colonies like JK Dutt Colony, Golf Links, etc in the NDMC area. The
Government is devising mechanism to give representation to the sparsely distributed
private population.
• The view finally taken at the level of the Union Home Minister is that the Government
would, at the moment, still prefer to stick to the amendments and not to make any
further changes in the proposed Bill.
4.0 The Chairman and a majority of the Members of the Committee then raised the following
queries/issues:
• The Bill is against the spirit of the Seventy third and the Seventy fourth Amendments
to the Constitution
• There is a contradiction in the argument put forward by the Government. The
Government Servants are legally debarred from contesting elections. However, the
families of the Government Servants are not barred from contesting elections. They
have the right to vote as well as to get elected.
• The position of Chairman, NDMC should not be a revolving one, as proposed in the Bill.
• Worldwide the trend is towards more and more democratization even at the local level
but the proposed Bill intends to take away from the people residing in the NDMC area,
the right to franchise and get elected to the body.
• In the Cantonment areas of the country, the family members of Defence personnel are
allowed to contest elections to the Cantonment Boards.
• Representation of women and Scheduled Tribes should be increased in the Council.
4.1 However, some Members, while supporting the Bill, fe lt that the Chairman of NDMC should
be an elected person and the present Bill served the purpose.
5.0 The Home Secretary responded to the issues raised by the Chairman and the Members of
the Committee.

48
6.0 Members felt that there are serious issues involved in the Bill and the Committee should
hear representatives of some local self governments, NDMC, and Residents Welfare Associations
of private colonies in NDMC areas. The Chairman then stated that Hon’ble Chairman has granted
extension of time upto 15
th November, 2010 to the Committee to present the report on the Bill
which is inadequate to complete the examination of the Bill. On being enquired, the Home Secretary
told the Committee that there is no urgency in enacting the Bill and the Committee may like to go
for further consultations, if felt necessary. The Committee, accordingly decided to seek further
extension from Hon’ble Chairman, for presenting its report on the Bill, upto the first week of the
Budget Session, 2011 of the Parliament and authorized its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman
for the purpose.
6.1 The Chairman asked the Home Secretary to meanwhile examine the issues raised in today’s
sitting.
(At this stage the witnesses withdrew)
7.0 * * * *
8.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

49
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 23 rd November 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
2. 0 The Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the Committee.
New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
3.0  Recalling the deliberation of the Committee held in its sitting held on 22 nd October, 2010,
wherein it had decided to seek further extension of time for submitting the report on the New Delhi
Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 upto the first week of the Budget Session, 2011 of
Parliament, the Chairman informed Members that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted
further extension upto 31
st January, 2011 only for presenting the report on the Bill. He informed
Members that the Committee would have to complete the remaining stages of examination of the
Bill and present its report within the extended time.
49

50
4.0 * * * *
4.1 * * * *
4.2 * * * *
4.3 * * * *
4.5 * * * *
5. * * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

51
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 20 th December, 2010 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Shri L.K. Advani
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
10. Adv. A. Sampath
11. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
12. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
13. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Joint Secretary (UT)
2. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Director
Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council
1. Shri Parimal Rai, Chairman
2. Shri Santosh D. Vaidya, Secretary
3. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor
51

52
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
4. Shri K.B. Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri R. Ragupathi, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Director
Representatives of Residents’ Welfare Associations
1. Shri A.P. Singh, President, Golf Links Resident Welfare Association
2. Shri Jitender Kapoor, Vice President, Federation of Golf Link, Jor Bagh, Malcha Marg
and Babar Road Resident Welfare Associations.
3. Shri A. Armugham, V ice-President, F,G,&H Block, Resident Welfare Association, Sarojini
Nagar
4. Shri Sunil Kumar Bhadauria, Secretary, F,G,&H Block, Resident Welfare Association,
Sarojini Nagar
5. Shri K. Dinakar Raj, Executive Member, F,G,&H Block, Resident Welfare Association,
Sarojini Nagar
Member of New Delhi Municipal Council
Shri Karan Singh Tanwar, MLA, Delhi Legislative Assembly
2.0 The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and informed them
of the agenda for the day.
3.0 * * * *
3.1 * * * *
NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010
4.0 The Chairman then recalled that in view of the important issues involved in the Bill, the
Committee in its meeting held on 22
nd October, 2010, had felt that it should hear representatives
of some Residents Welfare Associations of private and government colonies in NDMC areas.
4.1  He also recalled that the Committee had sought extension of time upto the first week of
the Budget Session, 2011 from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for presentation of report on the
Bill but Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension upto 31
st January, 2010 only.
4.2 He further stated that following the decision of the Committee,  representatives of two
Residents Welfare Associations (RW A), one from a private colony and one from government
colonies of NDMC area, had been invited to seek their views on the Bill. He also stated that the
Committee would hear the views of Shri Karan Singh Tanwar, MLA representing Delhi Cantt.
(which includes Sarojini Nagar, an NDMC area in the Delhi Legislative Assembly) and also a
Member of NDMC, on the Bill.
*** Relate to other matters.

53
[At this stage the witnesses were called in]
5.0 The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Residents Welfare Associations and
Ministries of Home Affairs and Law and Justice and Shri Karan Singh Tanwar, MLA. He then asked
the representatives of the RW As to express their views on the provisions of the Bill.
5.1 The highlights of the views by the witnesses were as follows:–
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOLF LINKs RWA
• Permanent residents have no stake in the governance of NDMC.
• There should be some kind of elective mechanism to represent the permanent residents
of NDMC in the Council.
• The Chairman of the Council should be a political head as he/she would be more
effective.
• The NDMC should be a non-political elected body. The Chairman could still be the
senior most officer of Central Government and no member of the Council should be
senior to him.
• NDMC could also be a partly elected body. The elected members like MLAs would not
be of much help in looking after day-to-day civic matters. Council should have
Members directly elected by the People.
REPRESENTATIVES OF F, G AND H BLOCK, SAROJINI NAGAR RWA
• The Chairman of the Council should be a political person as he would be more
effective.
• Present set-up of NDMC is alright and need not be altered.
• There should, however, be some mechanism to protect the interest of Government
Employees residing in an NDMC area. The Government Colonies RW As should be given
some representation in the Council.
SHRI KARAN SINGH TANWAR, MLA, DELHI CANTT. AND MEMBER, NDMC
• The main problem with the functioning of NDMC is its senior members do not attend
the meetings as it is presided over by a Chairman who is junior in rank.
• Elected members of the Council do not get facilities which are available to nominated
ones.
• Either NDMC should be made a totally elected body on the pattern of MCD or partly
elected and partly nominated, on the pattern of Cantonment Board.
6.0 The Chairman and Members of the Committee put some queries and asked the officials to
send written replies thereto.
7.0 The Committee then decided to issue a press release inviting Memoranda from Residents’
Welfare Associations of NDMC area seeking their views on the Bill.
8.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

54
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Wednesday, 5 th January 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Javed Akhtar
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
12. Adv. A. Sampath
13. Shri Ravneet Singh
14. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
15. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Smt. B. Bhamathi, Additional Secretary (UT)
3. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Director
Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council
1. Shri Parimal Rai, Chairman
2. Shri Santosh D. Vaidya, Secretary
54

55
3. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor
4. Shri S.P. Sanwal, Director (GA)
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice, Legislative Department
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
4. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary
3. Shri D. Bhardwaj, Additional Legal Advisor
2.0 In the absence of the Chairman, Shri S. S. Ahluwalia was voted to the Chair.
3.0 The Chair welcomed the Members to the first sitting of the Committee in the New Year
and wished them a Happy and Prosperous 2011. He then apprised them of the agenda for the day.
4.0 * * * *
4.1 * * * *
5.0 * * * *
5.1 * * * *
NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010
6.0 The Chair recapitulated that the Committee in its previous sitting had decided to issue a
Press Release inviting memoranda from the Residents’ Welfare Associations belonging to NDMC
area only, on the Bill and on the issue of NDMC being made an elected body, from a nominated
one. Implementing the decision of the Committee, the Secretariat issued a Press Release. In
response thereto, fifteen memoranda had been received, which had been circulated to the Members
and also forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for furnishing their comments on the
suggestions made therein. The Chair observed that the overwhelming view in the memoranda was
in favour of making NDMC an elected body.
[At this stage the witnesses were called in]
7.0 The Chair welcomed the witnesses. He recalled that the Committee had heard the views of
the Ministry in its sitting held on 22
nd October, 2010 and directed them to come prepared with the
responses on the issues raised in that meeting.
8.0 The Home Secretary then responded to the suggestion made by various RW As in their
memoranda. The Home Secretary informed the Committee that after consulting the Union Home
Minister, the final view that had emerged was that on account of the special character of the area,
the Government would still continue to go with the present structure and not bring in any elected
members into the governing structure of the NDMC and that the Government was not in favour
of changing the current structure of the Council, as proposed in the NDMC (Amendment)
Bill, 2010.
*** Relates to other matter.

56
9.0  The Chair and Members of the Committee while expressing unhappiness over the rigid
stand taken by the Ministry despite strong views of the Committee and the RW As to the contrary,
raised the following issues/queries:–
■ People residing in the NDMC area would not be convinced by the argument advanced
by the Ministry in favour of retaining the 
status quo in so far as the structure of NDMC
was concerned.
■ Rationale for depriving the people of NDMC area the opportunity to exercise their
franchise especially when residents of all regions of Delhi outside the NDMC area
exercise their right to vote in elections to the local self governing bodies so that their
elected representatives can look after matters relating to civic amenities which cannot
be attended to by area MPs and MLAs.
■ In the representations received, there is overwhelming support for an elected NDMC.
■ NDMC should be made an elected body either partially or fully.
10.0 The Ch air then enquired from the Law Secretary whether there would be any legal problem
in converting NDMC into an elected body to which the Law Secretary replied in the negative.
11.0 The Home Secretary then tried to respond to the queries which were not found convincing
and satisfactory by the Committee.
12.0 The Chair then told the Home Secretary that Government should give a serious thought to
the consensus which had emerged in the Committee in favour of an elected NDMC and furnish
an elaborate reply on the stand taken by Government in the matter, within a week’s time.
13.0 The Committee then decided to meet on 13
th January, 2011 to hold further discussion on
the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 in the light of the detailed response of
the Government.
14.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
15.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.56 
P.M.

57
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Thursday, the 13 th January 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Adv. A. Sampath
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
2.0 In the absence of the Chairman, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia was voted to the Chair.
3.0 The Chair welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee and told them that
internal discussion on the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 would be held.
4.0 The Chair recalled that the Committee in its sitting held on 5
th January, 2011, further heard
the Home Secretary on the Bill in the light of the memoranda received and the oral deposition of
some non-official witnesses.
4.1 The Chair also recalled that in its previous meeting, the Committee was unanimous in its
view that NDMC should be an elected body. He observes that the Committee was not convinced
57

58
by the reasons advanced by the Government as to why it was not in favour of making NDMC
an elected body. The Chair stated that the Committee had asked the Home Secretary to give a
serious thought to its views and submit a detailed explanation on the Government’s stand.
5.0 The Chair also informed the Members that in the meanwhile, seven Members of the
Committee had sent their written views in support of the Bill. He also informed that two more
memoranda had also been received from RW As belonging to NDMC area, which had been
circulated during the meeting itself.
6.0 The Chair thereafter informed Members that an OM dated the 13
th January 2011 had been
received in the Secretariat from the Ministry of Home Affairs, just before the commencement of
the days sitting, copies of which had been given to the Members in the course of the meeting.
The Chair observed that the said communication contained detailed explanation of the Government
in taking a final view that it was not in favour of changing the present structure of NDMC so
as to make it an elected body.
7. After some discussion the Committee was of the view that Members needed to be given
time to go through the written response of the Government and express their views on the Bill.
The Committee was also of the view that as a section of its Members had furnished their
comments in writings, other Members should also be given an opportunities to submit their written
comments if they so desire.
8.0 The Chair then directed the Secretariat to collect the following information and circulate the
same amongst the Members:–
(i) Government of National Capital Territory Bill, 1991 (as introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 16.12.91).
(ii) relevant extracts of L.S. debates dated the 20
th December, 1991 on the said Bill;
(iii) relevant extracts of R. S. Debates dated the 21 st December 1991 on the Bill; and
(iv) Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 (No. 1 of 1992).
8.1 The Committee also directed the Secretariat to find out from MHA whether at any point of
time during the formulation and consideration of the Government of National Capital Territory Bill,
1991 the issue of suitable structural arrangement for local self governance of the NDMC area, with
a view to maintaining special characteristics of that area, was discussed or not.
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then decided to meet at 3.00 
P.M. on Monday, the 24 th January, 2011 for
a final round of discussion on the Bill. The Committee then adjourned at 12.25 P.M.

59
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 24 th January 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
16. Shri L.K. Advani
17. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Adv. A. Sampath
22. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
23. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
24. Shri Harsh Vardhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Obituary Reference
2.0 * * * *
2.1 * * * *
59
*** Relates to other matter.

60
New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
3.0 The Chairman recapitulated for the benefit of the Members that the Committee had
considered the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 in eight sittings. The
Chairman also recalled that in its sitting held on 13
th January, 2011, the Committee had held brief
discussion on the Bill in the light of the presentations made by the Ministry of Home Affairs and
suggestions/views/comments made in the memoranda received from various RW As belonging to
NDMC area and the views of the non-official witnesses who appeared before the Committee. The
Chairman observed that the overwhelming view in the memoranda, the evidence of non-official
witnesses and the general consensus in the sitting of the Committee held on 5
th January 2011, was
in favour of making NDMC an elected body.
3.1 The Chairman informed the Members that in the meanwhile, eleven members of the
Committee had sent their written views in support of the Bill in its present form. He also informed
that one more Member had sent his written views in which he had suggested that the present Bill
may be returned with the recommendation that a new Bill be introduced by making provisions for
substantial component of elected members and keeping the number of nominated Members in
NDMC to the essential minimum.
3.2  The Chairman stated that some Members felt that those who had not submitted their
comments in writing and desirous to send the same be given an opportunity to do so.
3.3 The Chairman, thereafter, mentioned that additional papers concerning the Government of
National Capital Territory Bill, 1991 (as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 16.12.1991) and New Delhi
Municipal Council Bill, 1994 (as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 13.06.1994) alongwith relevant
extracts of debates in both the Houses on the Bills, had been circulated for information of
Members.
3.4 The Chairman also informed the Members that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted
extension of time upto 31
st January, 2011 for presentation of report on the Bill. He stated that after
that day’s deliberations, the Secretariat would prepare the draft report. As the time left for
preparing the draft report, considering and adopting the same and presenting it within the stipulated
time i.e., 31
st January 2011, was very close, the Committee would not be able to complete the
remaining stages of examination of the Bill and present report thereon by the extended date.
3.5 The Committee, accordingly, decided to seek further extension of time upto the last day of
the first week of Part I of the Budget Session 2011 from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for
presentation of report on the Bill.
4.0 * * * *
4.1 * * * *
4.2 * * * *
5.0 * * * *
Further discussion on New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
6.0  The Committee then took up further discussion on the Bill. The Chairman observed that
going by the discussion held in the Committee and the views expressed by the RW As, the elected
Member of the Delhi Legislative Assembly from New Delhi area and the spirit of the Constitution
Seventy Third and Seventy Fourth Amendments, a view that had emerged was that the Committee
should recommend to the Government that it would be better if NDMC was made an elected body,
*** Relates to other matter.

61
somewhat on the lines of the Cantonment Boards. At the same time, the Chairman also observed
that another view had emerged, expressed by certain Members, in support of the Bill and in favour
of retaining the present governing structure of the NDMC. The Chairman then announced that as
there was no agreement in the Committee on the Bill, it would not proceed with the clause-by-
clause consideration thereof. He informed Members that both the viewpoints on the Bill would be
incorporated in the draft report.
6.1 The Chairman then made a pointed reference to certain statements contained in the OM
dated 13
th January, 2011 of the Ministry of Home Affairs which he found to be exceptionable and
contrary to the objectives of the Constitution Seventy Third and Seventy Fourth Amendments.
7.0 Members then expressed the following views both in favour of and against the Bill.
Against the Bill
■ The Committee should stress upon the point that NDMC should be an elected body and
that the citizens could not be denied their civic rights and responsibilities.
■ While making structural changes in the NDMC, the model of the Cantonment Boards
should be kept in mind wherein there were components of both elected and nominated
members.
■ The functioning of Legislators, MPs and MLAs was completely different from the duties
and responsibilities of a corporator.
■ The post of the Chairman, NDMC ought not be a revolving one. In case the Chairman,
NDMC was not present, there could be a Deputy Chairman to preside over the body.
It would not be in order for the Chief Minister or for that matter a Minister of the
Central Government to preside over the NDMC only because of protocol requirements.
■ The O.M. dated 13 th January, 2011 of the Ministry of Home Affairs attributed negative
motives to a body whose composition was under discussion.
■ There could not be a body which was not answerable to the people. The residents must
have a say in the functioning of NDMC, particularly on civic matters.
■ It was interesting to note that the written submissions of Ministry of Home Affairs
sent to the Committee, spelling out the Government stand on the governing structure
of NDMC, were strikingly identical to the speeches of the then Home Minister in
both the Houses of Parliament during the debates in both the Houses on the NDMC
Bill, 1994.
■ If NDMC was not made an elected body then at least its name should be changed to
‘New Delhi Municipal Board’.
In favour of the Bill
■ Keeping in view, the special character of NDMC area, the amendments proposed in the
Bill should be accepted in the public interest.
■ The Bill was more in the nature of making procedural changes necessitated by recent
developments and protocol requirements and providing additional representation in the
body, which were steps in the right direction.
■ The issue of direct election should not be used as a ploy to derail the passing of the
proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting reform measures proposed for the NDMC.

62
General Observation
8.0 A Member observed that initially there was a near consensus in the Committee that NDMC
should be made an elected body. However, as the deliberations of the Committee were drawing to
a close, a section of its Members belonging to a particular political party had sent identically
worded letters to the Chairman of the Committee expressing their support to the Bill. According
to the Member, the division in the Committee along party lines, on a simple piece of legislation,
was unfortunate. He further observed that one of the most important principle of the Committee
System in Parliament was that it functioned in a non-partisan manner and decisions were taken by
consensus. He felt that it would have been a happy situation if Members had expressed their views
on the Bill rising above party lines. At this point, the Chairman observed that although the Members
of the Committee were entitled to express their views on a subject or Bill in writing, it was a sad
reflection on the functioning of the Committee System of Parliament when his office received some
letters signed by a few Members, not directly from them but from a Central Minister’s office.
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. to meet again at 12.00 N OON on Wednesday, the
2nd February, 2011 to hear the presentation of the Home Secretary on the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 and hold discussion thereon.

63
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.30 P.M. on Monday, the 14 th February 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri L. Raja Gopal
12. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
15. Adv. A. Sampath
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda for the day.
** * *
63
*** Relates to other matter.

64
Draft 148 th Report on NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010
3.0 The Committee took up consideration of the draft 148 th report of the Committee on the
NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman recapitulated that since the Committee could not
reach a consensus on the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and in such a
scenario, it was not possible to take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
4.0 The Chairman then read out the operative part of the Report for the benefit of the
Members.
5.0 After some discussion, the Committee adopted the report with some changes. The
Committee also decided to lay the Evidence tendered before it, alongwith the Report, in both the
Houses of Parliament.
6.0 The Committee then authorised Shri S.S. Ahluwalia and Shri Naresh Chandra Aggarwal,
Members, Rajya Sabha and Shri Neeraj Shekhar and Shri Bishnu Pada Ray, Members, Lok Sabha,
to present/lay the report of the Committee on the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 alongwith the
Evidence in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha, respectively, on 22 February 2011.
7.0 * * * *
8.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

65
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
3 Aug., 2010
Bill No. 84 of 2010
THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the New Delhi Municipal
Council (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 4,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause ( b), for the words “three members”,
the words “two members” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d), for the words “two members”,
the words “four members” shall be substituted;
67
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 4.
44 of 1994.

68
(iii) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(e) the Member of Parliament, representing
constituency which comprises wholly or partly
the New Delhi area.”;
(b) sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted.
(c) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(3) out of the thirteen members referred to in
sub-section ( 1), there shall be, at least,—
(a) three members who are women:
(b) two members belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, out of which one member shall
be from the members nominated under clause ( d)
of sub-section ( 1).”.
3. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) for the words “shall preside at every meeting”, the
words “shall, in a case not falling under the first proviso or
the second proviso or the third proviso or the fourth proviso,
preside at every meeting” shall be substituted.
(b) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that in case one of the members is a
member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi, being the
Chief Minister of Delhi, representing the constituency
which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area,
and such member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi
attends the meeting as a member of the Council under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4, such
member shall preside over the meeting of the Council:
Provided further that in a case not falling under
the first proviso, then, if one of the members is a
Member of Parliament, being a Minister for the Union,
representing the constituency which comprises wholly
or partly the New Delhi area, and such Member of
Parliament attends the meeting as a member of the
Council under clause ( e) of  sub-section ( 1) of section 4,
such member shall preside over the meeting of the
Council:
Provided also that in the cases not falling under
the first proviso or the second proviso, then, if one of
the members is a Member of the legislative Assembly of
Delhi, being a Minister in the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi, representing the constituency
which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area,
Amendment of
section 25.

69
and such member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi
attends the meeting as a member of the Council under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4, such
member shall preside over the meeting of the Council:
Provided also that in the cases not falling under
the first proviso or the second proviso or the third
proviso, then, if one of the members is a Member of
Parliament not being a Minister for the Union,
representing the constituency which comprises wholly
or partly the New Delhi area, and such Member of
Parliament attends the meeting as a member of
the Council under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 4, such member shall preside over the meeting
of the Council.”.

70
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 has been enacted
to provide for the establishment of the New Delhi Municipal Council
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It
provides, inter alia , there shall be three Members of the Legislative
Assembly of Delhi, whose constituency fall fully or partly in the
New Delhi area, as Members in the New Delhi Municipal Council.
After delimitation of Assembly Constituencies in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi, only two such Assembly Constituencies fall
within the New Delhi area and consequently only two Members of
Legislative Assembly may become the members in the New Delhi
Municipal Council.
2. Presently, the Member of Parliament representing the New
Delhi area in the Lok Sabha is a Special Invitee to the meetings of
the New Delhi Municipal Council without voting rights. The
Estimates Committee of Fourteenth Lok Sabha in its Eleventh and
Thirteenth Reports recommended, inter alia , that the Member of
Parliament should be given voting rights.
3. In view of the aforesaid, it is proposed to amend the New
Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 to provide, inter alia , that,—
(a) the Member of Parliament representing the New
Delhi area in the Lok Sabha shall be made a member of the
New Delhi Municipal Council with voting rights;
(b) the number of members of the Legislative Assembly,
who are members of the Council, be reduced from three to two;
(c) the number of Members representing certain fields
be increased from two to four;
(d) out of thirteen members there shall be at least three
members who are women and two members belonging to the
Scheduled Castes in the Council, out of which one shall be
from the nominated Members representing certain fields.
4. In view of proposed inclusion of the Member of
Parliament, referred to in sub-paragraph ( a) of the preceding
paragraph, in the New Delhi Municipal Council and two Members of
Legislative Assembly being the members of the New Delhi Municipal
Council, it is further proposed to amend the aforesaid Act to revise
the procedure for presiding over the meetings of the Council.
3. This Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 20th July, 2010.
70

71
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
A member of the New Delhi Municipal Council is entitled to
receive allowance at the rate of five hundred rupees for each day
on which he or she attends the meetings of the Council or any
Committee thereof subject to a maximum of three thousand rupees
per month. The members, other than elected representatives, are
also eligible to receive certain facilities, like vehicle, accommodation,
stationery, medical, etc. The payment in this regard is to be made
out of the New Delhi Municipal Fund and no expenditure is required
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
2. The Bill does not envisage any other expenditure of
recurring or non-recurring nature.
71

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE N EW D ELHI M UNICIPAL C ORPORATION A CT, 1994
(44 OF 1994)
** * * *
4. ( 1) The Council shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
** * * *
(b) three members of Legislative Assembly of Delhi
representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly
the New Delhi area;
** * * *
(d) two members to be nominated by the Central
Government in consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi
to represent from amongst lawyers, doctors, chartered
accountants, engineers, business and financial consultants,
intellectuals, traders, labourers, social workers including social
scientists, artists, media persons, sports persons and any
other class of persons as may be specified by the Central
Government in this behalf.
(2) The Member of Parliament, representing constituency
which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, shall be a
special invitee for the meetings of the Council but without a right
to vote.
(3) Out of the eleven members referred to in sub-section ( 1),
there shall be at least three members who are women and one
member belonging to the Scheduled Castes.
** * * *
25. ( 1) The Chairperson or his absence, the Vic-Chairperson,
on in the absence of both, such other member present as is decided
by the Council shall preside at every meeting of the Council.
** * * *
72
Composition of
the Council.
Presiding
officer.

73
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

74
ANNEXURE-II
PRESS RELEASE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS INVITES SUGGESTIONS
ON NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010, as introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 3rd August, 2010 and pending therein, has been referred to Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs, headed by Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu, M.P. Rajya Sabha  for
examination and report. The Bill proposes to amend Sections 4 and 25 concerning composition of
the Council and procedure for presiding over the meetings of the Council. Details of the proposed
amendments are available in the above said Bill.
2. With a view to having holistic consideration of the Bill, the Committee is also deliberating
on the issue of NMDC being an elected body, rather than a nominated one, as it is at present.
3. The Committee has accordingly decided to invite written memoranda containing suggestions/
views/comments of representatives of Residents Welfare Associations belonging to NDMC area
only, on the Bill as well as the above mentioned issue.
4. Those desirous of submitting memoranda to the Committee may send the same to Shri D.
K. Mishra, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 142, First Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi-ll0001 {Tele: 23035410 (0) and 23012007 (fax)}  latest by 3
rd January,
2011.
5. The memorandum which might be submitted to the Committee, would form part of its
records and would be treated as confidential and, therefore, should not be printed, circulated or
publicized by anyone, as such an act would constitute a breach of privilege of the Committee.
6. Representatives of RW As of NDMC Area may obtain, on written request, copy of the Bill
from Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Cabin ‘A’, Basement,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001 Telephone Number 011-23034034. The electronic text
of the Bill can be accessed from the official website http://rajyasabha.nic.in by clicking the above
Bill at Sr. No. 12 under the option “Bills with Committees”.
Website:- http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in
74

75
ANNEXURE-III
List of Persons/bodies from NDMC area
who submitted Memoranda on the Bill
75
Sl. No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Name of Individuals/Organisations
Babar Road Colony Lease Holders
Association, Babar Road, New Delhi
Bengali Market Traders Association
(Regd.) 2-3 Bengali Market.
Shri Mukesh Bhatt (Individual)
Shri Bal Ram Jain (Individual)
Shri R.N. Chandeliya (Individual)Former
Member of Delhi Metropolitan Council
(NDMC Area)
Gram Sudhar Samiti (Regd.), Sarojini
Nagar, New Delhi
Sarojini Market Shopkeepers Association
(Regd.)
Shankar Market Traders Associations
(Regd.), (New Central Market)
Bhagat Singh Market Vyapar Mandal
(Redg.), New Delhi
Federation NDMC Residents Welfare
Associations (Regd.), Palika Niwas,
Lodi Colony,
President Residents Welfare Association
(Regd), New Delhi
Suggestions
⇒ The present system of governance
of NDMC is undemocratic and
unconstitutional.
⇒ The NDMC should be made an
elected body rather than a nominated
one as it is at present.
⇒ NDMC should have representatives
of people.
⇒ Nominated MLA and MP already
happen to be busy with their
legislative functions in Assembly and
Parliament respectively.
⇒ NDMC houses sensitive areas like
President Estate, offices of Central
Ministries, etc. In any new scheme
sanctity of these important areas
should be maintained.

76
Sl. No.
12.
13.
14.
Name of Individuals/Organisations
Residents Welfare Association,M-40/4,
Moti Bagh New Delhi
Central Government Employees
Residents’ Welfare Association, (X & Y
Blocks) Sarojini Nagar, New Delhi
Central Government Employees
Residents’ Welfare Association, F, G &
H Blocks, H-101, Sarojini Nagar, New
Delhi
Suggestions
⇒ Support for NDMC being an elected
body
⇒ However, amendment to section
4(1)(b) and the consequent reduction
of MLAs on the Council, we may
lose our elected representative on the
Council and thus our voice in the
NDMC.
⇒ There should be a provision for
electing/nominating at least two
members from registered and
recognized Central Government
Residents Welfare Association which
comprises wholly or partly in the
NDMC area, to act as members of
the Council.
⇒ The present system of nominating
members in the New Delhi
Municipal Council is delivering
excellent services, but, in order to
have adequate representation of the
area covered by Central Government
Employee’s Resident Welfare
Association, number of nominated
members may be increased.
⇒ As regards amendment to Section 4,
Sub-section 1 in Clause (d) for the
word ‘two members’, the word ‘four
members’ may be further increased to
accommodate representatives of
various Government colonies. This is
basically to give proper and sufficient,
representation to Central Government
servants residing in NDMC area and
by nominating them as members of
NDMC.
⇒ Since these RW As are recognized/
approved by the Central Government
(through DoP&T) as per the
conditions laid down, DoP&T may
be entrusted the job of forming/
combining group of recognized

77
Sl. No.
15.
Name of Individuals/Organisations
Central Government Officers Residents
Welfare Association, Type-IV & III
Flats, Laxmi Bai Nagar, New Delhi
Suggestions
RW As/Federations and allow them to
select/elect representative to be
nominated as the member of NDMC
from each area such as Lodi
Colony, Sarojini Nagar, Laxmibai
Nagar, Netaji Nagar, Moti Bagh,
Gole Market, etc.
⇒ when NDMC is made an elected
body, there are chances that if a
clause is inserted that only permanent
residents of the area/ward are
allowed to contest the election then
the villagers living in the midst of
these Govt. colonies would only be
eligible to contest the election as
representative of these areas which
would be of no use and residents of
these Govt. colonies would be
compelled to approach such villagers
for their civic work from NDMC.
⇒ In view of this RW As Registered
and Recognized by the DOP&T,
Govt. of India may be allowed to
contest the election.

78
ANNEXURE-IV
Written Comments Submitted by Members on the Bill
78
Dear Shri Naidu garu
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
DR. N. JANARDHANA REDDY
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(RAJYA SABHA)
‘JANAPRIYA’
1109/2, Somajiguda,
Hyderabad-500 082
040-23403333/23413444
2, Jantar Mantar Raod,
NEW DELHI-110 001
Tel.: 011-23358666
Fax : 011-23316020
Website : htt://parliamentofindia.nic.in

79
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(DR. N. JANARDHANA REDDY)
Members Standing Committee

80
Imphal, the 10 th Jan., 2011
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Dear,
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
RISHANG KEISHING
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(RAJYA SABHA)
Ex - Member of Parliament
(Lok Sabha)
Ex - Chief Minister, Manipur
12, Talkatora Road, New Delhi - 1
011 - 23327252, 23320162
Mantripukhri, Imphal, Manipur
Pin - 795 002
0385-2422477

81
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(RISHANG KEISHING)

82
10th January, 2011
Dear Shri Venkaiah Naidu garu,
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
L. RAJAGOPAL
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
Door No. 32-2-10C,
Madhu Nagar,
Mogalrajpuram,
Vijayawada - 520 010.
Phones : 0866 - 2474500
0866 - 2492345
Fax : 0866 - 2496622


83
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Thanking you and with kind regards,
Yours truly,
Sd/-
(L. RAJAGOPAL)
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Govt. of India,
New Delhi.

84
January 13, 2011
Respected Sir,
Our Committee has been discussing in the last 3-4 meetings a proposal to amend the NDMC Act
1994. The amending Bill provides for that:
(i) The Member of Parliament representing the New Delhi area in the Lok Sabha shall be
made a Member of the New Delhi Municipal Council with voting rights;
(ii) The number of Members of the Legislative Assembly, who are members of the
Council, be reduced from three to two. This has been necessitated because of the
reduction of the number of Assembly Constituencies in the NDMC area from three to
two in the recent delimitation;
(iii) The number of Members representing certain fields be increased from two to four; and
(iv) Out of thirteen Members, there shall be at least three Members who are women and
two Members belonging to the Scheduled Castes in the Council, out of which one
shall be from nominated Members representing certain fields.
(v) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meetings of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a member of Parliamment is a Member
and attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the council as at present.
The proposed amendments seek to broad base the representative character of the NDMC.
Sir, I have gone through various papers relating to the demand for an elective body to replace the
NDMC in the past. However, it may be observed that the various Committees which have gone
into this issue on earlier occasions have persisted with the present setup in the larger interest of
maintaining a distinct character of this area.
NAVEEN JINDAL
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
Member, Public Accounts Committee
Member, Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Member, Consultative Committee, Ministry of Defence
Spe. Invitee, Consultative Committee, Ministry of Civil Aviation
Member - Convener, Parliamentary Forum on Children
Executive Member, Indian Parliamentary Group
171, South Avenue, New Delhi-110011 • Tel.: 23012253, 23795299 • Fax : 23012213
Jindal House, Mohan Nagar, Pipli Road, Kurukshetra (Haryana) - 136 118 • Telefax : 01744-222 223
e-mail : naveen@naveenjindal.com

85
I would therefore suggest that this Bill which is more in the nature of making procedural changes
and providing additional representation in the NDMC may be accepted in general public interest.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(NAVEEN JINDAL)
Shri V enkaiah Naidu, MP
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
123-A, Parliament House Annexe
New Delhi.

86
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Respected Sir,
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
Muhammed Hamdulla A.B. Sayeed
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
209, North Avenue,
New Delhi-110 001


87
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(MUHAMMED HAMDULLA A.B. SAYEED)

88
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Dear
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
DR. NILESH RANE
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha)
101/102, Sai-Pooja C.H.S. Ltd., 1st Floor, 16th Road, Bandra (W), Mumbai - 400 050 Tel. 022 - 2604 3670/71 Fax : 022 - 2631 309 9/2604 0399
97, North Avenue, New Delhi - 1 Tel.: 011 - 2309 3370 Fax : 011 - 2309 3263
Manah-Swanand, 16 Sealine, Sunita Nanda Chowk, Union Park, Bandra (W) Mumbai - 400 050
e-mail : nilesh.rane@sansad.nic.in/raneempire@yahoo.co.in

89
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(DR. NITESH RANE)

90
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Dear
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
RAVNEET SINGH
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
28, Rajender Prasad Road,
New Delhi


91
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect, inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(RA VNEET SINGH)

92
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Dear
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
MOHAMMAD ASRARUL HAQUE
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
H.No. 236, Raja Appartment,
Opp. St. No. 18,
Zakir Nagar,
New Delhi
Date: 12.01.2011


93
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(MOHAMMAD ASRARUL HAQUE)

94
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Dear
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
HARSH VARDHAN
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
Vill-Jungle Jogiabagh
P.O.-Anand Nagar,
Distt-Maharaj Ganj,
Uttar Pradesh.
10
th Jan., 2011


95
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(HARSH VARDHAN)

96
To
Shri Venkaiah Naidu,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Subject: Amendments to the NDMC Act.
Dear
As you would be aware, the proposal for amendment in the New Delhi Municipal Council,
Act, 1994 is currently under consideration of the Standing Committee of this Ministry under your
Chairmanship.
2. In order to recapitulate, the proposed amendment seeks to incorporate the following three
salient features:–
(i) The first amendment is that there shall be two Members belonging to the Scheduled
Caste, of which one should mandatorily be from the non-official category.
(ii) Another amendment that is proposed is that if a Member of Parliament is a Member
of the NDMC, he/she will have the right to vote.
(iii) To provide for an order of precedence in presiding over the meeting of the NDMC.
It is being provided for that if the Chief Minister is a Member and attends the meeting,
the Chief Minister will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament
and Minister in the Government of India is a Member and attends the meeting, he/she
will preside over the meeting; failing that, if a Member of Parliament is a Member and
attends the meeting, he/she will preside over the meeting. In all other cases, the
Chairperson will continue to chair the meeting of the Council as at present.
3. As is amply clear from the above proposed amendments there is no change in the governing
structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council. However, the amendment seeks to broadbase the
representative character of the NDMC with the objective of making it more meaningful by
increasing the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Caste category as also mandatorily
stipulating that one such member should be from the non-official category besides conferring
voting rights on the Member of Parliament who at present is only a special invitee to the Council
without any such voting rights. You would agree that this is a grossly anomalous situation in so
far as that the MLA’s who are members of the council have voting rights. This anomaly militates
against the truly representative character of the Council.
4. In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over of the meetings of the
Council are concerned, the same is necessitated on account of protocol requirements since in the
JITENDER SINGH MALIK
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(LOK SABHA)
Room No. 25, Haryana Bhawan,
Copernicus Marg,
New Delhi-110 001
Tel. : 011-23386131-4
Member :
o Standing Committee on Home Affairs
o Standing Committee on Subordinate Legislation
o Consultative Committee on Law and Justice

97
absence of the same till date, neither the Chief Minister nor the elected Members of Parliament in
the past (including from the BJP) have been able to attend the meetings of the Council.
5. The ambit of the proposed amendments does not cover, within their entire sweep, the issue
of direct elections. It is, accordingly, requested that the issue of direct elections should not be used
as a ploy to derail the passing of the proposed amendments and in effect inhibiting the reform
measures proposed for NDMC.
6. In light of the above, we are firmly of the view that the amendments in the current form
as proposed by MHA may kindly be accepted in larger public interest.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(JITENDER SINGH MALIK)

98
24th January, 2011
Dear Venkaiah Ji,
With reference to discussions held in the previous meetings of the Committee on proposal
to amend the NDMC Act, 1994, and the final reply of the Home Ministry on the said subject matter
along with the relevant valuable extracts and documents provided by the secretariat, I have come
to the following conclusions,
(1) As far as voting right to the Member of Parliament representing the New Delhi area is
concerned, it was stated that he/she has never been able to participated in the meeting of
the Council, I think a person loaded with such a huge amount of official & social
responsibilities can not be expected to sit in the council’s meeting as idle or mere
inoperative. I am fully agree with the other member’s suggestion that such Member of
Parliament should be made empowered with the voting right, so that he will have some
stake in the functioning and decision making of the Council and would feel accountable to
his duties as a member of the Council as well.
(2) Considering the distinctive character of the area fall in the jurisdiction of the NDMC as it
is also a seat of Central Government in the Union of India, not many changes can be made
in the amending Bill. Though, the reply of the Home Ministry seems to be more
bureaucratic than democratic. It should be made quite clear that there is a vast difference
between administered and empowered. The aspirations and democratic representation of the
residents can not be denied irrespective of the provisions given by any specific exception.
Though, it, keeps a very distinguished and unique ingredients of national and international
importance, NDMC can not be converted in to a fully democratically elected body in
one sweep but its composition can be adjusted suited to the aspiration and
representation of the people of the area for now. Therefore,
(a) In the light of the available options and the substantial amount of population and its
character, fall in the jurisdiction area of NDMC, I opine that the two nominated
members among the RW As should be accommodated in the Council , but it
should also be ensured that these members have elected democratically in their
respective associations and all the RW As should be given equal opportunity.
(b) In this way, in the proposed Council, among thirteen members, there will be one
Chairman and Vice Chairman each appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Chief minister of Delhi, one Member of Parliament, two
MLAs, two representatives of RW As and as proposed, four persons of various
nominated in consultation with the Government of NCT will constitute more than
an absolute majority in favor of  the direct and indirect representation of the residents
TARIQ ANWAR, M.P.
CHAIRMAN
COMMITTEE ON PAPERS
LAID ON THE TABLE
RAJYA SABHA
NCP Leader (Rajya Sabha)
OFF. : 128, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi-110 001
Tel. : 23034898, 23015733
Fax : 011-23793261
E-mail : t.anwar@sansad.nic.in
Res.: AB-11, Tilak Marg, New Delhi-110 001 • Tel.: 011-23384374, 23384392
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in • http://rajyasabhahindi.nic.in

99
of the said jurisdiction area as well as the Union government’s capacity to influence
decision making structure of this very special area shall also remain intact.
(3) There is a very categorical provision in the existing amendment that out of thirteen
members, there shall be three women members and one member belonging to Scheduled
Caste community, In my opinion, there is no need to add more to it as the population, is
primarily consisting of central government employees and their families, is floating in nature
and multi ethnic, thus the logic, as stated by many members, to add one more non-official
member belonging to Scheduled Caste community has no relevance.
(4) In so far as the proposed amendment about the presiding over the Council’s meeting is
concerned, the rule of protocol should be maintained. Accordingly, the first right of
presiding over the meeting goes well with the Chief Minister of Delhi, if he/she is the
member of the council. In his/her absence the Member of Parliament whether he/she is a
Minister in the Union or not, shall preside over the meeting of the council. In all other
cases, the Chairman will continue to chair the meeting of the council as at present.
I think, this much will be sufficient to move one step forward in making NDMC
more democratic than converting it into fully elected body in one sweep. Keeping in view
the unique salient feature attached to it, neither it is practically possible, nor is it feasible.
regards,
Sd/-
 (TARIQ ANWAR)
Sri M. Venkaiah Naidu
            Chairman
Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs,
Committee Cabin ‘A’
Basement, Parliament House Annexe
New Delhi-110001

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.