1 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
REPORT NO.   
187  
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 177 th  Report on Coastal Security Scheme 
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 31 st   JULY, 2015) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 31 st  JULY, 2015) 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
JULY, 2015/ ASHADHA, 1937 (Saka)  
                                       
C.S. (H.A.)-      
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations  
contained in the 177 th  Report on Coastal Security Scheme 
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 31 st  JULY, 2015) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 31 st  JULY, 2015) 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
JULY, 2015/ ASHADHA, 1937 (Saka)  
 
 
 

3 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACSOCs  Area Coastal Security Operation Centers  
AIS  Automatic Identification System  
CPS  Coastal Police Stations  
CSS  Coastal Security Scheme  
DGLL  Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships 
ECIL  Electronics Corporation of India Limited  
EEZ  Exclusive Economic Zone  
ETA  Expected Time of Arrival  
FIC  Fast Interceptor Crafts  
GRSE  Garden Reach Shipbuilders Engineers Limited  
GRSE  Garden Reach Shipping & Engineering Ltd.  
GSL  Goa Shipyard Ltd.  
IMBL  International Maritime Border Line  
JCP  Joint Coastal Patrol  
LRIT  Long Range Identification  and Tracking  
MPTI  Marine Police Training Institutes  
MPOC  Marine Police Operational Centers  
MSS  Mobile Satellite Services  
MPS  Marine Police Stations  
MMD  Mercantile Marine Department  
PN&G  Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
AIS  National Automatic Identification System  
NMDA  National Maritime Domain Awareness  
NCSMCS  National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against 
Threat from the Sea 
OJT  On Job Training  
ODAG  Offshore Defence Advisory Group  
RIB  Rigid Inflatable Boats  
RGI  Registrar General of India  
RFID  Radio Frequency Identification Device 
SOP  Standard Operating Procedures  
SMB  State Maritime Boards  
RCSOC  Regional Coastal Security Operation Centers  
RFID  Radio Frequency Identification Device 
SCSOC  State Coastal Security Operation Centers  
SPM  Single Point Moorings  
SPB  Sagar Prahari Bal  
VATMS  Vessel and Air -Traffic Management System  
VTMS  Vessel Traffic Management System  
 
 
 

4 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                                     PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                              (i)  
 
2. PREFACE                                                                     (ii) 
                                                                          
3. REPORT                                     1 -  45 
      
  
      3 - 12 
 
 
 
     13 - 16 
 
 
 
     17 - 32 
 
 
 
 
      33-40 
*4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE   
 COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE            41 - 45 
*5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITT EE 
 
 
 
* To  be appended at printing stage   
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies 
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect  of 
 
which the Committee has not accepted the  
replies of the Ministry 
 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 
which the final replies of the Government 
have not been received by the Committee 
 
 

5 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st  September, 2014) 
 
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan 
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
4. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
5. **Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
6. *Shri Vijay Goel 
7. Shri Derek O'Brien 
8. Shri Baishnab Parida 
9. Shri D. Raja 
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Shri Selvakumara Chinayan S. 
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Ramen Deka 
16. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar 
22. Shri Harish Meena 
23. Shri Nagarajan P. 
24. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda 
25. Shri Dilip Patel 
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
28. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil 
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director 

6 
 
 
*Shri Vijay Goel, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated  w.e.f. 19 th  December, 2014 to fill the vacancy caused by the a ppointment of Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
as MOS w.e.f. 9 November 2014. 
** Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w .e.f. 29 
th  January, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shifti ng of  Shri Satish Chandra Misra, MP, 
RS  to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9 January 2015.  
 
(i) 

7 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to  submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred Eighty Seventh Report on t he Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 177 th  Report on Coastal Security Scheme. 
 
2.  The One Hundred and Seventy Seventh Report of the D epartment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajya Sa bha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19 th  
February, 2014.  After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Hom e Affairs 
requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on th e recommendations of the Committee contained in the  
Report.   
 
3.  The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes o n the 177 
th  Report on the Coastal Security Scheme to 
the Committee on  31 st  December, 2014.  
 
4. The Committee in its sitting held on 5 th  February, 2015 heard the presentation of the Minis try 
of Home Affairs on the subject 'Border Management" wherein issues concerning Coastal Security 
were raised and the same is incorporated in this AT R at the appropriate place.   The Committee also 
took note of the discussion on coastal security whi le considering the Border Management and 
Demands for Grants and replies to questionnaire received from the Ministry. 
 
5. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft 187 
th  Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 177 th  Report on Coastal Security Scheme and adopted 
the same in its meeting held on 11 th June, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
11 
th  June, 2015 
P. Bhattacharya                
Chairman                                                   
Department-related Parliamentary                                                                         
Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
REPORT 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals wit h the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in th e One Hundred and Seventy Seventh Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commi ttee on Home Affairs on the Coastal Security 
Scheme.  The Report was presented to the Parliament on 19 th February 2014.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Mini stry of  Home Affairs in respect of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the One H undred and Seventy Seventh Report have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I: The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted by the Government:  
Paras: 2.1.14, 2.1.20, 2.1.23, 2.2.3, 2.3.2, 2.5.4,  2.6.9, 2.6.11, 2.6.13, 2.10.6, 2.10.8, 2.11.7, 2.1 2.14, 
2.12.15, 3.4, 3.7, 3.8, 3.14, 3.32, 3.33 (of the On e Hundred and Seventy Seventh  Report) Total 
recommendations- 20 Recommendations;   
 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted eighteen of its 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: - Paras: 2.8.4 , 2.8.7, 3.20, 3.24, 3.26, 3.39, 3.41 (ibid) Total 
recommendations-7 Recommendations;   
 
 The Committee is convinced with the explanation fu rnished by the Ministry and, therefore, 
does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
 
Chapter III: The observations/recommendations in re spect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras:  2.1.3, 2.1.12, 2.2.7, 2.6.15, 2.6.18, 2.7.5, 2.9.5 , 
2.9.7, 2.11.4, 2.11.8, 3.2, 3.5, 3.10, 3.12, 3.16, 3.28, 3.30, 3.37 (ibid 
) Total recommendations- 18 
Recommendations 
  
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-im plementation of twenty-two of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desire s that the Ministry should take further necessary 
action and furnish convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of three 
months after presentation of the Report. 
 
Chapter-IV: The observations/recommendations in res pect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received:  Para: 2.1.5, 2. 1.7, 2.1.10, 2.1.16,  2.1.18, 2.2.5, 2.3.4, 2.3.6, 
2.4.3, 2.7.4, 3.18, 3.22, 3.35 (ibid) Total recommendations- 13 Recommendations. 
  
In respect of the thirteen recommendations placed i n Chapter-IV, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry has either furnished interim replies or co uched its response in vague terms. 
 The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed an d detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of 
the recommendations of the Committee within three months. 
 

9 
 
 The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discus sed, as per the categorisation indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER-I 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Recommendation 
Calibration of VTMS to the security needs 
 
1.1 The Committee recommends that the request of th e State Government may be considered. 
(Para 2.1.14 of 177 
th  Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.1 The Indian Coast Guard have concurred to the proposal for sharing VTMS information with 
bonafide State agencies involved in the coastal sec urity mechanism provided that the information has 
to be sourced from the main VTMs Hub. 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.2 The Committee agrees with the state government and is of the opinion that fishermen can be a 
rich source of intelligence and can definitely be c ultivated as effective informers. The Central 
government should device a programme for imparting basic skills in intelligence gathering to the 
fishermen throughout the country in all coastal States. 
(Para 2.1.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.1 It has been proposed to devise a mechanism fo r organizing security awareness campaign 
trough Coastal Police with active participation of Indian Coast Guard, Deptt. Of Fisheries, Navy and 
central intelligence agencies.  Fishermen community  would be made aware about the security 
concerns of the nation and that anything concerning  security coming to their notice needs to be 
promptly communicated by them to any of the securit y agencies involved in coastal security viz. 
Coastal Police, Coast Guard or Navy.  They would be  communicating the same to Deptt. Of Fisheries, 
which in turn, would share the input with security agencies including central intelligence agencies. 
 
1.2.2 The Border Security Force is  motivating the fishermen of Gujarat and Bengal States operating 
in the jurisdictional area of BSF through orientati on programmes, for intelligence gathering to act as  
eyes and ears of Security Forces operating in this area.  Surveillance and patrolling in riverine area  are 
being enhanced and all efforts are being made to se nsitize fishermen for not violating the guidelines of 
IB. 
Recommendation  
 
1.3. The Committee recommends that all coastal Stat es/UTs should send their reports on 
construction of jetties to the Ministry of Home Aff airs so that their requirements of funds for 
construction of jetties may be looked into as per l ocal conditions. It is also of the opinion that if the 

11 
 
funds are found inadequate they may be suitably enh anced according to the requirements of 
concerned states/UTs. 
(Para 2.1.23 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.1 The financial assistance of Rs.50 lakh per je tty towards the cost of construction of jetties in 
States/UTs under the Phase-II of the Coastal Securi ty Scheme was finalized at the beginning of the 
Scheme, subsequent upon the vulnerability/gap analy sis and in consultation with all the coastal 
States/Union Territories.  As decided by the Steeri ng Committee in MHA for review of Coastal 
Security during its meeting on 07.03.2014, the Stat es/UTs have been asked to follow the ‘Maharashtra 
Model’ of upgradation of existing jetties and have been informed to send proposals for additionality of 
funds if any,  to MHA for needful action. 
 
1.3.2 While the UT administration A&N Islands has s tated that the sanctioned amount of Rs. 50 lakh 
is grossly inadequate since the cost of constructio n of Jetties in these Islands is far higher than th e 
mainland on account of remoteness and geographical conditions and demanded that Rs.30.00 crore 
would be required for the construction of a single new Jetty, the other States like – Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Karnataka, Odisha etc. have demanded that t he amount may be revised upwardly the range of 
Rs. 3-5 crore. Ministry of Home Affairs is seized of this issue. 
 
Recommendation 
Goa 
 
1.4 The Committee is not happy to note that procure ment under phase-I was not completed.   The 
Ministry may impress upon the State Government to c omplete the process at the earliest.   This brooks 
no further delay. 
(Para 2.2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.1 Purchase of 10 Rigid Inflatable Boats under C oastal Security Scheme (Phase-I) was approved 
by the Cabinet Committee on Security and the Phase- I of the Scheme is already completed on 
31.03.2011.  The Coastal Security Scheme is a suppl emental Scheme and is implemented in the 
Coastal States / UTs uniformly.  The State Governme nt of Goa have been requested to take necessary 
action in regard to procurement of 10 Rigid Inflata ble Boats sanctioned under the Phase-I of the 
Coastal Security Scheme on priority basis. 
 
1.4.2 Even as late as on 1 
st  Dec., 2014 in the West Zone Committee held in New Delhi, Chief 
Secretary who attended this meeting was specially r equested to take immediate action on this long 
pending issue.  He has assured that he will take early action in the matter.   
 
Recommendation 
Karnataka 
 
1.5 Preference for professional fishermen in appoin tments and other issues. 
(Para 2.3.2 ibid) 

12 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.1 Under the scheme, manpower for the marine pol ice personnel including technical crew for the 
boats is provided by the States and UTs.  As per de cisions taken at the Second Meeting of the Steering 
Committee for review of Coastal Security held on 07 .03.2014, all the Coastal States/UTs have been 
requested to consider relaxing recruitment rules to employ Ex-Navy/Coast Guard personnel.  
 
Recommendation 
 
West Bengal 
Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security  
 
1.6 The Committee is dissatisfied by the replies gi ven by the Ministry of Home affairs regarding 
the issues of inadequate technical manpower, mainte nance of equipments and high cost of running the 
interceptor boats. Several states/UTs have similar complaints which need to be seriously looked into 
by the Central government.   The Ministry may exami ne the concern of the State Government on the 
high cost of POL.   The Committee will deal with te chnical manpower and maintenance issues in the 
next chapter. 
(Para 2.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.1 18 Interceptor Boats have been provided by MH A to the State of West Bengal under CSS 
Phase-I.    The State Government of West Bengal has informed that in order to operate Fast Interceptor 
Boats in three coastal districts, 04 permanent Tech nical Staff and 13 Contractual Technical Staff have  
been engaged for patrolling along the coast as per schedule.  Further, approval for engaging 47 
technical staff has been given. 
 
1.6.2 As regards high cost of running the intercept or boats, it is pertinent to say that the boats hav e 
been supplied by the Defence PSUs, namely, Goa Ship yard Ltd., (GSL) and the Garden Reach Ship-
builders and Engineers (GSRS) and that the boats ha ve been fitted with one of the best engines which 
consume lesser quantity of POL as compared to the o ther engines.   Moreover, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs is reimbursing the POL expenses incurred by the coastal States/UTs 
 
Recommendation  
Odisha 
 
1.7 The Committee recommends that the requirement o f manpower, coastal police stations and 
jetties may be reassessed along with the realistic requirement of funds to be provided for 
establishment thereof.     
(Para 2.6.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7.1 Based on the extensive inter-ministerial revi ew of the entire coastal security scenario following 
26/11, inputs received from the Coast Guard, the id entification of vulnerability/gaps in the 
infrastructure available to coastal States/UTs and discussions/ consultations in several high level 

13 
 
meetings, the Costal Security Scheme (Phase-II) has  been formulated. All components, including the 
funds to the Coastal States/UTs, were fixed and frozen at the beginning of the Scheme itself. 
 
1.7.2 The construction cost of Rs.48 lakh for Coast al Police stations is uniform for all the coastal 
States except A&N Islands and Lakshadweep.).  The c ost was fixed in consultation with the 
CPWD/BPR&D and was approved by the Cabinet Committe e on Security (CCS).  The construction 
cost of Rs.50 lakh for the Jetties was also approve d by CCS.  MHA has received several requests from 
the States for revising the cost.   
 
1.7.3 During the Second meeting of the Steering Com mittee for review of Coastal Security held in 
this Ministry on 07.03.2014, the proposal of Govt. of Maharashtra to upgrade the existing 14 jetties o f 
the Maharashtra Maritime Board (MMB) to be used by the State Coastal Police on permanent basis , 
instead of the construction of the sanctioned 3  jetties under Phase-II of the Scheme, was approved and 
the    other States/UTs were also advised to consid er Maharashtra model by way of upgradation of 
existing jetties and for any additionality of funds , the States/UTs were informed to send the proposal s 
to MHA for needful action. 
 
1.7.4 Regarding upward revision of cost in respect of jetties, MHA is seized of this matter. 
Recommendation 
Other issues raised by the state 
  
1.8 The Committee recommends that the land for sett ing up of Marine Police Station inside 
Paradip Port may be provided at the earliest. 
(Para 2.6.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.1 The Board of Trustees of Paradip Port Trust h as already approved an allotment of one acre of 
Port land in favour of Home (Police) Department, Go vernment of Odisha for construction of Marine 
Police Station at Paradip on lease basis for a peri od of thirty years with a concession to the tune of  
75% on the revised market rate, in accordance with the Land Policy Guidelines, 2014 issued by the 
Ministry of Shipping, Govt. of India. 
 
Recommendation 
Release of Funds 
 
1.9 The Committee recommends that the state governm ent must submit the utilization certificates 
to the Central government so that further funds could be released for construction of jetties. 
(Para 2.6.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.1 The State Govt. of Odisha has since sent the utilization certificates and based on which the 
entire amount of Rs.1175.60 lakhs have been released. 
 

14 
 
Recommendation 
Lakshadweep 
 
1.10  The Ministry of Home Affairs may prepare guid elines for off season activities of Marine 
Police such as in Monsoon.   This may apply to othe r states too.   Ministry of Home Affairs may 
carefully examine the issue. 
(Para 2.10.6 ibid) 
 
1.10.1  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with the UT 
government in finalizing surveillance programme. In  no circumstance can vacuum be allowed to exist 
in Coastal policing as it can have severe consequences for internal security. 
(Para 2.10.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.2  Patrolling and surveillance programmes are finalized at local level by Marine Police, 
Coast Guard and Navy, as per local requirements. Ho wever, MHA periodically reviews the coastal 
security periodically along with all the stake-hold ers and give appropriate directions, wherever 
required.     
 
1.10.3  Every month the Community Interaction Progr amme (CIP) is organized by the Coast 
Guard  and, as such, the issues connected with secu rity viz. vulnerable areas and vulnerable points is  
identified and the States are sensitized for taking  appropriate action.  Further, fisheries officials who 
are well-versed with local languages are deputed to  coordinate the Coast Guard to conduct the CIP 
programe successfully. 
 
Recommendation 
Problem being faced in maintaining Coastal Security 
 
1.11 The Committee desires that the Ministry may di scuss with all States/UTs and take a decision in 
the matter.  
(Para 2.11.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11.1  As regards Odisha, the State Government hav e recruited 22 Ex-Naval Personnel for 
each MPS as per the guidelines under SOP issued by BPR&D, to operate the Interceptor Boats 
provided by MHA. Further, the Government   has sanc tioned @ 81 Police Personnel of different ranks 
for each Police Station.  Altogether 405 posts have  been created for existing 5 MPSs under Phase-I.  
Training is being imparted by Coast Guard HQ, Parad eep, phase-wise to the Personnel posted in 
different MPSs.  As per recommendation of the Stand ing Committee the seafaring allowance for the 
boat crew need to be sanctioned. 
 
1.11.2  18 FIBs (5 Ton/12 Ton) were provided by  MH A , GOI under Coastal Security Scheme 
(Phase-I).  04 permanent technical staff and 13 contractual staff have been engaged for operating these 
FIBs to patrol along the coast as per schedule.  St ate Govt.’s approval has been given for engaging 47  
technical staff. 

15 
 
1.11.3  Since the manpower for manning the CPSs, bo ats, etc., are to be provided by the 
Coastal States/UTs, the States/UTs are free to have  their own nomenclature as per the local 
laws/conditions. 
 
Recommendation 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration 
Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security   
 
1.12 The Committee also takes note of the fact that  the Ministry has approved a separate 
comprehensive security plan of A & N Islands.  The Committee desires that this plan may be 
implemented at the earliest. 
(Para 2.12.14 ibid) 
1.12.1  The Committee welcomes the initiative taken  by the UT Government in preparing a 
comprehensive security plan wherein it has proposed for setting up ten Marine Operational Centres in 
A& N Islands at prime locations for upgrading coast al security in A&N Islands. It hopes that the 
Central Government would provide the necessary supp ort needed by the UT in implementing its 
proposal in the larger framework of Coastal Securit y Scheme as envisaged by the Centre.  The 
Ministry may also look into the funds requirements for HSD and the problem of maintenance of boats. 
These issues need to be looked into in view of stra tegic location of the islands.  The Ministry may al so 
look into the inadequate skilled manpower. 
(Para 2.12.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.2  The Comprehensive Security Plan of Andaman & Nicobar Islands has been proposed in 
two parts.  Part A  of the Plan includes the components approved under  the Coastal Security Scheme 
Phase-II and Part B  of the Plan includes items which are required for augmentation of infrastructure 
for coastal security included under the 12 
th  Five Year Plan and being implemented through the A nnual 
Plans.  
1.12.3  Regarding Part A, MHA has released Rs.27.00  crore to the UT Administration for 
construction of 20 CPS, 10 jetties, 10 Marine Polic e Operation Centers and procurement of 20 four 
wheelers and 20 two-wheelers.   In addition to this, the HSD/POL expenditure is reimbursed to the UT 
Admn.  Further, 10 Large Vessels and 23 RIBs are under procurement for the UT. 
1.12.4  As regards Part B, necessary fund provision  has been kept in the MHA’s budget under 
the 12 
th  Plan for meeting the expenditure connected with so lar power, Utility support vehicle, floating 
jetties/docks procurement of 10 gensets etc. 
1.12.5  20 FRP boats and 20 nos. of  rubberized inf latable boats have been procured. 
 
Recommendation 
Manpower Recruitment 
1.13 The Committee feels that all the coastal State s may face this problem.  The Committee is of the 
opinion that the Central government should provide assistance to the states in recruiting technical 
manpower as the states agencies do not have the req uisite know-how and experience of doing the 
same. Coastal security is a joint venture of both t he governments and when there are shortcomings on 
the part of state governments, the Central Government step in to help them out.  
(Para 3.4 ibid) 

16 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.1  Under the scheme, manpower for the marine p olice personnel including technical crew 
for the boats is provided by the States and UTs.   
 
1.13.2  Presently they are drawn from the regular c ivil police and are deployed for a period of   
3 - 5 years after that, they are posted back to the ir parent cadre thereby causing shortage of technic al 
manpower.  In Tamil Nadu, a Coastal Security Group is in operation in the State since 1994, with a 
task-force of 500 dedicated personnel working on re gular basis.  Other supervisory staff are re-
employed on deputation from other sources for a fixed term of 4 years. 
 
1.13.3  The Second Steering Committee during its me eting held on 07.03.2014, examined the 
Tamil Nadu Model and it was suggested that all Coas tal States/UTs should have a permanent and 
dedicated Marine Battalion of 1000-2000 personnel o n the lines of ‘Creek Crocodile’ being raised by 
BSF.   It was also suggested that the States/UTs ma y consider relaxing recruitment rules to employ 
Ex-Navy/Coast Guard personnel and fishermen.   
 
1.13.4  The Coastal States/UTs have suggested that the proposed Marine India Reserve 
Battalion for all the Coastal States/UTs should tot ally be funded by the Central Government, which 
would go a long way in resolving the issue of Marin e Police force in the country.    It was decided th at 
coastal States/UTs will submit their comments to MH A on the proposal along with their requirement 
of manpower for the proposed Marine IRBs. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.13.5  The Committee strongly feels that requisiti oning of personnel from regular civil 
police should be in a such way that the personnel r eturning to parent cadre after deployment for 
a period of 3 - 5 years do not cause shortage of te chnical manpower and the replacement should 
be available beforehand. The Committee also desires  that the Ministry should take an early 
decision on the proposed Marine India Reserve Batta lions (MIRB). An early decision may be 
taken on the central funding for Battalion. 
 
Recommendation 
Coordination and consultation between the Central and State Governments 
 
1.14 The Committee hopes that some of the measures as undertaken by the Ministry would help in 
resolving the concerns of the state government. It also recommends that the officials of the coastal 
states and the Ministry of Home Affairs should meet  more often so that the suitable means and ways 
may be chalked out to implement the scheme satisfactorily. 
(Para 3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.1  All the Coastal States/UTs have been asked to submit the Monthly  Progress Report on 
the implementation of the Coastal Security Scheme ( Phase-II) for reviewing the physical progress of 
the same, which is being followed scrupulously. The  situation is being reviewed at the level of 

17 
 
Secretary(BM)/JS(BM) periodically and  In case of s hortfall, if any, the concerned States/UTs are 
asked to speed up the implementation process as per schedule.  
 
1.14.2  Monitoring of the implementation of Coastal  Security Scheme is being done by 
National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and C oastal Security against Threats from the Sea 
(NCSMCS) headed by Cabinet Secretary, Steering Committee in MHA headed by Secretary (BM) and 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  periodically from time to time.  So far, 9 
meetings of NCSMCS have been held  on September 4, 2009; January 22, 2010, May 14, 2010, 
November 23, 2010, 29 
th  July, 2011, 22 nd  June, 2012 and 30 th  November, 2012, 6 th  September, 2013 
and 3 rd  July, 2014. 
 
1.14.3  Secretary (BM) and Joint Secretary (BM) per iodically review the implementation of the 
Scheme.  The Steering Committee for Review of Coast al Security has also been constituted in the 
Ministry to review the implementation of the Scheme  which met twice on 26.09.2013 & 07.03.2014 
and issued several directions for speedier construction of CPSs and Jetties.  
 
Recommendation 
 
1.15 Coastal security set up in India is a three la yer set up comprising of Navy, Coast guard and 
marine police. The Committee though appreciating th e fact that coastal security is a team effort 
requiring a lot of coordination between the three a gencies, still it is of the opinion that a clear 
demarcation of jurisdiction and responsibilities sh ould be made. A clear hierarchy of command at 
national level should be established so that respon sibility for commission and omission during an 
emergency situation could be fixed. 
(Para 3.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.1  There is a three tier Coastal Security ring  all along our coast is provided by Marine 
Police, Indian Coast Guard and Indian Navy. The Ind ian Navy has been designated as the authority 
responsible for overall maritime security, which in cludes coastal security and offshore security. The 
Indian Coast Guard has been additionally designated as the authority responsible for coastal security in 
territorial waters including areas to be patrolled by the Coastal Police (0-200 nautical miles). The 
Director General Coast Guard has been designated as  Commander Coastal Command and is 
responsible for overall coordination between Centra l and State agencies in all matters relating to 
coastal security. State Marine Police are guarding the coast up to 12 nautical miles. 
 
 
Recommendation 
Non procurement of vehicles on account of austerity measures 
 
1.16 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the matter with 
the Ministry of Finance at the earliest for getting  the proposal cleared.  It also urges the Ministry of 
Finance to give 'one time’ relaxation for purchase of vehicles in the larger national interest. 
(Para 3.14 ibid) 

18 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.1  The requisite funds for the procurement of vehicles under the  Coastal Security Scheme 
(Phase-II) have been released to Coastal States/UTs  after getting necessary clearance from M/o. 
Finance and most of the coastal States/UTs have pro cured the vehicles.  The remaining States/UTs 
have been advised to immediately procure the same. 
 
Recommendation 
Security along West Bengal coast 
Infiltration of foreign nationals in A&N Islands 
 
1.17 The Committee is of the view that the security  agencies including marine police need to be 
extremely watchful as the terrorists would be looki ng for new and unconventional modus operandi to 
make terror strikes. Remote and uninhabited islands  may provide them the much needed safe havens 
to regroup themselves. 
(Para 3.32 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.17.1  In the case of West Bengal, all the 14 CPSs  of South 24 Parganas, North 24 Parganas, 
and Purba Medinipur districts are always alert in c urbing any untoward incident from seaward threat.  
As a precautionary measure, joint patrolling is bei ng conducted along IMBL by the State Marine 
Police in co-ordination with the Indian Coast Guard , and BSF to check infiltration from neighboring 
countries and anti-national activities by the intru der in Indian Territory.  For effective surveillanc e, 
especially in Sunderban areas, Electronic Surveilla nce system will be adopted as a proposal in this 
regard to MHA, Govt. of India for obtaining approval will be submitted.  The same is under process. 
 
1.17.2  Further, in Odisha, all the CPSs have been alerted to remain watchful in thwarting any 
incursions by foreigners and conduct patrolling in the shallow waters area in close cooperation with 
Indian Coast Guard and Indian Navy. 
 
1.17.3  In the case of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, I CG has taken special measure for 
protection of A & N islands. ICG has one regional H Q and two district HQ  one  each in North and 
South group of Islands . In addition, two independe nt ICG stations one at port Blair and Hut Bay are 
also functioning.   
 
1.17.4  ICG has issued 62 Distress Alert Transmitte rs (DAT) in year 2008-2009 in Phase I and 
66 DATs in year 2010-11 in Phase II to fishermen.         20 marine police stations have been upgraded  
under the scheme II (Rs 20 lakh per CPs).  It is pr oposed to create ten Marine Operational Centers 
(MOCs) with cost of Rs 13.50 crore in the scheme II  to organize patrolling, raids and surveillance in 
remote and scattered islands. These Centres will be  established at Land Fall, Diglipur, Interview 
islands, Kadamtala, Flat Island, Havelock, Port Bla ir and one  each at Tillong chang, Nancowry and 
Indira Point. Funds have already been released for creation of MOCs. 
 
1.17.5  Ten 12 ton boats, 11 light vehicles, 7 Mult i utility vehicles and 20 motor-cycles are 
provided for A & N Islands under the Scheme I and i t is proposed to provide 10 large vessels and 23 

19 
 
Rigid inflatable boats (RIBs), funds for constructi on of 10 Jetties 20, four wheelers and 20 motor 
cycles have been provided in the scheme I 
 
1.17.6  In addition to above, a comprehensive secur ity plan for A & N Islands have been 
approved on 11.11.2011 for implementation over  a p eriod of 8 years in 3 phases, (2012-2015, 2015-
2017 and 2017-2020).  The plan include: 
– two utility support vessels for A & N police, 
– centralized marine police control room at Port Blair, 
– high power marine HF trans-receivers,  
– creation of posts for manning of vessels, 
– UAV for ten C-143 boats and MOCs, 
– under water diving clearance unit, 
– marine helicopters and associated infrastructure and, 
– fiber coated dinghies for marine police.     
 
Further Observations 
 
1.17.7  Early decision should be taken to adopt ele ctronic surveillance system particularly 
in sundarban area. 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.18 The Committee also recommends that the securit y agencies including marine police should 
always be watchful in thwarting any incursions by foreigners 
(Para 3.33 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18.1  A three tier coastal security ring is provi ded by Marine Police, Indian Coast Guard and 
Indian Navy.  Surveillance of the coastline is main tained by IN and ICG through deployment of ships 
and aircraft for patrolling.  Joint operational exe rcises are conducted on regular basis among, Navy, 
Coast Guard, Coastal Police, Customs and others for  security of coastal areas including island 
territories.  The intelligence mechanism has also b een streamlined through the creation of Joint 
Operation Centres and multi-agency co-ordination me chanism.  A chain of radars and a network of 
Automatic Identification System (AIS) covering the country’s coastline is being operationalised for 
round the clock surveillance. 
 
1.18.2    It is relevant to mention that periodic i nput/analysis on security related issues such as 
threats from groups like the Lashkar-e-Taiyba (LeT)  to our coastal security are shared with the 
concerned agencies.  In addition, inputs such as po aching by Myanmar fishermen and Rohingya 
Muslims fleeing Myanmar by sea likely to impact sec urity of Andaman & Nicobar group of Islands 
have also been shared  

20 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation 
Tamil Nadu 
 
2.1 The Committee hopes that the issues related to berthing of boats would be resolved as a result 
of measures undertaken by the Ministry.  The Ministry may review the matter on a regular basis. 
(Para 2.8.4 of 177 
th  Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.1 During the review of the coastal security, by  the NCSMCS in its 9 
th  Meeting held on 
03.07.2014, all the coastal State Governments/UT Ad ministrations had apprised the Committee that 
they give priority berthing for security related ve ssels and allotment of land for security related 
buildings in all major and non-major ports. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.2 The Committee recommends that the necessary lan d allocation may be done at the earliest so 
that the marine police station could be established . It further recommends that an all out effort shou ld 
be made to resolve all such issues within a stipula ted time period. It also urges the Port Authorities  to 
look into the suggestion of providing cut land at n ominal rent on lease.  The Committee also urges the  
concerned agencies to put in place a system for fre quent interaction with common people of coastal 
areas.  Such an exercise should be conducted in the  local dialect as far as possible so that intellige nce 
gathering could be enriched further. 
(Para 2.8.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.1 M/o. Shipping had already taken a policy deci sion to delegate the powers to the Port Trust 
authorities for allotment of land to the States for  the construction of CPSs and that the powers have 
also been delegated to the Port Trusts. 
 
2.2.2 The CIPs with fishermen initiated by the Coas t Guard in the 1990s have helped in 
understanding the micro issues of fishermen. It is a purely a voluntary participation by fisher folks.  
The participation of fishermen in CIPs varies from 25 fishermen in fishing villages of A&N Islands 
which are thinly populated and up to 60 fishermen i n densely populated fishing villages along coastal 
States/UTs. 
 
2.2.3 On finalization of dates and place for conduc ting a Community Interaction Programme (CIP), a 
team comprising representative of Coast Guard, Indi an Navy, Marine Police and Fisheries Deptt. Of 
State/UT and headed by an officer of commandant ran k from Coast Guard is deputed.  Coast Guard 
makes efforts to nominate Coast Guard personnel wit h local dialect. The assistance of Fisheries 

21 
 
Department representative or local fishermen conver sant in Hindi/local language are sought for 
effective communication with fishermen. 
 
2.2.4 The Committee, in its meeting held on 5 th  February, 2015, was updated by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the issue of interaction with common people of coastal areas as under:- 
"Indian Coast Guard has been undertaking community interactions programmes for the 
fishermen to bring in awareness about safety issues  at sea.  The community interaction 
programmes are also conducted to sensitize the fish ing community on the prevailing security 
situation and develop them to be the “Eyes and Ears ” for intelligence gathering.   Since 2009, 
a total of 3120 community interaction programmes have been conducted till 31.12.2014." 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
2.2.5 The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home  Affairs must take up the issue of land 
allocation for construction of Coastal Police Stati ons (CPSs) with Ministry of Shipping and 
request them to direct Port Trust to allot land for  CPSs on priority basis in a time bound 
manner.  
 
Recommendation 
Land acquisition for setting up of coastal security infrastructure 
 
2.3 The Committee feels that setting up of coastal security infrastructure should not get stuck on 
account of failure in acquiring land for the purpos e.  It recommends that review of the progress may 
be done from time to time so that the projects are not unnecessarily delayed, keeping in mind their 
importance.  Wherever there are issues of land acquisition, the Ministry may take up with the sates fo r 
resolving them so that infrastructure is in place. 
(Para 3.20 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.3.1 MHA: In so far as implementation of the Phase -II of the Coastal Security Scheme is 
concerned, land for the 114 of the total sanctioned  131 Coastal Police Stations have been acquired and  
the process to acquire land for the remaining 17 is  progressing.  The matter is being reviewed by this  
Ministry on monthly basis. 
 
Recommendation 
Need for recruiting people well-versed with local language 
 
2.4 The Committee, however, recommends that all pos sible efforts should be made to recruit 
people knowing local dialect so that interaction wi th  local fishermen becomes easy and smooth.  The 
fact that fishermen are the 'eyes and ears' of the coast further emphasizes the importance of knowledge 
of local dialect necessary for intelligence gatheri ng.   Any literature as may be necessary may be 
distributed to fishermen in local language. 
(Para 3.24 ibid) 

22 
 
Community interaction programmes 
 
2.4.1 The Committee is of the view that the communi ty programme should gradually evolve from a 
body with voluntary nature to a body with semi-professional nature on the lines of civil defence so that 
they can also play a vital role in coastal security . Local fishermen may also be provided orientation 
programmes to impart necessary skills for intellige nce gathering and keeping vigil on the coast while 
continuing with daily professional chores. 
(Para 3.26 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 Indian Coast Guard has been undertaking commu nity interactions programmes for the 
fishermen to bring in awareness about safety issues  at sea.  The community interaction programmes 
(CIP) are also conducted to sensitize the fishing c ommunity on the prevailing security situation and 
develop them to be the “Eyes and Ears” for intellig ence gathering. Since 2009, a total of 3043  
Community Interaction Programmes have been conducted till date.  
 
2.4.3 The CIPs with fishermen initiated by the Coas t Guard in the 1990s have helped in 
understanding the micro issues of fishermen. It is a purely a voluntary participation by fisher folks.  
The participation of fishermen in CIPs varies from 25 fishermen in fishing villages of A&N Islands 
which are thinly populated and up to 60 fishermen i n densely populated fishing villages along coastal 
States/UTs. 
 
2.4.4 On finalization of dates and place for conduc ting a Community Interaction Programme (CIP), a 
team comprising representative of Coast Guard, Indi an Navy, Marine Police and Fisheries Deptt. Of 
State/UT and headed by an officer of commandant ran k from Coast Guard is deputed.  Coast Guard 
makes efforts to nominate Coast Guard personnel wit h local dialect. The assistance of Fisheries 
Department representative or local fishermen conver sant in Hindi/local language are sought for 
effective communication with fishermen. 
 
Recommendation  
Registration of the fishing vessels and boats 
 
2.5 The Committee notes that more than ninety perce nt of fishing vessels and boats have been 
registered. It feels that by keeping track of such vessels, the security agencies would be in a better  
position to keep a vigil on such vessels.   The Com mittee recommends that registration of all fishing 
vessels may be completed at the earliest. 
(Para 3.39 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.1 The Department through the National Informati on Centre (NIC) has devised a uniform web 
based registration regime (ReALCraft) for online re gistration of fishing vessels.  ReALCraft is a work  
flow based online application system for registrati on of all category fishing vessels of less than 20 m 
under MS Act., and issuance of fishing license unde r the Marine Fisheries Regulation Acts (MFRAs).  
Registration under the newly developed system is be ing done.  As on 3 
rd  June, 2014, a total of 

23 
 
1,98,787 fishing vessels have been registered under  the new system, out of total reported strength of 
fishing vessels of 1,99,141 (99.82%). 
 
Recommendation  
Fishermen Awareness Programme 
            
2.6 The Committee urges the Ministry of Agriculture  through its Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries to formulate a Sche me to bring about awareness among the 
fishermen of coastal States/UTs.  It also urges the  Ministry of Home Affairs to coordinate with it and  
other relevant agencies to prepare the modalities o f such a progamme for early implementation. It 
also recommends that the necessary budgetary allocation in this regard be made. 
(Para 3.41 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.1 The D/o. AHD&F M/o. Agriculture, at present, has no scheme to take up programme for 
awareness building to fishermen on coastal security  and intelligence gathering activities etc.  Beside s, 
the Department has no separate budgetary allocation  for taking up such security related schemes and 
the budgetary allocated to the Department is only s ufficient for running the on-going fisheries 
development schemes and programmes. 
 
2.6.2 However, Indian Coast Guard has been undertak ing community interactions programmes for 
the fishermen to bring in awareness about safety is sues at sea.  The community interaction 
programmes (CIP) are also conducted to sensitize th e fishing community on the prevailing security 
situation and develop them to be the Eyes and Ears”  for intelligence gathering. Since 2009, a total of  
3043  Community Interaction Programmes have been conducted till date. 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.1 The Committee agrees that Gujarat coast is high ly sensitive due to its close proximity to a very 
vulnerable part of International Maritime Border Li ne (IMBL).  The Committee is in agreement with 
the State Government that it needs more funds and i nfrastructure to improve and strengthen coastal 
security preparedness. The Committee recommends tha t under the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-
II), all the infrastructural and logistical gaps in  the coastal security apparatus of the state should  be 
filled in view of its vulnerability due to hostile atmosphere in the coastal area of Gujarat.   Necess ity 
of additional funds may be considered after discussing with State Government.  
(Para 2.1.3 of 177 
th  Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.1 As envisaged in the Coastal Security Scheme, in the context of the fast changing coastal 
security scenario, the demands of effective coastal security has increased manifold & subsequent to the 
Mumbai incidents on 26/11, the entire coastal secur ity scenario of the country has been subjected to 
multi-level, inter-ministerial review by the Govern ment of India.  MHA was tasked to formulate 
Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme in order to  fill the gaps in close coastal patrolling along th e 
Indian coastline.   
 
3.1.2 Accordingly, the Coastal States/UTs were aske d to undertake an exercise to identify the 
vulnerable gaps in consultation with Coast Guard an d on the basis of this vulnerability/ gap analysis,  
submit future projection to MHA for formulation of a comprehensive proposal to be known as Phase-
II of Coastal Security Scheme.  The Coast Guard was  also asked to work out in consultation with the 
States, additional requirement of boats to be incorporated in the Phase-II of the Scheme.   
 
3.1.3 Based on the extensive inter-ministerial revi ew of the entire coastal security scenario following 
26/11, inputs received from the Coast Guard, the id entification of vulnerability/gaps in the 
infrastructure available to coastal States/UTs and discussions/ consultations in several high level 
meetings, the Costal Security Scheme (Phase-II) has  been formulated. All components, including the 
funds to the Coastal States/UTs, were fixed and fro zen at the beginning of the Scheme itself.  Out of 
the total sanctioned amount of Rs.131.41 Crore unde r the Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme, to 
be released to 13 Coastal States/UTs for developmen t of infrastructure, a sum of Rs.122.60 Crore has 
already been released.  The balance amount would be  released to the Coastal States/UTs upon receipt 
of the Utilization Certificates in respect of the amount already released to them. 
 
3.1.4 In the case of Gujarat, under the Phase-I of the Coastal Security Scheme, funds to the extent of  
Rs. 58.43 crores were provided for setting up of 10 Coastal Police Stations (CPSs), 25 Check Posts, 46 
out Posts and purchase of 20 Jeeps, 101 Motorcycles , Computers and equipments etc. in addition to 
supply of 30 Boats (20 boats of 12 Ton capacity and 10 boats of 5 Ton capacity) worth Rs. 124 crores.  

25 
 
 
3.1.5 Under the Phase-II of the Coastal Security Sc heme, the State has been provided with a sum of 
Rs. 11.05 crore for setting up of  12 Coastal Polic e Stations, 5 Jetties, 12 Four-wheelers, 24 Two-
wheelers and a lump sum of Rs. 15 lakh per CPS for purchase of surveillance equipment, Computers 
and Furniture etc.  Besides these, 10 Nos. of 5 Ton  boats worth Rs. 30 crore (approx.) are being 
provided. 
 
3.1.6 Fully recognizing that Gujarat is extremely v ulnerable to the threats from the sea due to its 
location in the Arabian sea and a long coast-line, it has been decided to set up a National Institute of 
Coastal Policing, an apex institution for imparting  training to the States Marine Police personnel.  
Once established, the States Marine Police personnel, including the State of Gujarat, will be able to get 
a comprehensive training and, thus, equipped with t he handling of boats and patrolling activities to a  
greater extent.   
 
3.1.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs further apprised  the Committee in its meeting held on 5 
th  
February, 2015 that the Phase-II of the CSS would be completed by 31.03.2016.  
 
Further Recommendation    
 
3.1.8 The Committee agrees with State Government's view that 'one-size fits all' approach 
can't be adopted in Coastal Security domain due to varying vulnerability, threat perceptions and 
necessities of different States/UTs. Therefore, the  Committee recommends that Ministry of 
Home Affairs should actively consider demands for a dditional funds so as to plug all 
infrastructural & logistical gaps.  Implementation of CSS (Phase-II) may be completed at the 
earliest and all sanctioned boats must be provided to the state to augment the existing fleet. The 
National Institute of Coastal Policing, may be set-up, as proposed, at the earliest.  
 
Recommendation  
Integration of visual imagery from aerial surveillance and satellite imagery  
 
3.2 The Committee recommends that the National Mari time Domain Awareness (NMDA) project, 
which envisages development of common operational p icture of all maritime activities in the seas 
around India based upon various sources, should be finalized at the earliest.  The Committee hopes 
once the NMDA is established it will provide one st op solution for providing satellite imagery for 
Surveillance purposes. This will be useful for all coastal states and not just Gujarat. 
(Para 2.1.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.1 With an aim to improve NMDA in the aftermath of the Mumbai terrorists’ attacks, the Indian 
Navy articulated an Approach Paper for a comprehensive national approach to development of NMDA 
and the paper was prepared in January 2010 and was well received by all maritime stake-holders.  The 
same was later translated into DPR which was prepared in August 2010.  
 
3.2.2 The DPR was accorded in-principle approval by  the National Committee on Strengthening 
Maritime and Coastal Security Areas against Threats  from Sea (NCSMCS) in November 2010, which 

26 
 
directed the Indian Navy to prepare a CCS note and forward the same to the MoD for CCS approval.  
The CCS note was accordingly prepared and forwarded  by MoD in September, 2011 for vetting by 
concerned Ministries.  With the change in Central G ovt. in June, 2014, fresh concurrence of all 
Ministries was requested by MOD in July, 2014.  Pre sently, a final Cabinet Note has been submitted 
before the Cabinet for its consideration and approval. 
 
3.2.3 It has been proposed to integrate the nationa l security agencies into the National Command 
Communication and Intelligence Network (NC3IN) of t he National Maritime Domain Awareness 
(NMDA) programme being co-ordinated by MoD/Indian Navy. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.2.4 The Committee feels unhappy to note that the work on improving National Maritime 
Domain Awareness (NMDA), which started in January, 2010, is still at the consideration stage. 
In view of the Committee, a substantial and preciou s time has elapsed. The Government now 
needs to give priority to this pending crucial task  and complete all the procedural clearances at 
the earliest.  
 
Recommendation 
Seaworthiness of Boats 
 
3.3 The Committee however desires that the concern of the State Government may be examined 
again.  
(Para 2.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.1 The specifications of boats provided under th e Phase-I of the Scheme have been finalized in 
consultation with the Coastal States/UTs, Indian Navy and Coast Guard. 
 
3.3.2 It is reiterated that that the specifications  for the boats to be supplied under the Coastal Security 
Scheme (Phase-II)  have been finalized by the Minis try with due consultations with the coastal 
States/UTs.  These boats  have endurance range of 2 00 nautical miles and able to withstand conditions 
of sea-state 4. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.3 Several States/UTs have raised concerns regar ding endurance and seaworthiness of 
boats. The Committee notes that specifications of b oats were finalized in consultation with 
States/UTs, however, boats remain short of required  performance. The Committee, therefore, 
wants the Ministry to obtain actual performance fig ures of endurance of boats (in both number 
of hours and nautical miles), their fuel efficiency , fuel tank capacity and maximum achievable 
speed for both five and twelve ton boats from all S tates and UTs and take remedial measures in 
the light of information obtained, if required. This should be done without any delay. 
 

27 
 
Recommendation 
Repairing Centre at Paradip 
 
3.4 The Committee desires that the Ministry may dis cuss the matter with the State Government to 
resolve the issue. 
(Para 2.6.15 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.4.1 A Regional Repairing Centre is functioning at  Paradip, which is attending to immediate faults 
of Interceptor Boats of CPSs and in case of necessi ty the GRSE staff are attending necessary repair of  
the boat.  The Regional Repairing Centre of Paradee p is not well equipped and sufficiently manned.  
Request has been made to GRSE, Kolkata to provide all sorts of facilities / manpower to the Centre. 
Further Recommendation  
3.4.2 The Committee takes a serious note of the fac t that the regional Repairing Centre at 
Paradip is not well equipped and staffed. The Commi ttee expresses its reservations on the issue 
of extension of AMC contracts to the services defic ient companies. The Committee recommends 
that if the situation does not improve, the governm ent may explore other options like imposing 
penalties and seeking services of private players. 
Recommendation 
 
3.5 The Committee feels that the State Government b y now must have got the information.  
However, Ministry of Home Affairs may discuss the m atter with Coast Guard and the State 
Government. 
(Para 2.6.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.1 M/o. Defence has informed that the ICG is yet  to receive a formal request from the State 
Government of Odisha for deputing a Commandant leve l officer for setting up the State’s Coastal 
Security Scheme.  The request will be considered once it is received. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.2 The Committee is displeased at the lack of co mmunication between Odisha State 
Government and the Indian Coast Guard. The committe e strongly recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs must coordinate with the S tate Government and ICG and ensure that 
all bottlenecks are removed from speedy implementation of the scheme.  
 
Recommendation 
3.6 Other issues flagged by the State Government re late to manpower and related matters.   The 
issues relating to manpower recruitment training et c. are dealt in the next chapter.  However, the 
Committee recommends that the specific issues raise d by the State Government of Andhra Pradesh 

28 
 
may be appropriately addressed.   Some issues also concern other states as well and a careful 
examination of the issues is necessary. 
(Para 2.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.6.1 Under the scheme, manpower for the marine pol ice personnel including technical crew for the 
boats is provided by the States and UTs.  
 
3.6.2 Presently they are drawn from the regular civ il police and are deployed for a period of   3 - 5 
years after that, they are posted back to their par ent cadre thereby causing shortage of technical 
manpower.  In Tamil Nadu, a Coastal Security Group is in operation in the State since 1994, with a 
task-force of 500 dedicated personnel working on re gular basis.  Other supervisory staff are re-
employed on deputation from other sources for a fixed term of 4 years. 
 
3.6.3 The Second Steering Committee during its meet ing held on 07.03.2014, examined the Tamil 
Nadu Model and it was suggested that all Coastal St ates/UTs should have a permanent and dedicated 
Marine Battalion of 1000-2000 personnel on the line s of ‘Creek Crocodile’ being raised by BSF.   It 
was also suggested that the States/UTs may consider  relaxing recruitment rules to employ Ex-
Navy/Coast Guard personnel and fishermen.   
 
3.6.4 The Coastal States/UTs have suggested that th e proposed Marine India Reserve Battalion for 
all the Coastal States/UTs should totally be funded by the Central Government, which would go a long 
way in resolving the issue of Marine Police force i n the country.    It was decided that coastal 
States/UTs will submit their comments to MHA on the  proposal along with their requirement of 
manpower for the proposed Marine IRBs 
3.6.5 Only few states/UTs, have responded, details of which are as under: 
 
State/UT Requirement of Battalions under IRB 
Odisha 01 
Maharashtra MRBs will not be created in Maharashtra  as Marine Training Academy 
will be sanctioned at Palghar. 
Puducherry 02 
Karnataka 02 
Tamil Nadu 03 
Kerala 01 
Goa 01 
Daman & Diu 02 
Lakshadweep 01 
The remaining States / UTs have be en requested to send their requirement.  MHA is  
seized of the matter. 
 

29 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.6 The Committee notes the progress relating to raising of Marine India Reserve Battalion 
(MIRB) and desires that Ministry of Home Affairs mu st impress upon all the state to submit 
their requirement of manpower along with their comm ents on the proposed MIRB at the 
earliest. After the comments of all the states are received, the Ministry may take early decision. 
 
 
Recommendation  
Daman & Diu 
Problem faced in maintaining Coastal Security 
 
3.7 The effort on the part of the UT Administration  to recruit local fishermen for the marine police 
is laudable and will contribute for the improved pa trolling and surveillance along the coast of Daman 
and Diu.    The Committee desires that the local pe ople so recruited for Marine Police may be given 
sufficient training. 
(Para 2.9.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.1 Under the scheme, manpower for the marine pol ice personnel including technical crew for the 
boats is provided by the States and UTs.  
 
3.7.2 Presently they are drawn from the regular civ il police and are deployed for a period of   3 - 5 
years after that, they are posted back to their par ent cadre thereby causing shortage of technical 
manpower.  In Tamil Nadu, a Coastal Security Group is in operation in the State since 1994, with a 
task-force of 500 dedicated personnel working on re gular basis.  Other supervisory staff are re-
employed on deputation from other sources for a fixed term of 4 years. 
 
3.7.3 The Second Steering Committee during its meet ing held on 07.03.2014, examined the Tamil 
Nadu Model and it was suggested that all Coastal St ates/UTs should have a permanent and dedicated 
Marine Battalion of 1000-2000 personnel on the lines of Creek Crocodile being raised by BSF.  
 
3.7.4 It was also suggested that the States/UTs may  consider relaxing recruitment rules to employ 
Ex-Navy/Coast Guard personnel and fishermen.   
 
3.7.5 The Coastal States/UTs have suggested that th e proposed Marine India Reserve Battalion for 
all the Coastal States/UTs should totally be funded by the Central Government, which would go a long 
way in resolving the issue of Marine Police force in the country. It was decided that coastal States/UTs 
will submit their comments to MHA on the proposal along with their requirement of manpower for the 
proposed Marine 3IRBs. Accordingly, most of the Sta tes/UTs have since submitted their proposal.  
MHA is seized of this issue. 
 

30 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7.6 The Committee notes the progress relating to raising of Marine India Reserve Battalion 
(MIRB) and  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8 The Committee desires that the issue of Diu fis hermen being captured by Pakistan authorities 
may be addressed appropriately. 
(Para 2.9.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.1  According to Ministry of External Affairs, t he matter relating to release and repatriation 
of Indian fishermen lodged in Pakistani jails has been raised with Pakistan at different meetings held at 
the levels of Foreign Secretaries, Foreign Minister s, Home/Interior Secretaries, Home/Interior 
Ministers details of which are as under:  
 
(i) At the Foreign Secretary Level Talks on 25.02.2010 in New Delhi  & on 24.06.2010 in 
Islamabad 
(ii) during Home Minister’s visit to Islamabad on 25-26 June, 2010; 
(iii) during the Foreign Minister level talks in Islamabad on 15.07.2010; 
(iv) Foreign Secretary level talks in February, 2011 in Thimpu; 
(v) Home / Interior Secretary level talks on 28-29 March, 2011 in New Delhi; 
(vi) Foreign Secretary level talks in Islamabad on 23-24 June, 2011; 
(vii) Foreign Minister level talks in New Delhi on 27.07.2011; 
(viii) Home/Interior Minister level talks in Islamabad on 24-25 May, 2012; 
(ix) Foreign Secretary level talks in New Delhi on 4-5 July, 2012 
(x) External Affairs Minister level meet in Islamabad on 08.09.2012 
 
 
3.8.2  An India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Pris oners consisting of four retired judges 
from each side has been set up to recommend steps f or humane treatment and expeditious release of 
prisoners of respective countries in each other’s jails, which met on seven times since 2008. 
 
3.8.3  The matter is being monitored by the High Co mmission of India, Islamabad on a 
continuous basis and requests for consular access f or the Indian fishermen in Pakistani jails, upon 
receipt of which from the Govt. of Pakistan, the ve rification papers are sent to MHA through MEA for 
nationality status verification of these fishermen.   The High Commission also takes up the matter with  
Govt. of Pakistan for release of Indian fishermen who have completed their sentences. 
 
3.8.4  The India-Pakistan Judicial Committee consis ting of retired judges from both countries 
visits jails in both countries to ensure humane treatment and expeditious release of prisoners, including 
fishermen, who have completed their prison term.  A s a result of consistent efforts of the Government 
337 fishermen were released during 2013 and 185 fis hermen were released in 2014 till 10 December 
2014. 

31 
 
 
3.8.5  A delegation comprising officials and fishin g boat owners from Gujarat visited Pakistan 
from 18-19 July, 2014 to discuss the issue of relea se of 57 boats in Pakistani custody.  The modalitie s 
are being worked out. 
 
3.8.6  Ministry of Agriculture is the nodal agency for processing payment of compensation of 
fishermen lodged in Pakistani jails.  The Soft Loan  Package for replacement of fishing vessels held in  
captivity in Pakistan is implemented by the Marine Exports Development Authority (MPEDA). 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.7  The Committee notes the efforts being made b y Ministry of External Affairs for 
release and repatriation of Indian fishermen. Howev er, it desires that fishermen community in 
sensitive border areas must be made aware of the ex isting maritime border situation and must 
be discouraged to venture far off in the sea to avo id capture by Pakistan authorities. Further, 
the Committee recommends that in India's maritime r egion all efforts must be made by security 
agencies to provide the fishermen adequate security  so that their livelihood activities may not be 
affected. The Committee further hopes that the impl ementation of proposal for electronic geo-
fencing would be helpful in tackling the problem of arrests of fishermen by foreign authorities. 
 
 
Recommendation 
Puducherry 
Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security  
 
3.9 The Committee is disappointed to note that out of 23 technical posts approved in CSS phase I, 
only 3 have been filled and the others could not be  filled for want of recruitment rules.  Further, 76  
technical posts have also been approved under phase  II of the scheme.  In view of the Committee, this 
is a very typical case of sorry state of affairs.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Recruitment Rules may be framed at the earliest so that the sanctioned technical and also non-
technical posts may be filled at the earliest to de al with shortage of technical man power. The 
Committee also agrees with the UT government that i f the incentive structure provided to the 
employees is not attractive enough, it would be dif ficult to recruit and retain capable people needed 
for the purpose. The Committee is therefore not sat isfied with the routine reply of the Ministry and 
desires that it be more pro-active in recruiting ri ght people so that the Coastal Security scheme does  
not remain merely on paper. 
(Para 2.11.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.1  Under the scheme, manpower for the marine po lice personnel including technical crew 
for the boats is provided by the States and UTs.  P resently they are drawn from the regular civil poli ce 
and are deployed for a period of 3-5 years after th at, they are posted back to their parent cadre ther eby 
causing shortage of technical manpower.  In Tamil N adu, a Coastal Security Group is in operation in 
the State since 1994, with a task-force of 500 dedi cated personnel working on regular basis. Other 
supervisory staff are re-employed on deputation from other sources for a fixed term of 4 years. 
 

32 
 
3.9.2  The Second Steering Committee during its mee ting held on 07.03.2014, examined the 
Tamil Nadu Model and it was suggested that all Coas tal States/UTs should have a permanent and 
dedicated Marine Battalion of 1000-2000 personnel o n the lines of ‘Creek Crocodile’ being raised by 
BSF.   It was also suggested that the States/UTs ma y consider relaxing recruitment rules to employ 
Ex-Navy/Coast Guard personnel and fishermen.   
 
3.9.3  The Coastal States/UTs have suggested that t he proposed Marine India Reserve 
Battalion for all the Coastal States/UTs should tot ally be funded by the Central Government, which 
would go a long way in resolving the issue of Marin e Police force in the country. It was decided that 
coastal States/UTs will submit their comments to MH A on the proposal along with their requirement 
of manpower for the proposed Marine IRBs 
 
3.9.4  Ministry of Home Affairs has sanctioned 364 posts for Coastal Police Stations in 
Puducherry, which include 76 technical posts. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.5  The Committee recommends that the Ministry o f Home Affairs must actively 
monitor the status of recruitment of personnel in d ifferent States/UTs on a continuous basis and 
should help them, whenever necessary, overcome any road blocks. The Ministry should also take 
an early decision on the proposed Marine India Rese rve Battalions (MIRB).  The Committee 
feels that such a responsible and collaborative app roach is essential for ensuring foolproof 
Coastal Security of India. 
 
Recommendation 
Problem being faced in maintain Coastal Security 
 
3.10 All the above suggestions apply to all the coa stal States/UTs.  The Ministry needs to adopt a 
common approach on the above suggestions.  The Comm ittee recommends that the Ministry may look 
into the above suggestions of the UT government to find out their feasibility for implementation.  
(Para 2.11.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.1  Under the scheme, manpower for the marine p olice personnel including technical crew 
for the boats is provided by the States and UTs.   
 
3.10.2  The suppliers/AMC contractors of the Fast I nterceptor Boats supplied to the States/UTs 
have informed that preventive checks / maintenance are being carried out on boats on regular basis. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.3  The Committee is not convinced with the rep ly and feels that the complaints of 
Coastal State Governments/UTs cannot be ignored. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
immediate action should be taken on the complaints received from the States and the Ministry of 
Home Affairs must prevail upon the suppliers/AMC contractors to improve their services.  

33 
 
 
Recommendation 
OTHER ISSUES 
Shortage of Technical Manpower and lack of training facilities 
 
3.11 The Committee strongly recommends that the pro posed Marine Police Training Institutes – 
one each on the Eastern and Western Coast may be se t up as soon as possible as the specialized 
training required by the Marine police personnel is of utmost importance. The Committee is also of the 
view that the Central and concerned state governments should pro-actively coordinate with each other 
so that the project does not get trapped in bureauc ratic hurdles and the institutes are set up in a 
definite time frame. 
(Para 3.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.11.1  Under the Coastal Security Scheme, the manp ower is to be provided by the coastal 
States/UTs.  MHA provides the necessary  training t hrough the Coast Guard.   The coastal States/UTs 
are exhorted to recruit local fishermen by way of r elaxation of the recruitment rules, in addition to 
employ the ex-Navy and ex-Coast Guard personnel.   
 
3.11.2  MHA has already finalized setting up of Nat ional Marine Police Training Institute to be 
located in Gujarat for imparting training to the St ates Marine Police personnel.   Necessary steps are  
being taken for establishing the Institute.   
Further Recommendation  
3.11.3  The Committee reiterates that one Marine po lice training institute on eastern 
Coast of the country also may be set-up in view of the vast coastal line of the country. 
Recommendation  
 
3.12. The Committee has been informed by the Govern ment of Karnataka that the State Government 
plans to recruit separate staff for Coastal Securit y Policing and wish to train them adequately in sea -
faring. The step has been welcomed by the Home Mini stry. The Committee also appreciates the step 
taken by the Government of Karnataka and urges othe r State Governments/UTs to also raise 
dedicated cadres for marine policing as has been planned by the Government of Karnataka. 
(Para 3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.12.1  The coastal States/UTs have been advised to  adopt the Karnataka model, as per which, 
State had earlier engaged  Ex-Navy/Coast Guard Pers onnel as Coastal Marine Police.  But, the 
Karnataka has informed that    over a period of tim e, this system was found to be ineffective, because  
the  Ex-Navy/Coast Guard Personnel have the tendenc y to leave the organization due to better pay and 
perks offered elsewhere.  Despite this, various Sta tes/UTs have taken necessary steps for adopting thi s 
model. 

34 
 
3.12.2  Nevertheless above, as per the  decision of  the Second Steering Committee during its 
meeting held on 07.03.2014,  it was suggested that all Coastal States/UTs should have a permanent 
and dedicated Marine Battalion of 1000-2000 personn el on the lines of ‘Creek Crocodile’ being raised 
by BSF.   It was also suggested that the States/UTs  may consider relaxing recruitment rules to employ 
Ex-Navy/Coast Guard personnel and fishermen.   
 
3.12.3  The Coastal States/UTs have suggested that the proposed Marine India Reserve 
Battalion for all the Coastal States/UTs should tot ally be funded by the Central Government, which 
would go a long way in resolving the issue of Marin e Police force in the country.    It was decided th at 
coastal States/UTs will submit their comments to MH A on the proposal along with their requirement 
of manpower for the proposed Marine IRBs.  While mo st of the States/UTS have sent their proposal, 
few States/UTs have yet to submit the same. MHA is seized of this issue. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.4  The Committee notes the progress relating t o raising of Marine India Reserve 
Battalion (MIRB) and desires that Ministry of Home Affairs must impress upon all the state to 
submit their requirement of manpower along with their comments on the proposed MIRB at the 
earliest. After the comments of all the states are received, the Ministry may take a decision 
immediately thereafter. 
 
Recommendation 
Maintenance of boats and other equipments 
 
3.13 The Committee is totally dissatisfied by the M inistry's response and its approach towards the 
issue of maintenance. It needs to be more serious o n the issue and address the issue of maintenance 
appropriately. It also notes the complaints of simi lar nature made by other Coastal states/UTs.   The 
Committee feels that the issue should be looked afr esh in consultation with the State Governments so 
that such issues could be resolved satisfactorily. It recommends that the Ministry should hold a 
meeting with all the service providers and the conc erned governments for resolving all outstanding 
issues related to maintenance, so that the boats an d other equipments do not lie idle for want of 
rectification even when there are slight technical malfunctions.   The Committee also recommends that 
technical knowhow for small technical defects may be given to local operators so that they do not have 
to depend upon others even for small problems.  The  Committee also suggests that decentralization of 
the maintenance of boats may be considered. 
(Para 3.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.1  For the maintenance of the Interceptor Boat s supplied to the coastal States/UTs under 
the Phase-I of the Coastal Security Scheme, an Annu al Maintenance Contact (AMC) has been signed 
by MHA, on behalf of coastal States/UTs, with Govt.  of India Undertaking shipbuilders, GSL and 
GRSE on 20.1.2010 initially for a period of four ye ars, which has been granted extension beyond 
20.01.2014 upto 31.03.2016.   

35 
 
3.13.2  The Suppliers/AMC Contractors of the Interc eptor Boats provided under the Phase-I of 
the Coastal Security Scheme have informed that preventive checks / maintenance are being carried out 
on regular basis.  Further, they are imparting necessary on the spot training in each coastal State/UT. 
 
3.13.3  In the various review meetings taken by the  MHA, the issues connected with boats are 
discussed comprehensively both with the coastal States/UTs and the boat suppliers. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.4  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should exhort the 
suppliers / AMC Contractors to establish regional repair works hops and spare parts shops at 
major ports in every States/UTs. As a stop gap arra ngement they may open authorized service 
centers. They must also be urged to conduct regular  training workshops to impart required 
technical know-how. The Committee also recommends t hat the above stated measures may be 
made a necessary condition for granting any future AMC. 
 
Recommendation  
Port Security 
 
3.14 The Committee is surprised to note that even a fter the Mumbai attack, 187 minor ports of 
the country still lack standardized security cover.  The Committee strongly recommends that an 
early decision may be taken on the report submitted  by the working group of the Ministry of 
Shipping so that security norms for Minor Ports may  be established.    There should be regular 
security audit of the minor ports also alongwith ma jor ports. 
(Para 3.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.1  Ministry of Shipping has issued necessary d irections for implementation of provisions 
of ISPS.  The purpose of ISPS Code is essentially to detect and deter through effective access control.  
 
3.14.2  A Committee under the Chairmanship of A. Ra machandran, the then Chairman of 
Cochin Port Trust was formed to devise minimum secu rity standards for ports vide M/o. Shipping 
Order No.PT11024/1/2003-PT dated 31.07.2009.  The C ommittee submitted its report to Ministry of 
Shipping on August 8, 2011.  There is need of early  implementation of the security recommendations 
of report at all the ports.  Once some basic infras tructure like boundary wall/fencing, access control  
mechanism, anti-sabotage checking mechanism, force to guard and seafront security are put in place 
by the owners/operators, security audits can be conducted.   
 
3.14.3  MHA has got the security audit done through  IB and audit has revealed that out of 203 
non-major/minor ports, 45 are non-operational while  75 have no security force even for name sake to 
guard them.  Further, many of these non-operational  ports are used as fish landing points/jetties.  IB  
has also stated that this list includes 49 non-majo r ports – 21 in Gujarat, 09 in Maharashtra, 05 in 
Andhra Pradesh, 02 in Karnataka, 06 in Tamil Nadu, 02 in Puducherry and 01 each in Goa, A&N 
islands, Kerala and Orissa.   
 

36 
 
3.14.4  As per the Security Audit report, there are  several short-comings in the existing security 
arrangements like – X-ray machine is not available, non-maintenance of record of incoming / outgoing 
communications, to name a few. After evaluating the  existing security arrangements, threat 
perceptions etc, the IB has made various recommendations like –  
• Adequate number of CCTVs should be installed to carry out surveillance. 
• Mock-drill should be conducted periodically.  
• Speed breakers may be constructed inside and outside at all the gates. 
• The 8 digits alphanumerical character passwords may be used for operating the PCs and 
should be changed periodically.  
• Bomb Detection and Disposal Squard (BDDS) should be available at the Port. 
• The Port should be declared as a ‘Prohibited Area’ for fishing. 
• X-ray scanner should be made available at the gate and the port’s administrative office 
to scan the personal belongings of the staff/visitors. 
• Proper record of the foreigners with details of the ir particulars i.e. name, passport 
details, visa details, period of stay and purpose etc., may be maintained. 
• The watch-towers of adequate height may be construc ted in the port jetty area to 
monitor the sea front from all sides of Port Jetty. 
• Patrol tracks both inside and outside perimeter sho uld be made to carry out effective 
patrol. 
• Random checking of Tiffin boxes of employees must be carried out during entry / exit. 
• Contingency plan for oil spillage may be vetted by Indian Coast Guard. 
 
3.14.5  Further, the IB has already circulated the audit reports to the respective 
States/concerned authorities for information and necessary action.   
 
3.14.6  Soon after receipt of the above report, MHA  has addressed to the Chief Secretaries of 
the concerned States to take appropriate action imm ediately so as to comply with the 
recommendations of the audit report of the IB. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.14.7  The Committee is shocked to note that accor ding to the MHA out of 203 non-
major/minor ports, 45 are non-operational while 75 have no security force even for name sake to 
guard them.  Further, many of these non-operational  ports are used as fish landing points/jetties 
and this list includes 49 non-major ports. The Comm ittee takes a very serious note on the grave 
deficiencies highlighted in the security audit repo rt of IB and is of the view that this report of IB 
should act as an alarm bell for the Government, par ticularly with reference to such ports in 
Gujarat and Maharashtra. The Committee feels strong ly that the recommendations given in the 
above said report should be implemented at the earliest by all States/UTs. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs should support States/UTs by providing any required technical and financial assistance 
as well as monitoring regularly the implementation of the recommendations given in the 
Security Audit Report. 
 

37 
 
Recommendation 
Constitution of Maritime Boards 
 
3.15 The Committee strongly urges the State governm ents of Andhra Pradesh and Goa and UT  of 
A&N Islands to constitute State Maritime Boards at the earliest. It also urges the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to expedite examination of Maritime Board B ills/Ordinance of the governments of Karnataka, 
Kerala and Odisha so that the Boards can be established at the earliest. 
(Para 3.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.15.1  Kerala : MHA has conveyed the instructions of the President for promulgation of the 
Ordinance on 22.10.2014 in respect of Kerala.  
 
3.15.2  In respect of Odisha and  Karkanataka, thei r proposal were examined in the Ministry 
and sent the same to the respective States for clarifications. 
 
3.15.3  In respect of  Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Anda man & Nicobar Islands, the process of 
constitution of Maritime Board is underway. 
Further Recommendation  
3.15.4  The Committee is not satisfied with the pro gress in this regard and recommends 
that the institutional arrangements of setting up o f state maritime boards should be put in place 
at the earliest. In this regard State governments m ay be persuaded to take immediate 
appropriate action and there should be no further delay in this regard. 
 
Recommendation 
Total requirement of manpower for coastal security 
 
3.16 The Committee recommends that all the sanction ed posts for coastal security may be filled up 
in time so that the vigilance on the coast is not c ompromised for want of adequate number of 
personnel. It exhorts the ministry to avoid procedu ral pitfalls so that the posts can be filled in 
stipulated time period.   The Committee desires tha t the scheme should not suffer for want of man 
power. 
(Para 3.28 ibid)   
Recruitment process for 1000 personnel under Sagar Prahari Bal 
  
3.16.1  The Committee desires that the rest of the personnel may be recruited as and when the 
remaining Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs) are induct ed. The Committee hopes that a time line for the 
same would be fixed by the Ministry for strict adherence. 
(Para 3.30 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.2  M/o. Defence has informed that personnel fo r all the 1000 posts of Sagar Prahari Bal 
have been inducted.  Presently 20 Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs) have been inducted and 20 officers 

38 
 
and 504 sailors have been deployed.  Balance 60 FIC s are expected to be inducted by the end of 2017 
with four FICs being inducted every quarter.  The b alance personnel will be deployed in accordance 
with the FIC induction plan. 
 
3.16.3  Under the Coastal Security Scheme, the manp ower is to be provided by the coastal 
States/UTs.  MHA provides the necessary  training t hrough the Coast Guard. While most of the 
States/UTs have made recruitments, the coastal Stat es/UTs are exhorted to recruit local fishermen by 
way of relaxation of the recruitment rules, in addi tion to employ the ex-Navy and ex-Coast Guard 
personnel.     
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16.4  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must actively 
monitor the status of recruitment of personnel in d ifferent States/UTs on a continual basis and 
should help them, whenever necessary, to overcome a ny road blocks. The Ministry should also 
take an early decision on the proposed raising of Marine India Reserve Battalions (MIRB).   
 
Recommendation 
Issues related to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries 
Issuance of biometric ID cards to fishermen 
 
3.17 The Committee urges the government to complete  issuing of biometric identity cards of the 
remaining fishermen. It also recommends that a data  bank of such cards should be maintained for 
ready reference. Such a measure would help in identifying intruders and foreign nationals entering the 
country.  
(Para 3.37 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.17.1  D/o. Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries  (DAHDF) Project  is charged with  
issuance of biometric identity card to marine fishe rs  Out of 18,12,011 fishermen identified for 
issuance of biometric ID card, data collection & di gitization in respect of almost all the fishermen h as 
been completed.  Till the end of May, 2014, the con sortium of CPSUs has produced a total of 
11,30,843 ID cards and dispatched 11,28,675 cards to the States/UTs for distribution to the fishermen.  
 
3.17.2  The Committee, in its meeting held on 5 
th  February 2015, was updated by the MHA 
regarding the latest status of issuance of fishermen ID cards as follows:- 
"The RGI has captured biometric details of 67,50,719 persons of age 18 years and above living 
in the coastal areas, and distributed 65,72,523 NPR  ID cards. D/o Animal Husbandry 
Dairying and Fisheries has produced 11,71,616 Fishe rmen ID Cards and delivered 11,52,146 
cards for the fishermen." 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17.3  The Committee is constrained to express its  displeasure over the slow progress of 
production and distribution of bio-metric ID Cards of fishermen as only about two third target 

39 
 
has been achieved so far. The Committee desires that Government should fix a strict time-line to 
complete production and distribution of bio-metric I-Cards to fishermen. The Ministry may 
pursue this issue regularly with the consortium of Central Public Sector Units (CPSUs) and 
States/UTs for completion of the process within a definite time frame. 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation  
Role of Mercantile Marine Department 
  
4.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the issues  raised by the State Government regarding non-
availability of inputs on national security matters  and regulation of benami investment are worth 
noting and deserve attention. The Committee feels t hat if the Ministry of Shipping is not the relevant  
agency then the concerned agency be it Ministry of Home Affairs or any other agency should provide 
necessary inputs to the state government.   Ministry of Home Affairs may look into this matter. 
(Para 2.1.5 of 177 
th  Report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.1 Ministry of Shipping has informed that the ma ndate of Mercantile Marine Department (MMD) 
is to check the technical aspects and sea-worthines s of the vessels registered under Merchant Shipping  
Act and MMD will not be in a position to bring out investment details. 
 
4.1.2 The matters relating to the issues concerning  benami investment in ship building, under-
valuation of investment pertains to Ministry of Fin ance/D/o. Revenue.  The matter has been taken up 
with them for further appropriate action. 
Recommendation 
Involvement of Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships (DGLL) 
 
4.2 The Committee, notwithstanding the reply of the  Ministry, desires that the concern of the State 
Government may appropriately be addressed.  Secretary, Shipping may hold a meeting in the matter.  
(Para 2.1.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.1 The NCSMCS (National Committee for Strengthen ing Maritime Coastal Security against 
Threats from Sea) in its 9 
th  meeting held on 3 rd  July, 2014 had directed that ICG will continue wit h 
both the pilot projects i.e. RFID and MSS for track ing system (transponders) for boats less than 20 m,  
as per the earlier decision.  M/o Defence may, in a ddition, study the Singapore model (triangulation 
method using cell phones) for suitability.  Similar ly, NCSMCS also directed that M/o Shipping will 
complete the pilot study on proprietary transponders within one-and-half months. 
 
4.2.2 Status:  An inter-ministerial Committee (IMC) headed by IG ( Ops), Coast Guard and 
comprising representatives from following Deptts. v iz.  Indian Navy, M/o. Shipping/DGLL, D/o. 
Space DRDO, NSCS, G/o Gujarat, G/o. Maharashtra was constituted. 
  
4.2.3 As per the Committees report, the AIS(P) tran sponders are best suited for tracking sub 20 mtrs. 
boats subject to being suitably modified, while the  other two technologies i.e. RFID and MSS having 

41 
 
been ruled out due to (a) in absence of any existin g working model and lack of firm proposal for long 
range tracking transponders using RFID and (b) beca use of non-availability of ‘S’ band frequency  
spectrum for MSS technology. 
 
4.2.4 PMO has forwarded a pilot project undertaken on electronic geo-fencing by DGLL for tracking 
of small fishing vessels fitted with customized AIS  transponders upto a distance of 50 kms. from 
coastline.  DGLL has got an evaluation study conduc ted on this project.  PMO informed that the study 
report is to be shared with M/o Home Affairs and M/ o Home Affairs, in consultation with DAHDF 
would bring a Note for the Cabinet by 30.09.2014 ba sed on the report submitted by DGLL, to roll out 
the project. MHA has, accordingly, initiated drafti ng the Cabinet Note in consultation with D/o 
AHD&F. 
 
4.2.5 In the meeting of the Committee held on 5 
th  February, 2015 on the subject Border 
Management, IG, Coast Guard apprised the Committee regarding the plans to install Automatic 
Information System (AIS) Transponders on sub-20meters boats and the proposed Geo-Fencing Project 
as follows:- 
 
"But, the problem is of boats which are less than 2 0 metres.  That has been the biggest 
problem.  There are 2.4 lakhs boats.  They are smal l targets.  There is no transponder on 
them to pick them up through our radars or the sens ors which are put along the coasts 
and as a result, they have become the biggest threa t area for us.  So, recently we have 
had a Committee which has finalized a transponder w hich will be an AIS transponder, 
i.e., Automatic Information System, which will be p laced on all these boats for which the 
Secretary (BM) has said that they are making a CCS note.  Through that, we will be able 
to track all the movements of these boats, once it is implemented.  It may take two-three 
years to fructify finally. But once that is there, it is going to be connected with the 
national AIS chain and we will get the feedback in all our Coast Guard operations’ room 
and Naval operations’ room and DGLL will also have a feedback of all these boats in 
our territorial waters and in adjacent seas.  There are provisions made of geo fencing." 
 
4.2.6 The Committee was further apprised with the i nformation on Registration and Tracking of 
Vessels/Boats as under:- 
 
"All the sailing vessels above 20 metres length are  mandatorily required to be fitted with 
Automatic Identification System (AIS) equipment.  I f the same is not fitted, then the 
Registrations of such vessels on an annual basis wi ll not be done. While sailing vessels 
below 20 metres (mainly fishing vessels) are statut orily not required to install AIS which 
poses threat to the security of the coastal area.  A total of 1,91,559 fishing vessels have 
been registered up to 31.12.2014." 
 
Recommendation  
Security of off-shore oil installations 
  
4.3 It appears that the Ministry of Home Affairs is  not aware of the issue.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may lo ok into the security concerns expressed by the 

42 
 
State Government.  The Committee recommends that th e Ministries of Home, Shipping, Steel and 
Petroleum & Natural Gas should hold a meeting with the State Government of Gujarat to understand 
the missing link and find suitable ways to address its concerns. 
(Para 2.1.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.3.1 The issue of providing security to the Single  Point Moorings (SPMs) has been engaging the 
attention of MHA for quite some time now.  In order  to identify the appropriate agency for security 
cover to the SPMs, an Inter-Ministerial Committee u nder the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Border 
Management), MHA and members drawn from stake-holde r Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies has 
been constituted on 17.04.2014 to go into the entir e gamut of the issues concerning the SPMs and to 
suggest recommendations. The Committee has met thrice, on 05.06.2014, 02.07.2014 and 04.08.2014.   
 
4.3.2 Subsequent to discussions during the meetings , D/o. Legal Affairs has been requested to 
examine the issue as to whether in terms of Section  14 of the Coast Guard Act, 1978, the duty to 
protect the SPMs falls within the purview of Indian Coast Guard or not.   
 
4.3.3 D/o. Legal Affairs have informed that  the is sue raised by the MoD/ICG that as per the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, the security of  SPMs rests with the port authorities and, hence,   the 
Ministry of  Shipping may be consulted and their vi ews may also be made available for examination.  
Accordingly the issue has been taken with the M/o S hipping for their comments on 7 
th  November, 
2014, followed by a reminder on 18 th  Nov.2014.  
 
4.3.4  After receipt of M/o Shipping’s comments, the file will be referred to D/o. Legal Affairs again 
for their considered advice on this issue so that necessary action for  addressing the issue of  protecting 
the SPMs will be taken. 
Recommendation  
Deliberate Oil spills by insurgents 
 
4.4 The Committee recommends that the scheme may be  prepared at the earliest. It also feels that 
the Ministry should address the fears expressed by the state government of deliberate oil spills by 
insurgents, for creating fire hazards for destructi on of ships and port properties, by procuring 
equipment and dispersants to combat oil spill.  This issue concerns all the coastal States. 
(Para 2.1.16 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
4.4.1 The Ministry of Shipping is preparing the Sch eme for assisting major and non-major ports 
from the fund collected from oil pollution cess @ 5 0 paisa per MT, to procure equipment and 
dispersant to combat oil spill. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.4.2 The Committee desires that formulation of sch eme of combating oil spills may be done at 
the earliest. 

43 
 
Recommendation 
Requirement of equipments for meeting ISPS Audit  
 
4.5 The Committee recommends that Radio-active mate rial scanners should be installed at all 
entry/exit points of all major ports in all the coastal States. 
(Para 2.1.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.5.1 Ministry of Shipping was requested to take su itable action for installing scanner for radioactive 
material at all entry/exit points in all the Coastal States/UTs.  
 
4.5.2 DG Shipping has informed that the issue is be ing handled separately wherein they have opined 
that RDEs should not be part of ISPS. 
 
Recommendation  
Coastal Security-multi-agency responsibility and surveillance  
 
4.6 The Committee recommends that pilot projects fo r RFID, MSS and AIS(P) may be undertaken 
so as to ascertain their feasibility for implementation and the same should be completed at the earlie st 
so that a final view may be taken in this regard.  The Committee is of the opinion that such 
technological interventions are extremely important  to improve the logistics of coastal security 
apparatus and, therefore, should be put into servic e as soon as the feasibility studies prove positive . 
The issue was also raised during the Study Visit of  the Committee to the Coastal Police Stations in 
Andhra Pradesh.  The Committee is of the opinion that a separate group is needed by including people 
who work on this subject in the aviation sector in a collaborative effort with the Coast Guard and 
agencies dealing with  satellites and transponders for early implementation. 
(Para 2.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6.1 The NCSMCS (National Committee for Strengthen ing Maritime Coastal Security against 
Threats from Sea) in its 9 
th  meeting held on 3 rd  July, 2014 had directed that ICG will continue wit h 
both the pilot projects i.e. RFID and MSS for track ing system (transponders) for boats less than 20 m,  
as per the earlier decision.  M/o Defence may, in a ddition, study the Singapore model (triangulation 
method using cell phones) for suitability.  Similar ly, NCSMCS also directed that M/o Shipping will 
complete the pilot study on proprietary transponders within one-and-half months. 
 
4.6.2 Status: An inter-ministerial Committee (IMC) headed by IG (Ops), Coast Guard and 
comprising representatives from following Deptts. v iz.  Indian Navy, M/o. Shipping/DGLL, D/o. 
Space DRDO, NSCS, G/o Gujarat, G/o. Maharashtra was constituted. 
  
4.6.3 As per the Committees report, the AIS(P) tran sponders are best suited for tracking sub 20 mtrs. 
boats subject to being suitably modified, while the  other two technologies i.e. RFID and MSS having 
been ruled out due to (a) in absence of any existin g working model and lack of firm proposal for long 
range tracking transponders using RFID and (b) beca use of non-availability of ‘S’ band frequency  
spectrum for MSS technology. 

44 
 
4.6.4 PMO has forwarded a pilot project undertaken on electronic geo-fencing by DGLL for tracking 
of small fishing vessels fitted with customized AIS  transponders upto a distance of 50 kms from 
coastline.  DGLL has got an evaluation study conduc ted on this project.  PMO informed that the study 
report is to be shared with M/o Home Affairs and th at the M/o Home Affairs, in consultation with 
DAHDF would bring a Note for the Cabinet  based on the report submitted by DGLL, to roll out the 
project.  
  
4.6.5 MHA has, accordingly, initiated drafting the Cabinet Note in consultation with D/o AHD&F. 
Recommendation 
4.7 The Committee feels that it is a ticklish issue .  The Ministry of Home Affairs may discuss with 
State Government and fishermen and solve the problem. 
(Para 2.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.7.1 The issue pertains to objection by local fish ermen to the use of Jetties of Fisheries and Port 
Department by the Coastal Security Police. The Stat e Government of Karnataka has been requested to 
solve the issue on priority basis as per the recommendation of the Committee. 
Recommendation 
 
4.8 The Committee notes the assurance of the State Government given to the Ministry and desires 
that the recruitment may be completed at the earlie st.   Issuing of ID cards may also be completed at 
the earliest. 
(Para 2.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.1 The State Government of Karnataka have been r equested to take appropriate action in the 
matter.  All the 66,203 cards produced have been delivered.   Efforts are on to produce balance cards.  
 
 
Recommendation  
Kerala 
Provision of Jetties and floating wharfs 
 
4.9 The Committee desires that the suggestion of th e State Government for providing wharfs where 
constructing Jetties is a problem, may be looked in to.   Even though the decision has been left to the  
State Government, the Ministry may discuss the issue with the state. 
(Para 2.4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.9.1 The State Government of Kerala have been requ ested to take appropriate action in the matter. 
 

45 
 
Recommendation 
Andhra Pradesh 
 
4.10 The Committee recommends that the pilot-study regarding fitting AIS (transponders) may be 
completed in a time bound manner so that the findings of the same may be implemented thereon. 
(Para 2.7.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10.1  9
th  NCSMCS in its meeting held on 3 rd  July, 2014 had directed that ICG will continue 
with both the pilot projects i.e. RFID and MSS for tracking system (transponders) for boats less than 
20 m, as per the earlier decision.  M/o Defence may , in addition, study the Singapore model 
(triangulation method using cell phones) for suitab ility.  Similarly, NCSMCS also directed that M/o 
Shipping will complete the pilot study on proprietary transponders within one-and-half months. 
 
4.10.2  Subsequently, an inter-ministerial Committee (IMC) headed by IG (Ops), Coast Guard 
and comprising representatives from following Deptt s. viz.  Indian Navy, M/o. Shipping/DGLL, D/o. 
Space DRDO, NSCS, G/o Gujarat, G/o. Maharashtra was constituted. 
  
4.10.3  As per the Committees report, the   AIS(P) transponders are best suited for tracking sub 
20 mtrs. boats subject to being suitably modified, while the other two technologies i.e. RFID and MSS 
having been ruled out due to (a) in absence of any existing working model and lack of firm proposal 
for long range tracking transponders using RFID and  (b) because of non-availability of ‘S’ band 
frequency  spectrum for MSS technology. 
 
4.10.4  PMO has forwarded a pilot project undertake n on electronic geo-fencing by DGLL for 
tracking of small fishing vessels fitted with custo mized AIS transponders upto a distance of 50 kms. 
from coastline.  DGLL has got an evaluation study c onducted on this project.  PMO informed that the 
study report is to be shared with M/o Home Affairs and that the M/o Home Affairs, in consultation 
with DAHDF would bring a Note for the Cabinet based  on the report submitted by DGLL, to roll out 
the project.  
 
4.10.5  MHA has, accordingly, initiated drafting th e Cabinet Note in consultation with D/o 
AHD&F. 
Recommendation 
Incentives to people joining marine police 
 
4.11 The Committee strongly recommends that an attr active incentive structure may be considered 
personnel recruited for coastal security.  
(Para 3.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.11.1  The Coastal States/UTs have been advised to  formulate an attractive incentive package 
on the lines of Indian Coast Guard for State Marine Police personnel. 
 

46 
 
Further Observation  
4.11.2  The Committee notes the reply and desires t hat there should be uniformity in the 
incentives among the state marine police personnel.  Early action may be taken after receiving 
the plans from the states.  
Recommendation  
4.12 The Committee is not convinced and observes th at the temporary arrangement as has been 
made in Hyderabad can be temporarily made at some c oastal town. Land required for permanent 
Coastal Security Headquarter in Andhra Pradesh may also be allotted soon in Vizag. All such 
headquarters/offices in other States related to coa stal security which are far from the coastal areas 
may be shifted to appropriate coastal towns 
 (Para 3.22 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.12.1  The State Government of Andhra Pradesh have  been requested to take appropriate 
action in the matter. 
Recommendation  
Issues related to Ministry of Shipping 
Imposing Cess to combat oil spills 
               
4.13 The Committee is not clear as to whether the c ollected cess will also be used to tackle 
situations when oil gets spilled into the sea eithe r in an accident or as a result of misadventure by 
anybody. The Committee is of the opinion that a por tion of such collected cess should also be kept to 
tackle ‘post-spill’ emergencies while the rest can be utilised for proper handling and storage of oil 
cargo. The Committee is also surprised by the  fact that though the oil pollution cess is being collected 
for nearly twenty-five years since October, 1988, n o money was ever utilized for the intended purpose 
for want of a scheme for implementation. The Commit tee therefore recommends that the scheme for 
implementation should be approved at the earliest so that the same can be implemented. 
(Para 3.35 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.13.1  Regarding cess to combat oil spills,  the S cheme was envisaged by the Ministry of 
Shipping and is titled  “Scheme for providing assis tance to ports for combating oil pollution and for 
mitigating measures” the objective of the scheme is  to support Major and Non-Major Ports by way of 
financial assistance to procure pollution response equipments/ materials required for combating Tier-1  
oil spills in their waters. The role of the Directo rate was limited to examining the draft EFC memo to  
make the scheme more specific and also specify the kinds of equipments that can be allowed under the 
scheme (civil works excluding).  
 
4.13.2  DG Shipping, has accordingly, provided a ge neralized list for consideration. However, 
the equipments for each port is required to be spec ific to the Port and would depend on the size of 
vessels handled  by the port, its topography , the quantum  to oil handled by the Port etc. Each Port 
Authority was to examine and forward to the Ministr y their exact requirements. The opinion of the 
Committee  with regard to retaining portion of the collected cess to tackle ‘Post-spill ‘ emergencies 

47 
 
may therefore need to be considered by the Ministry  of Shipping .It is also noted that the Ministry is  
considering a scheme for utilization of the funds as per the recommendations.   
GENERAL ISSUE 
4.14 In the meeting of the Committee on Home Affairs on 5 
th  February, 2015 on the subject Border 
Management, Secretary (BM) and IG, Coast Guard made  the following submissions in their 
presentation on Coastal Security:- 
Capturing of Indian fishermen and their boats by Sri Lanka 
".......But, it is more often than not that our boa ts are found on the other side because of 
lack of fishing resources in the water adjacent to our coast.  It is completely exploited.  
There is no fish, so they go deliberately to the ot her side and do fishing there.  At times, 
they have gone very close to the Sri Lankan side an d as a result they get 
apprehended.........as of now, we have got 28 boats  and 22 crew in Indian jails from Sri 
Lanka.  And, Indian boats which have been apprehend ed by Sri Lanka, as of now, are 96 
boats and 29 fishermen; boats are more."   
4.14.1  The representative further submitted as below:- 
"We also have a mechanism to have the release of the fishermen as early as possible from 
Sri Lanka.  We have faced no problem until and unle ss the fishermen are involved in 
smuggling and narcotics."  
4.14.2  The Committee recommends that this issue ma y be resolved at the earliest so that 
lives and livelihood of fishermen may not be endang ered. The Committee further recommends 
that the Ministry must take stringent measures to s top illegal activities such as smuggling and 
narcotics in India's coastal region. 

48 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE  
Manpower Recruitment 
 
 The Committee strongly feels that requisitioning o f personnel from regular civil police 
should be in a such way that the personnel returnin g to parent cadre after deployment for a 
period of 3 - 5 years do not cause shortage of technical manpower and the replacement should be 
available beforehand. The Committee also desires th at the Ministry should take an early 
decision on the proposed Marine India Reserve Batta lions (MIRB). An early decision may be 
taken on the central funding for Battalion. 
(1.13.5)  
Security along West Bengal coast 
Infiltration of foreign nationals in A&N Islands 
 
Early decision should be taken to adopt electronic surveillance system particularly in 
sundarban area. 
(1.17.7) 
Marine Police Station 
 
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affai rs must take up the issue of land 
allocation for construction of Coastal Police Stati ons (CPSs) with Ministry of Shipping and 
request them to direct Port Trust to allot land for  CPSs on priority basis in a time bound 
manner.  
(2.2.5) 
Additional Funds for Infrastructure & Logistic Development 
   
The Committee agrees with State Government's view t hat 'one-size fits all' approach 
can't be adopted in Coastal Security domain due to varying vulnerability, threat perceptions and 
necessities of different States/UTs. Therefore, the  Committee recommends that Ministry of 
Home Affairs should actively consider demands for a dditional funds so as to plug all 
infrastructural & logistical gaps.  Implementation of CSS (Phase-II) may be completed at the 
earliest and all sanctioned boats must be provided to the state to augment the existing fleet. The 
National Institute of Coastal Policing, may be set-up, as proposed, at the earliest.  
(3.1.8)  
Integration of Visual Imagery from Aerial Surveillance and Satellite Imagery  
 
The Committee feels unhappy to note that the work o n improving National Maritime 
Domain Awareness (NMDA), which started in January, 2010, is still at the consideration stage. 
In view of the Committee, a substantial and preciou s time has elapsed. The Government now 
needs to give priority to this pending crucial task  and complete all the procedural clearances at 
the earliest.  
 (3.2.4) 
Seaworthiness of Boats 
 
Several States/UTs have raised concerns regarding e ndurance and seaworthiness of 
boats. The Committee notes that specifications of b oats were finalized in consultation with 

49 
 
States/UTs, however, boats remain short of required  performance. The Committee, therefore, 
wants the Ministry to obtain actual performance fig ures of endurance of boats (in both number 
of hours and nautical miles), their fuel efficiency , fuel tank capacity and maximum achievable 
speed for both five and twelve ton boats from all S tates and UTs and take remedial measures in 
the light of information obtained, if required. This should be done without any delay. 
(3.3.3)  
Repairing Centre at Paradip 
The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that  the regional Repairing Centre at 
Paradip is not well equipped and staffed. The Commi ttee expresses its reservations on the issue 
of extension of AMC contracts to the services defic ient companies. The Committee recommends 
that if the situation does not improve, the governm ent may explore other options like imposing 
penalties and seeking services of private players. 
(3.4.2) 
Coordination between various Coastal Security Agencies 
  
The Committee is displeased at the lack of communic ation between Odisha State 
Government and the Indian Coast Guard. The committe e strongly recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs must coordinate with the S tate Government and ICG and ensure that 
all bottlenecks are removed from speedy implementation of the scheme.  
(3.5.2)  
Marine India Reserve Battalion 
  
The Committee notes the progress relating to raisin g of Marine India Reserve Battalion 
(MIRB) and desires that Ministry of Home Affairs mu st impress upon all the state to submit 
their requirement of manpower along with their comm ents on the proposed MIRB at the 
earliest. After the comments of all the states are received, the Ministry may take early decision. 
(3.6.6)  
Daman & Diu 
Problem faced in Maintaining Coastal Security  
 
The Committee notes the progress relating to raisin g of Marine India Reserve Battalion 
(MIRB) and made a recommendation in para 3.6.6 in this Chapter.  
(3.7.6) 
Security of Fishermen 
  
The Committee notes the efforts being made by Minis try of External Affairs for release 
and repatriation of Indian fishermen. However, it d esires that fishermen community in sensitive 
border areas must be made aware of the existing mar itime border situation and must be 
discouraged to venture far off in the sea to avoid capture by Pakistan authorities. Further, the 
Committee recommends that in India's maritime regio n all efforts must be made by security 
agencies to provide the fishermen adequate security  so that their livelihood activities may not be 
affected. The Committee further hopes that the impl ementation of proposal for electronic geo-
fencing would be helpful in tackling the problem of arrests of fishermen by foreign authorities. 
 
(3.8.7)  

50 
 
Puducherry 
Problems being Faced in Maintaining Coastal Security 
  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must actively monitor the 
status of recruitment of personnel in different Sta tes/UTs on a continuous basis and should help 
them, whenever necessary, overcome any road blocks.  The Ministry should also take an early 
decision on the proposed Marine India Reserve Batta lions (MIRB).  The Committee feels that 
such a responsible and collaborative approach is es sential for ensuring foolproof Coastal 
Security of India. 
(3.9.5) 
Problems being Faced in Maintaining Coastal Security 
  
The Committee is not convinced with the reply and f eels that the complaints of Coastal 
State Governments/UTs cannot be ignored. The Commit tee, therefore, recommends that 
immediate action should be taken on the complaints received from the States and the Ministry of 
Home Affairs must prevail upon the suppliers/AMC contractors to improve their services.  
                       (3.10.3)  
Shortage of Technical Manpower and lack of Training Facilities  
The Committee reiterates that one Marine police tra ining institute on eastern Coast of 
the country also may be set-up in view of the vast coastal line of the country.  
(3.11.3) 
Marine India Reserve Battalion  
 
The Committee notes the progress relating to raisin g of Marine India Reserve Battalion 
(MIRB) and desires that Ministry of Home Affairs mu st impress upon all the state to submit 
their requirement of manpower along with their comm ents on the proposed MIRB at the 
earliest. After the comments of all the states are received, the Ministry may take a decision 
immediately thereafter. 
                      (3.12.4)  
Maintenance of Boats and other Equipments 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should exhort the 
suppliers / AMC Contractors to establish regional repair works hops and spare parts shops at 
major ports in every States/UTs. As a stop gap arra ngement they may open authorized service 
centers. They must also be urged to conduct regular  training workshops to impart required 
technical know-how. The Committee also recommends t hat the above stated measures may be 
made a necessary condition for granting any future AMC. 
(3.13.4)  
Port Security 
  
The Committee is shocked to note that according to the MHA out of 203 non-
major/minor ports, 45 are non-operational while 75 have no security force even for name sake to 
guard them.  Further, many of these non-operational  ports are used as fish landing points/jetties 
and this list includes 49 non-major ports. The Comm ittee takes a very serious note on the grave 
deficiencies highlighted in the security audit repo rt of IB and is of the view that this report of IB 

51 
 
should act as an alarm bell for the Government, par ticularly with reference to such ports in 
Gujarat and Maharashtra. The Committee feels strong ly that the recommendations given in the 
above said report should be implemented at the earliest by all States/UTs. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs should support States/UTs by providing any required technical and financial assistance 
as well as monitoring regularly the implementation of the recommendations given in the 
Security Audit Report. 
(3.14.7)  
Constitution of Maritime Boards 
The Committee is not satisfied with the progress in  this regard and recommends that the 
institutional arrangements of setting up of state m aritime boards should be put in place at the 
earliest. In this regard State governments may be p ersuaded to take immediate appropriate 
action and there should be no further delay in this regard. 
       (3.15.4)   
Recruitment process under Sagar Prahari Bal 
  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must actively monitor the 
status of recruitment of personnel in different Sta tes/UTs on a continual basis and should help 
them, whenever necessary, to overcome any road bloc ks. The Ministry should also take an early 
decision on the proposed raising of Marine India Reserve Battalions (MIRB).   
(3.16.4)  
Issues related to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries 
Issuance of Biometric ID Cards to Fishermen  
 
The Committee is constrained to express its displea sure over the slow progress of 
production and distribution of bio-metric ID Cards of fishermen as only about two third target 
has been achieved so far. The Committee desires that Government should fix a strict time-line to 
complete production and distribution of bio-metric I-Cards to fishermen. The Ministry may 
pursue this issue regularly with the consortium of Central Public Sector Units (CPSUs) and 
States/UTs for completion of the process within a definite time frame. 
(3.17.3) 
Deliberate Oil Spills by Insurgents 
 
The Committee desires that formulation of scheme of  combating oil spills may be done at 
the earliest. 
(4.4.2)  
Incentives to People Joining Marine Police  
The Committee notes the reply and desires that ther e should be uniformity in the 
incentives among the state marine police personnel.  Early action may be taken after receiving 
the plans from the states.  
(4.11.2) 
General Issue  
The Committee recommends that this issue may be res olved at the earliest so that lives 
and livelihood of fishermen may not be endangered. The Committee further recommends that 

52 
 
the Ministry must take stringent measures to stop i llegal activities such as smuggling and 
narcotics in India's coastal region. 
       (4.14.2)  
***** 
 