117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 83rd REPORT
OF THE COMMITTEE PERTAINING TO THE PERSONNEL POLICY OF CISF
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 28 NOVEMBER, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 28 NOVEMBER 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/ AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T
1.                  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         
2.                  INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                               
3.                  REPORT                                                                                                                
                *RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AT A GLANCE
                *RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
ANNEXURE 
Letters written by the then Chairman of the Committee to the then Home Minister dated December 4, 2000 and March
8, 2001.
Letter of the then Home Minister to the then Chairman of the Committee dated 26 March 2001.
Letter by the then Home Minister to the then Chairman of the Committee dated 8 March 2002.
Letter from the Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject seeking extension of time for furnishing its Comments dated 20
February 2003.
Letter from the then Home Secretary addressed to the then Chairman, Committee on Home Affairs furnishing the
comments of the Ministry in brief.
Updated replies of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject dated 6 August 2004.
Communication of the Ministry of Home Affairs conveying the rejection by DoP&T of ad-hoc arrangements proposed 
by Ministry of Home Affairs dated 27 May, 2005.
*To be appended at printing stage
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
            Shri Pranab Mukherjee-   Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
 .          Smt. Basanti Sarma
            Shri Kapil Sibal
            Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
           Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
            Shri Kalraj Mishra
           Dr. L.M. Singhvi

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
           Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
 .          Shri K.M, Saifullah
            Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
           Shri Janeshwar Mishra
            Shri Drupad Borgohain
            Shri C.M. Ibrahim
            Shri Swaraj Kaushal
            Shri Ram Jethmalani
            Shri Lalu Prasad
.        Shri Motilal Vora
 
LOK SABHA
    Shri Rajen Gohain
    Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
    Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
    Shri Anadi Sahu
    Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
    Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
    Shri Vinay Katiyar
    Shri Manabendra Shah
    Sardar Buta Singh
    Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
    Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
    Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
   Shri K. Karunakaran
   Begum Noor Bano
   Shri M.O.H. Farooq
   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   Shri Subodh Ray
   Shri B.V.N. Reddy
   Shri Ramji Lal Suman
   Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
   Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
________________________________________________________________________
* Ceased to be member w.e.f. 9 April 2002 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya  Sabha.§Nominated w.e.f. 22 April
2002.
(i)   Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
   Shri Adhi Sankar
   Shri P.H. Pandian
   Dr. Bikram Sarkar
   Shri Holkhomang Haokip
   Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
   Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
a
  46.     Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
b  47.     Shri E. Ponnuswamy
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 1 January 2003)
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri Kapil Sibal
3.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4.         Shri Motilal Vora
5.         Smt. Ambika Soni

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
6.         Shri B.P. Singhal
7.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
8.         Dr. V. Maitreyan
9.         Shri Lalu Prasad
10.       Shri Drupad Borgohain
11.       Shri Ram Jethmalani
12.       *
Shri Pramod Mahajan
13.       §Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
14.       ¨Dr. L.M. Singhvi
15.       Vacant
LOK SABHA
16.       Shri Adhi Sankar
17.       Begum Noor Bano
18.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
19.       Adv. Uttamrao  Dhikale
20.       Shri M.O.H. Farook
21.       Shri Rajen Gohain
22.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
23.       Shri K. Karunakaran
24.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
25.       Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
26.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
27.       Shri P.H. Pandian
28.       Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
29.       Shri Subodh Roy
30.       Shri Anadi Sahu
31.       Shri P.A. Sangma
32.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
33.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
34.       Shri Manabendra Shah
35.       Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
36.       Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
37.       Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
38.       Sardar Buta Singh
39.       Shri  Ramjilal Suman
40.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
41.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
42.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
43.       Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
44.       j
Dr. (Smt.) Sudha Yadav
45.       ¦Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1.         Smt. Sushma Swaraj     -Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri V. Narayanasamy
3.         Shri Rishang Keishing
4.         Shri R.K. Dhawan
5.         Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6.         Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
7.         Shri N. Jothi
8.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
9.         Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10.      *Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
                       
           LOK SABHA
11.       Shri L.K. Advani
12.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
13.       Shri C.K. Chandrappan
14.       Shri Biren Singh Engti
15.       Shri Rahul Gandhi
16.       Shri Tapir Gao
17.       Shri T.K. Hamza
18.       Shri Naveen Jindal
19.       Shri Ajit Jogi
20.       Shri Tek Lal Mahato
21.       Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
22.       Shri Sachin Pilot
23.       Shri Ashok Pradhan
24.       Prof. M. Ramadass
25.       Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
26.       Shri Bajuban Riyan
27.       Dr. H.T. Sangliana
28.       Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30.       Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
__________________________________
* Nominated w.e.f.  5
th September 2004 vice Shri Manoj Bhattacharya.   Expired on 14th February 2005.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 5 August 2005)
 
1.         Smt. Sushma Swaraj-Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri V. Narayanasamy
3.         Shri Rishang Keishing
4.         Shri R.K. Dhawan
5.         Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6.         Shri N. Jothi
7.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
8.         Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9.         *
Shri Sitaram Yechury
10.       Vacant
                       
           LOK SABHA
11.       Shri L.K. Advani
12.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
13.       Shri C.K. Chandrappan
14.       Shri Biren Singh Engti
15.       Shri Rahul Gandhi
16.       Shri Tapir Gao
17.       Shri T.K. Hamza
18.       Shri Naveen Jindal
19.       Shri Ajit Jogi

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
20.       Shri Tek Lal Mahato
21.       Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
22.       Shri Sachin Pilot
23.       Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
24.       Prof. M. Ramadass
25.       Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
26.       Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27.       Dr. H.T. Sangliana
28.       Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30.       Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Seventeenth
Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its 83
rd Report
pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF.
2.         The Eighty-third Report of the Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented /laid to/in Rajya Sabha/Lok
Sabha on 19 December 2001.
3.0       Action Taken Reports on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty- third
Report were first received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on 18 March 2002 which were followed by updated
Action Taken Replies dated 6 September 2004.
3.1       The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Home Secretary and Secretary Personnel on the issues arising out
of the ATRs in its meetings held on 12 November 2002 and 25 February 2005.
3.2       The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 18 October 2005 and adopted the same.
4          For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 
                                                                                                                     SUSHMA SWARAJ
NEW DELHI;
                                                                                                  Chairperson
October  18, 2005.                                                                                    Committee on Home Affairs
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
Report
The subject matter of grievances of the Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
has been engaging the attention of the Committee on Home Affairs since 1999.  The Committee first took up the issue
in its Fifty Fourth Report (1999-2000) on Demands for Grants of Ministry of Home Affairs and followed it up in Fifty
Ninth Report (2000-2001) on Demands for Grants. In its first chapter of Eighty-third Report (2001) the Committee had
extensively dealt with the problem.
1.1       The genesis of the grievances of CISF Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ officers may be traced to the year 1987 when
the post of Assistant Commandant of CISF was accorded Group ‘A’ status and selection procedure for that post was
made through Civil Services Examination (CSE) conducted by Union Public Service Commission (UPSC).  The
Assistant Commandants selected through CSE of UPSC were neither allowed to take subsequent CSE for improvement
of their career (IFS, IAS, IPS), nor were they given the benefits of organized Group ‘A’ service in their organization
(CISF) leading to acute stagnation creating resultant resentment and demoralization amongst them.  The magnitude of
the sufferings of the direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF was accentuated by the application of ROTA-QUOTA1

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
system.  The ROTA-QUOTA system followed in CISF is heavily stacked against the direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers
whose career progression is doomed right from the moment they joined  the CISF as a result of this system.  The 150
odd officers recruited between 1987-1996 through Civil Services Examination were denied the opportunity to better
their performance in the same examination, which was available to their counterparts (ACs) in CRPF, BSF & ITBP
presumably on the ground that the former were recruited through CSE and hence treated at par with their batchmates
who were allocated one of the Group ‘A’ Civil Services.  Considering the pathetic condition with regard to the career
prospects of direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF, the Committee in its Fifty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(1999-2000) of Ministry of Home Affairs, dwelt at length on the subject with a view to persuade the Ministry to find
some lasting solution to the problems of these officers.  Accordingly, it recommended for the reallocation of direct
recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF to Indian Police Service (IPS) or to any other Group ‘A’ Service as no other solution
was going to make any perceptible change to their position because irreparable damage had already been done to them
by the ROTA-QUOTA system.
1.2       In response to the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Fifty-fourth Report, the
Ministry of Home Affairs in its Action Taken Replies thereon, intimated that a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Shri Nikhil Kumar, Special Secretary (ISP) in the Ministry had been constituted to examine the service grievances of
those Officers.  Further action in the matter was proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Committee.
2.         The Nikhil Kumar Committee which was constituted pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-fourth Report, made the following recommendations relating to the career prospects of the Group
‘A’ Officers of the CISF:
(i)         The promotion quota for cadre officers in the rank of Commandant (both Junior and Sr. Commandants) may be
increased to eighty per cent while the deputation quota for the IPS officers be restricted to twenty per cent;
Promotion quota for cadre officers of CISF at the rank of DIG may be increased to sixty per cent and the quota for IPS
officers may be reduced to forty per cent.  The quota at the level of IG may be retained at 33.3 per cent;
Rules relating to maintenance of seniority may be amended.  All directly recruited officers of one batch should be
placed in a bunch, above the promotee officers of the same year.  The year of declaration of result of the relevant Civil
Services Examination should be taken as the seniority year for the directly recruited officers as is done in case of All
India Services;
Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF may be nominated for deputation to other forces and organizations so that the prevailing
stagnation is removed; and
It did not find it feasible to reallocate the directly recruited Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF to IPS and other Group ‘A’
Services.
2.1       The Ministry expressed its inability to abolish the ROTA-QUOTA system and felt that even if that system were
to be abolished, it could only be done prospectively which was not going to benefit the aggrieved officers. No
substantial improvement in the service conditions could be noticed with the limited implementation of some of the
recommendations of the Nikhil Kumar Committee by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2.2       The Committee again considered the grievances of those officers during the examination of Demands for Grants
(2000-01) of Ministry of Home Affairs and reiterated, in its Fifty-ninth Report, its earlier recommendation as contained
in its Fifty-fourth Report that direct recruit Group ‘A’ officers of CISF who had been recruited through Civil Services
Examination should be reallocated to IPS or to any other Group ‘A’ Civil Service to redress their grievances.
2.3       In the meantime a delegation of the direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF met the then Home Minister twice
- on 24 April and 24 July 2000 regarding redressal of their grievances. 
2.4       The Ministry of Home Affairs in its ATR on Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee stated that by 31 December
2000 a final decision on the issues relating to grievances of these officers would be taken.  The Ministry sought two
subsequent extensions for submission of final reply in the matter but could not arrive at the final decision on the issue. 
While seeking second extension the Ministry informed that a Departmental Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri
A. K. Bhandari, Special Secretary (JKA) had been constituted to look into the grievances of Group ‘A’ officers of the
CISF & other CPMFs and to examine the recruitment patterns in the past and suggest measures to remove any future
bottlenecks in the promotions of the cadre officers of the Para-Military Forces;
2.5       The Bhandari Committee, inter alia, recommended cadre review of the CPMFs; grant of Junior Administrative
Grade/Senior Administrative Grade as time scales; adoption of uniform system of seniority in all the CPMFs; doing
away with Rota-quota system; relaxation in residency period for promotions; deputation of those officers in larger
number to Intelligence Bureau (IB), Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), State Police Forces, PSUs, etc.
2.6       The Ministry had stated that in pursuance of the recommendations of the Bhandari Committee following actions
had been taken by the Government:

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
Recruitment of Asstt. Commandants in CISF had been delinked from CSE from 2003 onwards in order to remove the
confusion created due to their recruitment through the Civil Services Examination.
After consulting Ministry of Law, draft Seniority Rules have been referred to DOP&T in order to remove the
contentious issue of Rota-Quota system of fixation of seniority.
Senior Time Scale (Rs.10,000-15,200) had been granted to Asstt. Commandants of CPFs on completion of 4 years
service in the grade.
For promotion to various ranks, residency period prescribed in Recruitment Rules had been reduced upto one year in
relaxation of the prescribed norms.
Deputation policy had been relaxed and liberalized for direct recruit officers.  Their names were being forwarded for
deputation to other Departments/PSUs even when they had not completed the prescribed 10 years of service in the
Force.
2.7       The Committee has however noted that none of the recommendations have been fully implemented till date. In
reality, none of those measures of the Government has brought in any substantial improvement in the career prospects of
direct recruit Group 'A' Officers of CISF recruited between 1987-1996 through CSE.
3.         Keeping in view the cavalier manner in which the Ministry of Home Affairs had handled the whole issue, as also
its repeated attempts to furnish wrong information thereby misleading the Committee, the then Chairman of the
Committee wrote to the then Home Minister on December 4, 2000 (Annexure-I) and the latter responded to the issues
raised (Annexure-II). The then Home Minister had assured (Annexure-III) the then Chairman of the Committee on
Home Affairs that the Bhandari Committee recommendations would be finally implemented within next six months
which would bring desired benefits to the direct recruit Group 'A' Officers.
3.1       In view of the continued dithering and adoption of dilatory tactics on the part of Ministry of Home Affairs, the
Committee decided to present a separate report on the issue covering all aspects and accordingly came out with its
Eighty-third Report (Chapter-I). In that Report, the Committee observed that direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF
should not be made to pay for the wrongs of the decision makers who failed to foresee the negative fallout of their
dispensation and reiterated its earlier recommendation as contained in its Fifty-fourth and Fifty-ninth Reports that those
officers be reallocated to IPS or any other Group ‘A’ Civil Service. 
3.2       Further, as a temporary measure before arriving at a final decision on the issue, the Committee recommended
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should adopt a liberal deputation policy vis-à-vis those officers so that some interim
relief was provided to them till a lasting solution was found to their grievances.  The Committee also sought a quarterly
report on this issue so as to know the number of officers actually sponsored and released for deputation.
3.3       The Eighty-third Report was presented to both Houses of Parliament on 19 December 2001.  The ATR on the
recommendations contained in the Report were received in the Secretariat from the Ministry on 18 March 2002. 
4.0       The oral evidence of the Home Secretary on the issues arising out of the ATRs furnished by the Ministry was
heard in the meeting of the Committee held on 12 November 2002.  The Home Secretary in that meeting had assured
that the issue would be settled one way or the other within three months.  The deadline set by the Home Secretary
expired on 11 February 2003. 
4.1       In the meantime, the Ministry was requested to furnish replies/comments on (i)   questionnaire prepared by the
Secretariat based on points/issues arising out of the ATRs; and (ii) statement containing the remarks of the Secretariat
on the ATRs, as approved by the Committee, by 22 November 2002.   These remarks, inter alia, contained suggestions
for reallocation of direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF either to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) by
restructuring it or to an organised vigilance set up or to the security set up of Indian Embassies. The Ministry of Home
Affairs through their communication dated 27 November 2002 requested for an extension of fifteen days to furnish the
requisite replies.   However, nothing was heard from the Ministry and after a lapse of nearly three months, the Ministry
sent a communication dated 20 February 2003 (Annexure-IV) stating that the comments of the Ministry on the remarks
of the Secretariat were being finalized in consultation with Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT) and the CISF,
which would be sent by 30 June 2003.
4.2       Finally, the replies/comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs were submitted, in summary form, by the then
Home Secretary vide his D.O. letter No.45019/6/2002/Pers.(Vol.II) dated 20 June 2003 addressed to the then Chairman,
Committee on Home Affairs (Annexure-V) and in detailed form, by the Ministry vide its letter No.45019/6/2002 Pers.
(Vol.II) on 20 June, 2003.  The Ministry rejected almost all the recommendations/suggestions of the Committee. 
However, the letter from the Home Secretary addressed to the Chairman, Committee on Home Affairs stated that the
suggestion of reallocation of these Officers to CBI, CVC or Foreign Missions abroad was not acceptable to the
concerned organizations and Ministry of Home Affairs as the organizational structure was decided on the basis of its
requirement; hence the solution seemed to lie within the CISF only.  He further assured the Committee that a

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
restructuring proposal had, therefore, been envisaged suggesting creation of a number of higher-level posts which would
provide more avenues of promotion at higher levels to the Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF.
5.         Due to dissolution of the Thirteenth  Lok Sabha on 6 February 2004, the Committee’s tenure came to an end
and, therefore, it could not consider the subject further.        
6.         However, on the eve of the constitution of the new Committee, the Committee Secretariat requested the Ministry
on10 June 2004 to furnish the updated replies/comments on the observation of this Secretariat on the ATRs by 30 June
2004 so as to enable it to place the same before the newly constituted Committee.
7.0       The Ministry, however, sought further extension of three months upto 30 September 2004, which was not
acceded to by the Secretariat and the Ministry was directed by the new Committee to furnish the same positively by 16
August 2004.
7.1         The Ministry vide letter No.45019/6/2002-Pers.1 (Vol.II) dated 6 September 2004 furnished the updated
version of the replies.         (Annexure-VI).  Actually the latest ATR furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs was
reiteration of its earlier replies by not accepting the recommendation of the Committee for reallocation to  IPS or any
other Group ‘A’ Civil Service to the aggrieved CISF Group A Officer directly recruited through CSE.
7.2       In the final analysis, it may be observed that despite persistent efforts made by the Committee on Home Affairs
to impress upon the Ministry of Home Affairs the need to find a just and lasting solution to the grievances of direct
recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF, things remain more or less the same as they were when the Committee first took up
this issue six years ago.  Though the Ministry of Home Affairs has claimed to have taken several steps to improve the
service conditions of these officers, the avowed steps are more cosmetic in nature than of any substance.  In view of the
steps taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Committee posed the following questions to the Ministry of Home
Affairs and Department of Personnel and Training:
Whether sufficient avenues have been created within CISF to ensure that a direct recruit officer reaches Senior
Administrative Grade (SAG)/IG level after rendering 20-24 years of service.  If not, what is the utility of having a cadre
review or restructuring?
How the proposed cadre restructuring would benefit the direct recruit Group 'A' officers of CISF recruited between
1987-1996?
The benefit of financial upgradation has been given only at the Senior Time Scale level after completion of four years in
service.  If the Ministry considers ‘financial upgradation’ as the second best alternative to functional promotion then
why it does not extend the same benefit to the next higher levels i.e. JAG, SAG, etc. also?
Whether the steps taken so far by the Ministry are adequate enough to address the problems of these officers in their
entirety?  If not, how does it propose to address the long pending grievances of these officers with a view to find lasting
solutions to them?
Whether the Ministry has implemented the recommendations of Bhandari Committee in toto?  If not, reasons thereof.
If the Ministry of Home Affairs is adopting a liberal deputation policy vis-à-vis direct recruit officers then why is it so
that only a small number of officers have been allowed to go on deputation?
The Ministry has reversed the earlier recruitment policy of Asstt. Commandants of CISF and since 2003 their
recruitment has been combined with the CPO Examination conducted by UPSC.  Whether the Ministry has
contemplated any special dispensation for the Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ Officers, recruited between 1987-1996 through
CSE which is now a moribund cadre?
The Ministry has turned down the repeated recommendation of the Committee for reallocation of Direct Recruit
Officers to IPS or another Group ‘A’ Service, on the ground inter alia that such a step might lead to number of such
demands from other services.  However, the fact is that no other civil service has become a dead cadre like the Group
‘A’ Officers of CISF.  Whether the Ministry would reconsider its decision to ameliorate the suffering of the direct
recruit officers?
7.3       The Ministry, while furnishing its replies to the questions posed by the Committee, has stated that:
whereas in 1969, the strength of CISF was 3,129 only, which  increased to 94,347 at present.  Despite this increase in
the strength of the Force, no cadre review or restructuring was undertaken at HQ level.  Cadre review thus became
necessary due to enlarged role and increased manpower of the Force at lower levels.  However, creation of higher level
posts merely to grant functional promotions to officers will adversely affect the command and control structure of the
Force and is not in the interests of the organization.
 the orders on cadre restructuring have been issued on 13.12.04, creating 80 temporary Group ‘A’ posts and 175
temporary posts as supporting staff.  After the restructuring, 24, 60, 31, 19 and 4 Direct Recruit Group A Officers of
1983-1996 batches are expected to get the ranks of IG, DIG, ADIG, Sr. Commandants and Commandants, respectively.
5 Direct Recruit ACs who joined CISF service in 1996 and 2 ACs joining in 1997 have been regularly promoted as DCs

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
(Rs. 10000-15200), whereas, IPS officers of 1996 batch have become eligible for JAG scale (Rs.12000-16500) from
1.1.2005.
in case of All India Service Officers, including IPS Officers, service is counted from first January of the batch year for
the purpose of grant of promotion, whereas in the case of CISF officers, service is counted from the date of their joining.
while financial up-gradation may not be a substitute of functional promotion, this is nevertheless the second best
alternative given the organizational constraints.  Proposal to grant financial up-gradation in DC’s pay-scale has already
been agreed to and implemented in all the CPFs.
the proposal for similar financial up-gradations to JAG/SAG levels was considered by MHA in consultation with
DOP&T which did not agree to it as promotions to JAG level and above are supposed to be earned.  DOP&T however
suggested to take it up again when revised strengths at various levels in all the CPFs is known after their restructuring.
further action is being taken to fill up the additional Group A posts sanctioned after restructuring of the Force.  This will
provide them more avenues of promotion.
from the date of oral evidence of Home Secretary before the Committee on 10.4.2001, the Government have been
liberally nominating CISF Group A officers for deputation to other organizations. At present there are eight direct
recruit group A officers (CSE 1987-96) on deputation. Even after their selection on deputation, some officers (42)
refused to go on deputation to organizations like State Police, IB, SPG & NSG.  On selection, some of these officers put
down certain conditions for their deputation to these organizations which were not acceptable to the latter.  Hence, they
could not join on deputation even after being selected.
the demand of the CISF Group A Officers is that seniority principles as are applicable to the All India Services, where
direct recruits of a particular batch/recruitment year are placed en-bloc senior to the promotee officers who are promoted
in that recruitment year against the promotion quota, should be adopted in their case.  This has been considered by
MHA in consultation with the DOP&T, but has not been agreed to as the CPFs, including CISF, are not comparable
with the All India Services,  As in the case of other central government employees and services, the general principles
of seniority as per the rota-quota system should be applied by all the other services/posts, including those in CISF.
CISF is a need based Force and its structure is more horizontal than being a typically vertical pyramid.  Rota quota
system of seniority as applied to all posts in the CISF is not a stumbling block in the career prospects of its officers. 
However, the abolition of Rota-quota system if & when effected cannot be applied retrospectively to the benefit of
already recruited Group A direct officers.
due to recruitment of Assistant Commandants through a separate examination by the UPSC, the existing direct recruit
officers of CISF are not affected.  However, MHA have been taking all possible steps to improve their career prospects
within the organizational constraints.  In the recent restructuring of the Force, a number of higher posts upto IG level
have been created, which will further improve their promotional prospects.
After the restructuring of the CISF, a number of higher level posts of DC, Commandant/Sr. Commandant, ADIG, DIG
and IG have been created which will further improve their promotional prospects.  Career-wise, officers of CISF are not
in disadvantageous position when compared with similarly placed officers of the Central Police Forces under MHA.
8.0       The Committee was not satisfied with the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry and updated replies
sent to the Committee subsequently. The Committee has repeatedly articulated its concern over the fact that promotion
prospects for those officers had been completely blocked and they did not get parity either with other Group ‘A’ Civil
Services or with other Central Para-Military Forces which ought to have been done.  The impugned rules of the Civil
Services Examination which barred the direct recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF from joining an All India Service or
availing further chances in the examination to improve their ranking on the ground that all Group ‘A’ Services were at
par, were not enforced in case of other services including the CPMFs personnel.
8.1       During the evidence of the  Home Secretary before the Committee on 25 February 2005, it was  conveyed to him
that the grievances of Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF had been engaging the attention of the Standing
Committee for the past six years during which successive Committees had examined the matter in detail and presented
their Reports to Parliament containing views, observations and recommendations on the subject.  It was also stated that
each predecessor Committee had come to the conclusion that injustice had been done to the Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ of
CISF officers of 1987-1996 batches and had strongly recommended that steps ought to be taken and action initiated to
redress the grievances of those officers.  The Committee was not satisfied with the Action Taken Replies furnished by
the Ministry and updated replies sent to the Committee subsequently.  The Members felt that the Committee had
repeatedly articulated its concern over the fact that promotion prospects for those officers had been completely blocked
and they did not get parity either with other Group ‘A’ Civil Services or with other Central Para-military Forces which
ought to have been done.  It was observed that the impugned rules of the Civil Services Examination which barred the
Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF from joining an All India Service or availing further chances in the

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
examination to improve their ranking on the ground that all Group ‘A’ Services were at par, were not enforced in case
of other services including the CPMFs personnel.
8.2       The Home Secretary responded to the observations of the Committee and stated that he did get the feeling that
perhaps the Home Ministry had not been able to meet the expectations of the Committee in the matter.  The Home
Secretary inter alia highlighted what had been done by the Ministry in the meantime.  He made a distinction between an
organized civil service and a uniformed police force.  He then stated that as the CISF was a uniformed police force,
there was an inbuilt resistance in its very structure towards creating too many posts at the higher level which was also
true for the other CPMFs and the Armed Forces.  The Home Secretary stated that it was not in order to draw
comparisons between Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF and the IPS, as the structure of the latter was different. 
He informed the Committee that the Ministry had tried with the lateral shifting of those personnel of CISF to other
forces or to other organizations but the same did not succeed.  The number of persons who had been adjusted in that
manner had not been enough to make any major difference to the promotion prospects of the CISF which was the
concern of the Committee.  So the problem before the Ministry was how to redress their grievances within the
constraints.  In the same genre he admitted that although certain decisions had been taken on the basis of the
recommendations of the Nikhil Kumar Committee and Bhandari Committee, they did not make any substantial
difference in the career prospects of the CISF Officers.  Therefore, the Ministry fell back on the age-old methodology of
improving the service conditions by creating higher level posts.  He added that because of the cadre restructuring of the
CISF, most of the Direct Recruit personnel of CISF, recruited between 1987-96 would have a better chance to reach up
to the level of IG.
8.3       Thereupon it was pointed out that the most important recommendation of the Nikhil Kumar and the Bhandari
Committees was the abolition of rota-quota system which Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions had
not agreed.  In this context, the reasons for rejecting the said recommendation was enquired from the Secretary
(Personnel).  
8.4       Secretary (Personnel) replied that the CISF had not yet been constituted as a Group ‘A’ Service of the
Government of India and the demand of the Direct Recruit officers that they should be treated at par with All India
Services was untenable.  As regards the recommendation for abolition of rota-quota system, Secretary (Personnel) stated
that it was structurally unacceptable at that moment.  Besides, there would be objections from the promotee officers
because the rota-quota system was giving them a position which a Direct Recruit wants and its abolition would be quite
harmful to the interests of the promotees themselves.  Secretary (Personnel) felt that it was a matter which the Home
Ministry would have to deliberate within themselves and as far as the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions was concerned, its view was quite clear that the rota-quota system would be inapplicable only when the CISF
was constituted as a Group ‘A” service which at that moment it was not.
8.5       Thereupon, it was observed that while debarring the candidates, who got selected as Assistant Commandants in
CISF through Civil Services Examination, from taking further chances for improving their ranks, the Ministry
somewhere sought to create an impression that the post of Assistant Commandant in CISF was a Group ‘A’ Service and
as all Group ‘A’ Services were at par. As it was an extraordinary situation, the whole Committee was concerned over it
and was very keen to find a just and lasting solution to the satisfaction of all concerned.  The Committee was once again
convinced that injustice had been done to the 150 and odd Assistant Commandants recruited through the Civil Services
Examinations between 1987-96.
8.6       While responding to the statement of the Home Secretary that cadre restructuring would bring lot of
improvement in their career prospects, the Committee felt that it would benefit only 0.2 per cent of the affected officers
and that their share of benefit out of the cadre restructuring would only be peanuts.  The Committee observed that unless
and until the Government gets those officers absorbed in other services/organizations, their problem would not be
solved, as there was no possibility of redressal of their grievance within the CISF.  In that context it was stated that
when a large number of vacancies were available in various organizations, the Ministry should try to adjust the affected
officers against those posts.  Alternatively, the Ministry could permanently earmark the required number of posts for
those officers to be filled up by deputation.  In short the Committee urged upon the Government to come out with some
solution so that justice could be done to the aggrieved officers of the 1987-96 batches. It was also suggested to the
Ministry to stop inducting officers on deputation into CISF so that those posts could be offered to the Direct Recruit
Assistant Commandants.
8.7       Thereafter DG, CISF apprised the Committee of the status of implementation of recommendations of the Nikhil
Kumar Committee and Bhandari Committee Reports and the perceived resultant benefit to the Direct Recruit Group ‘A’
officers of CISF.  He inter alia stated that twenty four officers would reach upto the rank of IG and fifty eight officers
could go upto the rank of DIG.  He compared CISF officers’ career prospects with three best and three worst Group ‘A’

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
Service and stated that it was true that the career prospects of the Direct Recruit CISF officers was slightly less than that
of the three best Group ‘A’ Services whereas in relation to the three worst Group ‘A’ Services, the CISF officers’ career
prospects were better.
8.8       Thereupon, the Committee took exception to the comparison made by DG, CISF of the Direct Recruit officers of
CISF with certain Group ‘A’ Civil Services.  According to him such a comparison was unfair because a CISF personnel
was ready to sacrifice his life to protect the country’s important installations and VIPs.  Moreover, such a comparison
was also unfair in the sense that the disability that was imposed upon the Direct Recruit CISF officers in the Civil
Services Examination, was not imposed on the Group ‘A’ Civil Services with whom the DG, CISF had sought to
compare the Group ‘A’ Assistant Commandants of CISF.
8.9       Thereafter, the Committee clarified to the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the CISF that the
Committee was concerned about the problems being faced by the 1987-96 batches Direct Recruit Assistant
Commandants of CISF and was deliberating as to how a solution could be found to their problems.  At this stage the
Home Secretary clarified that the Ministry had looked at every possibility and had sought to find a way out of the
impasse but acknowledged that it still did not meet the total requirement of the situation.  In that context Home
Secretary stated that if the Ministry changed a particular rule in favour of CISF Direct Recruits, then that rule would
affect others and there lied the problem of the Ministry. It was observed that though the Ministry, by delinking the
recruitment of Assistant Commandants in CISF from the Civil Services Examination and linking it with the CPOs
Examination conducted by UPSC, had set right the problem for future, the fate of 150 plus officers still hanged in the
balance. The Home Secretary stated that he would not promise that the entire problem could be solved, but the Ministry
would try and see if some ad hoc arrangement could be made only to take care of those officers without changing the
normal rules which could have an impact on other services.  The Committee appreciated the gesture of Home Secretary
and urged upon him that a report on the action taken/proposed to be taken in the light of his observations should be sent
to its Secretariat positively by 31
st March, 2005.
9.0       The Ministry of Home Affairs in its latest communication No. 45018/1/2005-Pers.-1 dated 27th May, 2005
(Annexure-VII) has submitted a statement wherein ad-hoc arrangements proposed by CISF and Ministry of Home
Affairs to take care of the grievances of Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ Officers of CISF, have been rejected by the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) on one ground or the other.  It
may be pertinent to point out that it is not known whether the Home Ministry while formulating the ad hoc proposals
consulted the DoP&T or not.  If prior consultations took place with DoP&T, what was their stand on the proposals?  If
prior consultations did not take place then how could the Ministry of Home Affairs make formulations unilaterally
which have now been outrightly rejected by DoP&T?   Another aspect which needs to be highlighted here is that from
time to time the Committee has made suggestions/recommendations which have been summarily turned down by the
Home Ministry.  At times the Home Ministry has formulated proposals which have been rejected by DoP&T.  This time
again the DoP&T has not agreed to the ad hoc arrangements proposed by the Ministry of Home Affairs.  In these series
of rejections of recommendations/suggestions/proposals, the line of argument of Ministry of Home Affairs and DoP&T
have been more or less the same.  In the latest instance of turning down the proposals, the same trend has manifested
once again.  The present case epitomises the indifferent attitude of the Ministry of Home Affairs and DoP&T towards
the recommendations of the Committee and towards finding a solution to the problems of Direct Recruit Assistant
Commandants of CISF.  The entire episode clearly establishes the fact that neither Ministry of Home Affairs nor
DoP&T is  genuinely interested in finding a solution to the grievances of the affected batches of Assistant
Commandants in CISF, even though they are adhoc in nature, applicable only to the 1987-96 batches of Direct Recruit
Assistant Commandants of CISF.   This is further manifested by the communication of Ministry of Home Affairs dated
27 May 2005 forwarding the comments of the DoP&T on the ad hoc arrangements proposed by the former.  It is
interesting to note that the Ministry of Home Affairs has simply forwarded the response of DoP&T like a post office
without offering its comments on the subject on which the Committee has been concerned since 1999 and produced no
fewer than three reports.
9.1       The measures suggested by MHA, though did not offer a comprehensive solution to the problems but were
definitely a step in the right direction. Abolition of Rota-Quota System for 1987 to 1996 batches and consequent
retrospective revision of seniority would have given these direct CISF officers some respite within the organisation. 
9.2       It is thus evident that the DoP&T has been rejecting all the proposals mooted by the Parliamentary Committee
including those made by the Home Ministry citing antiquated rules. The DoP&T has completely overlooked the fact that
the whole problem of Direct Recruit Officers of CISF is Government’s own creation. The Committee is convinced that
parity, as demanded by the aggrieved officers of CISF, with that of other Group A Services is just and reasonable and

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
that the DoP&T has been seen putting impediments by way of rejecting proposals after proposals made by the
Committee & the Home Ministry.
10.       The Committee expresses its serious concern at the dilatory, dilly-dallying and  lackadaisical approach of both
the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (DoP&T) on finding a lasting
solution to the grievances of Group ‘A’ Direct Recruit Officers of CISF belonging to 1987-96 batches.  The Committee
also notes with anguish the way in which both the Ministries have blatantly ignored its recommendations/observations
contained in its various Reports since 1999, when the issue was first brought before the Committee. The Committee
observes that the latest development has created an impasse.  The Standing Committee of Parliament on Home Affairs
consisting of Members of both the Houses representing various political parties/groups, has been making unanimous
recommendations since 1999 which have been shown the scant regard. This does not augur well for the Committee
system in a parliamentary democracy. The Committee, in the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case,
recommends that the plight of the 150 odd affected Group ‘A’ Direct Recruit Assistant Commandant of CISF may be
placed before the highest authority of the Government i.e. the Union Cabinet for a just and fair solution of the problem
to the satisfaction of the aggrieved officers. 
******
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations /Observations /Conclusions at a Glance
*          The present case epitomises the indifferent attitude of the Ministry of Home Affairs and DoP&T towards the
recommendations of the Committee and towards finding a solution to the problems of Direct Recruit Assistant
Commandants of CISF.  The entire episode clearly establishes the fact that neither Ministry of Home Affairs nor
DoP&T is  genuinely interested in finding a solution to the grievances of the affected batches of Assistant
Commandants in CISF, even though they are adhoc in nature, applicable only to the 1987-96 batches of Direct Recruit
Assistant Commandants of CISF.   This is further manifested by the communication of Ministry of Home Affairs dated
27 May 2005 forwarding the comments of the DoP&T on the ad hoc arrangements proposed by the former.  It is
interesting to note that the Ministry of Home Affairs has simply forwarded the response of DoP&T like a post office
without offering its comments on the subject on which the Committee has been concerned since 1999 and produced no
fewer than three reports.                                                                                                        (Para 9.0)
 
*          It is thus evident that the DoP&T has been rejecting all the proposals mooted by the Parliamentary Committee
including those made by the Home Ministry citing antiquated rules. The DoP&T has completely overlooked the fact that
the whole problem of Direct Recruit Officers of CISF is Government’s own creation. The Committee is convinced that
parity, as demanded by the aggrieved officers of CISF, with that of other Group A Services is just and reasonable and
that the DoP&T has been seen putting impediments by way of rejecting proposals after proposals made by the
Committee & the Home Ministry.                                                         (Para 9.2)
 
*          The Committee expresses its serious concern at the dilatory, dilly-dallying and  lackadaisical approach of both
the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (DoP&T) on finding a lasting
solution to the grievances of Group ‘A’ Direct Recruit Officers of CISF belonging to 1987-96 batches.  The Committee
also notes with anguish the way in which both the Ministries have blatantly ignored its recommendations/observations
contained in its various Reports since 1999, when the issue was first brought before the Committee. The Committee
observes that the latest development has created an impasse.  The Standing Committee of Parliament on Home Affairs
consisting of Members of both the Houses representing various political parties/groups, has been making unanimous
recommendations since 1999 which have been shown the scant regard. This does not augur well for the Committee
system in a parliamentary democracy. The Committee, in the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case,
recommends that the plight of the 150 odd affected Group ‘A’ Direct Recruit Assistant Commandant of CISF may be
placed before the highest authority of the Government i.e. the Union Cabinet for a just and fair solution of the problem
to the satisfaction of the aggrieved officers.                                                                 (Para 10)
 
******
 
 
 
 

117th roport of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/117threport%20.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:43]
 
 
 
 
 
a Nominated  w.e.f. 25 February  2002.
b Nominated w.e.f. 19 April 2002.
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27 February 2003
§ Nominated w.e.f. 5 May 2003
¨ Nominated w.e.f.27 July 2003
 
(iii)
 
j Nominated w.e.f. 26 February 2003
¦ Nominated w.e.f. 7 April , 2003.          
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 25 September 2005 viceShri A. Vijayaraghavan
 
 
1
 Out of 10 vacancies in any given year, first five go to the promotees, sixth and seventh vacancies are allotted to one optee and one ex-army officer, respectively, and
the last three are given to direct recruit officers.