PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
EIGHTY-SECOND REPORT
 
ON
NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON DECEMBER 18, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON DECEMBER 12, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2001/AGRAHAYANA 1923 (SAKA)
 
 
CS (HA)- 155
C O N T E N T S
 
            
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2001)
                                           
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                             
3.         REPORT                                                                                                                    
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT  A GLANCE
                                                               
5.         RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
                  
6.         ANNEXURE                                                                                                                 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2001)
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee-   Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Hiphei
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
7.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8.         Shri K.M, Saifullah
9.         Shri C.M. Ibrahim
f 10.        Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
11.       Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
12.       Shri Drupad Borgohain
13.       Shri Kuldip Nayyar
* 14.        Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
15.       Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
©16.        Shri Pritish Nandy
®17.        Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan
         
   LOK SABHA
18.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
19.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
   ª20.        Shrimati  Nisha Chaudhary
  **21.        Shri Samar Chaudhary
22.       Shri M.O.H. Farook
# 23.        Shri Vijay Goel
24.       Shri Rajen Gohain
25.       Shri  Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
26.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
27.       Shri Arun Kumar
28.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
29.       Shri P.H. Pandian
30.       Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel
31.       Shri Shriniwas Patil
   *** 32.        Shri Jitendra Prasada
33.       Shri Subodh Ray
34.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
35.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
____________________________________________________________________
f     Ceased  to be Member   w.e.f. 1 March, 2001
*     Ceased to be Member w.e.f 14 June 2001 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya Sabha
©    Nominated w.e.f. 3 August 2001.
®    Nominated w.e.f. 20 August 2001.
ª    Expired on 30 January,2001.
**   Expired on  10 September 2001.
#    Ceased to be Member w.e.f 1 September 2001 on being appointed Minister.
*** Expired on 16 January, 2001.
 
 36.Shri Anadi  Sahu
37.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
38.       Shri Manabendra Shah
39.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
^ 40.        Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
41.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
42.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
43.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
f 44.        Dr. S. Venugopal
45.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
46.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
   ¨47.        Shri  Harin Pathak
©48.        Shri E. Ponnuswamy
$ 49.        Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
^   Expired on 27 November, 2001.
f   Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on  Human Resource Development.
¨  Ceased to be Member  w.e.f 15  October, 2001on being appointed as Minister.
©  Nominated w.e.f. 8 March, 2001.
$   Nominated w.e.f. 21 November, 2001.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Eighty-second Report of the
Committee on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998*.
2.         In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill,
1998, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 8 December, 1998 and pending therein, to the Committee on 9 August, 2001
for examination and report.
3.         The Committee considered the Bill in its five sittings held on 13 September, 4, 16 & 30 October and 4
December, 2001.
3.1       The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Special Secretary (North-East), Ministry of Home Affairs on the
Bill in its sitting held on 13 September, 2001.
3.2       In its meetings held on 4 and 16 October, 2001, the Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, North-
Eastern Council, Secretary, Planning Commission, Chief Secretaries of Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim,
Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh and Assam, and representatives of North-East MPs Forum.
3.3       The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on 30 October 2001.
3.4       The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 4 December, 2001 and adopted the same.  It
also decided that the evidence tendered before the Committee may be laid on the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament.
4.         In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background material on the Bill received
from the Ministry of Home Affairs, amendments given notice of by the Home Minister, comments/replies received from
the Ministry of Home Affairs, State Governments and North-East MPs Forum to the queries raised by the Members in
the sittings of the Committee.
5.         For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                    PRANAB MUKHERJEE
December 4, 2001.                                                                                      CHAIRMAN
                                                                                COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
*Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 2, dated 8 December, 1998.
**Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No.39075 dated 13 August, 2001.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
REPORT
 
            The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 (see Annexure-I) seeks to restructure the North-Eastern
Council so as to make it more effective. To achieve this objective, the proposed amendments inter alia seek to provide
for inclusion of Sikkim as one of the members of the Council; discontinuance of Governors as Members of the Council;
nomination of three members by the President; functioning of the Council as a regional planning body and conferring of
such powers as may be delegated to it by the Central Government; formulation of regional plans with priority to
schemes and projects benefiting two or more States; formulation and review of implementation of specific projects and
schemes for Sikkim; and setting up of a Screening Committee to examine projects/schemes to ensure that selected
projects/schemes have a regional character and reflect the needs of the member States of the Council.
 
2.         However, some of the above-mentioned proposals as contained in the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill,
1998, have been reconsidered by the Government. Accordingly, the Government proposes to amend some of the
provisions of the Bill as per the amendments given notice of by the Home Minister (see Annexure-II). These
amendments inter alia seek to restore the membership of the Council to the Governors of the constituent States; provide
for the nomination of the Chairman of the Council by the President; do away with the provision for setting up of the
Screening Committee; and provide that the Council shall meet at least twice a year.
 
3.         As a result of the amendments given notice of by the Home Minister, the final shape of the Bill, in contrast to the
earlier Bill, seeks to maintain status quo ante by restoring the membership of the Council to the Governors of the
constituent States. In addition to this, it provides for nomination of the Chairman of the Council by the President and
holding of the meetings of the Council at least twice a year and does away with the provision of the Screening
Committee.
 
4.         Here it may be pertinent to have a peep into the profile of the North-Eastern Council. The North-Eastern Council
was set up in 1972 under the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971. The Council is an advisory body. It can discuss any
matter in which some or all the States represented in the Council, or the Union and one or more of the States represented
in the Council, have a common interest, and advise the Central Government and the Government of each State
concerned as to the action to be taken on any such matter. The Council’s objectives include, inter alia, balanced
development of the North-Eastern Region. The Council endeavours to achieve this objective by formulating for the
States represented in the Council a unified and coordinated regional plan in regard to matters of common importance.
The Council also reviews, from time to time, the implementation of the projects and schemes included in the regional
plans. In addition to this, the Council has been entrusted with the task of reviewing the measures taken by the States
represented in the Council for the maintenance of security and public order. The North Eastern Council presently
consists of the Governors as well as the Chief Ministers of the seven North-Eastern States. One of the members of the
Council is nominated by the President of India as its Chairman.
 
5.         So far as the genesis of the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 is concerned, it is relevant to refer to
the Background Note received from the Ministry of Home Affairs which states that the North-Eastern States have been
demanding restructuring of the Council so as to make it more effective. There has also been a demand from the
Government of Sikkim for inclusion of that State in the Council. After careful consideration of the matter, the
Government is also of the view that North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 needs to be amended for effective restructuring of
the Council. In this backdrop, the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 came into being. It was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on 8 December, 1998.
 
6.         After its introduction in the Rajya Sabha and while pending therein it was referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on 9 August, 2001 for examination and report.
 
7.         Accordingly, the Committee first took up the consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on 13 September,
2001. It heard the oral evidence of the Special Secretary (NE), Ministry of Home Affairs in the same meeting.
 
7.1       The Special Secretary (NE), Ministry of Home Affairs made an audio-visual presentation on the Bill.  In his
presentation, he gave a brief account of the genesis and the mandate of the North-Eastern Council as provided for in the
North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.  While tracing the genesis of the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998, the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
special Secretary stated that the proposed amendments emerged from the meeting of the Prime Minister with the Chief
Ministers of seven North-Eastern States and Sikkim held on 8 May 1998 at Shillong.  In that meeting, it was decided
that the Council would be reconstituted with the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission as its Chairman and Chief
Ministers of North-Eastern States and Sikkim as its members.  It was also decided to include Sikkim as a member of the
Council.
 
7.2       While touching upon the salient features of the Bill, the Special Secretary stated that the Bill inter alia provided
for (i) inclusion of Sikkim as a member State; (ii) cessation of Governors as members of the Council; (iii) nomination of
three members on the Council by the President; (iv) setting up of a Screening Committee; and (v) identification of the
Council as a regional planning body.
 
7.3       After underlining the salient features of the Bill, the Special Secretary stated that due to efflux of time it was felt
that Governors might be retained as Members of the Council keeping in view the special role envisaged for them in the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  Similarly, the provision for having a Screening Committee was also dropped as it
might lead to delays in the approval of the Council’s schemes/projects. On the other hand, it was considered necessary
to provide for having at least two meetings of the Council in a year.  It was also specifically mentioned that the
Chairman of the Council shall be nominated by the President.
 
7.4       Accordingly, the Special Secretary informed, the amendments were given notice of by the Home Minister and
the Statement of Objects and Reasons was revised (see Annexure-III).
 
8.         While considering the Bill in its meeting held on 13 September 2001, the Committee proposed to invite
Secretary, North-Eastern Council, Secretary, Planning Commission, Chief Secretaries of North-Eastern States and
Sikkim, and MPs of North-Eastern States to hear their views on the Bill.
9.         In its meeting held on 4 October 2001, the Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, North-Eastern
Council, Principal Advisor and Secretary, Planning Commission and Chief Secretaries of Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura, on the Bill.
9.1       The Secretary, North-Eastern Council, in his presentation before the Committee, gave a brief account of the
various aspects and functions of the Council.  He stated that North-Eastern States were administratively and
economically weak which is why the Council was seen as a source of supplementary funding agency to prop up them. 
He informed the Committee that ninety per cent of North Eastern Council schemes were implemented by agencies of
the constituent States and the Central Government.  As such North-Eastern Council had no role to play in the actual
execution of its schemes.  He opined that since no security role had been assigned to the Council till date, it need not be
part of its mandate.  The Council, as a matter of fact, should confine itself to development activities with a focus on
planning.  He felt that in order to be more effective, the organisational structure of the Council needed a review.  He
suggested the opening up of the North-Eastern region for economic investment from outside.  With regard to
membership of Governors in North-Eastern Council, the Secretary stated that they should be retained as members as
their presence brought to bear a more balanced and objective outlook to the discussions in the Council. 
 
9.2       In her presentation before the Committee, the Secretary, Planning Commission stated that originally three
distinct roles were envisaged for the North-Eastern Council. First as a regional planning body; second as a zonal council
for North-East; and third as a coordinating agency for security matters.  However, the focus of the Council had been on
development and planning only.  While elaborating the Council’s role, the Secretary stated that it was required to
formulate regional plans in order to secure a balanced development of the region; prioritise the projects/schemes; and
thereafter make recommendations to the Central Government for consideration of those projects/schemes.  She briefed
the Committee about the financing pattern for the projects/schemes of the Council and stated that the Planning
Commission provided funds for the annual plans of the Council out of the available Central assistance to State plans. 
The allocated funds were then placed at the disposal of the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs.  The
draft annual plans were proposed by the Council to the Ministry of Home Affairs which, in turn, recommended the plans
for approval to the Planning Commission which formally accorded final approval to the plans.  The Secretary informed
that Ninth Plan period witnessed a slight shortfall in the expenditure of the Council.  She further informed that the
Government had taken a decision to reallocate the business relating to the Council from the Ministry of Home Affairs to
a newly created Department for Development of North-Eastern Region.  With the reallocation of business, the Tenth

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
Plan allocations would be reflected in the budget of that Department and not the budget of Ministry of Home Affairs. 
The Secretary stated that it was proposed to intensify review and monitoring of Council’s plans through interaction
between the Planning Commission and the Department for Development of North-Eastern region.
 
9.3       The Chief Secretary, Meghalaya in his presentation before the Committee stated that Chief Ministers of
constituent States should alone be the members of North-Eastern Council as they were the elected representatives of the
people.  There was no reason for restoration of Governors as members of the Council.  With regard to the Chairmanship
of the Council, he stated that it was yet to be decided as to whether the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission or the
Union Home Minister should be the Chairman of the Council.  A new dimension had been added with the appointment
of a separate Minister for Development of North-East who could also be considered for Chairmanship.  He informed the
Committee that the Chief Ministers of North-Eastern States were scheduled to meet at Shillong on 19 October 2001 to
evolve a consensus amongst themselves on all the relevant issues pertaining to the Council. 
 
9.4       While presenting the viewpoints of his Government, the Chief Secretary, Mizoram welcomed the inclusion of
Sikkim in the Council.  He too opposed the proposal to retain the Governors in the Council.  Regarding Chairmanship of
the Council, he was of the view that the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission or the Union Home Minister
should be nominated as the Chairman.  He also welcomed the appointment of a separate Minister for Development of
North-Eastern States.  As regards the nomination of three members to the Council by the President, he opined that they
should be of the same status as Chief Minister of a State.
 
9.5       The Chief Secretary, Tripura also welcomed the inclusion of Sikkim in the Council and endorsed the view that
Governors need not be retained as members of the Council.  He stated that his Government supported the inclusion of
three members in the Council to be nominated by the President.  He suggested that these nominated members should be
from amongst the Union Home Minister, the Finance Minister, the Minister of Development of North-Eastern Region
and the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission.  He expressed the view that only one of the members of the
Council should be the Chairman of the Council.  He opined that if it was to be specified in the Act itself then either the
Union Home Minister or the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission should be nominated as Chairman of the
Council.  He emphasized the need to have State-specific projects for States like Tripura and Mizoram.  He suggested
that fifty per cent of Council’s funds should be earmarked for regional projects while remaining fifty per cent should be
allocated for State-specific projects.  He supported the provision that the Council should meet at least twice a year and
felt that there was no need for increasing its membership.  He felt that the Council should play a more important role in
regional development and the recommendations of the Shukla Commission for building infrastructure projects in the
North-Eastern region should be taken into account while funding NEC plans.
 
9.6       The Chief Secretary, Nagaland also welcomed the inclusion of Sikkim in the Council and urged that the funds
for the Council should correspondingly be increased with the inclusion of Sikkim.  He stated that since the Council had
taken a decision about equitable distribution of funds to its constituent States, there should be corresponding increase in
the funds so that States like Nagaland did not suffer.  With regard to the Chairmanship of the Council, he stated that his
Government’s view was that the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission should be the Chairman.   As regards the
nomination of three members by the President, he was of the view that they should be persons of eminence having
expertise in the matter of socio-economic planning and development.  He welcomed the provision which assigned the
role of a regional planning body to the Council and felt that State-specific schemes should also be considered by the
Council.  He endorsed the provision for holding the meetings of the Council at least twice a year and opposed the
provision for retaining Governors as the members of the Council.
 
9.7       The Chief Secretary, Sikkim expressed gratitude for inclusion of Sikkim in the North-Eastern Council.  He,
however, stressed on the need for proportionate increase in the annual outlay for the Council in the Tenth Plan.  He too
supported State-specific projects and concurred with the observations of his counterparts from North-Eastern States vis-
à-vis other provisions of the Bill. 
 
10.       The Committee, in its meeting held on 16 October 2001, heard the oral evidence of Chief Secretaries of Assam
and Arunachal Pradesh, and the representatives of North-East MPs Forum on the Bill. 
 
10.1     The Chief Secretary, Assam while making a presentation before the Committee on the North-Eastern Council

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
(Amendment) Bill, 1998, stated that his Government was opposed to the idea of retaining the Governors as members of
the Council.  He emphasized that only Chief Ministers of the constituent States should be members of the Council
because giving dual representation to the States had served no purpose in the past.  He further stated that North-Eastern
Council should be divested of its security role.  He was of the view that the Council should play a supportive role to the
Planning Commission and its focus should be on developmental activities.  He, therefore, suggested that the Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission should be the Chairman of the Council.    This apart, Union Finance Minister and
Minister of Development of North-Eastern Region should also be the members of the Council.  While welcoming the
inclusion of Sikkim in the Council, he emphasized the need for a pro rata increase in the annual budget of the Council. 
He also held the view that the Council should take up State-specific schemes keeping in view the physical geography of
the region. 
 
10.2     While making a presentation before the Committee, the Chief Secretary, Arunachal Pradesh stated that the Chief
Ministers alone should remain members of the Council.  He was also of the view that the Council should be divested of
its role in security related matters.  As regards screening of projects/schemes of the Council, he was of the view that it
should be left to the Council to devise its own mechanism for the purpose.  He endorsed the view that the Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission should be the Chairman of the Council.  He suggested that the Union Ministers
directly concerned with the development of North-Eastern region could be nominated to the Council.  He further
suggested that the Council should have flexibility in its role in the regional planning and should have the powers
equivalent to those of a Union Ministry. 
 
10.3     The representatives of North-East MPs Forum made a presentation before the Committee on the Bill.  The
Chairman of the Forum briefly traced the genesis of the North-Eastern Council and stated that though the Council had
been entrusted with both development and security related matters, it assumed the role more of a developmental
instrument.  It hardly took up security related matters.  While touching upon the role of the Governor in the Council, it
stated that by virtue of being members of the Council both Governor and Chief Minister of a State presented similar
views on the matters connected with the State in the meetings of Council.  It was so primarily because both were
dependant on the same State machinery and got same feedback.  Thus, the presence of the Governor in the Council did
not make much of a difference rather it was duplication of representation of the State.  Therefore, he felt that there was
no reason for the Governor to be member of the Council.  Moreover, with the recognition of the Council as a regional
planning body with its focus on development, he felt that Governor had no role to play in developmental activities.  He
emphasized that the Council must function as a regional planning body for all practical purposes.  Its objective should
be to achieve coordinated development of the North-Eastern region in a balanced manner.  He stressed that the Council
must extend its projects/schemes to those areas which were economically backward and neglected.  He was of the view
that the Council should not have any role to play in security related matters.  He suggested that it should have some
teeth vis-à-vis execution of its projects/schemes.  He welcomed the inclusion of Sikkim in the Council. 
 
10.3.1  As regards the representation of MPs in the Council, he stated that the Council should have a representative
character to ensure its accountability to representatives of the people.  He, therefore, recommended that MPs should be
represented in the Council.  With regard to the Chairmanship of the Council, he stated that the Deputy Chairman of the
Planning Commission should be the Chairman of the Council.  He further opined that the Council should have a
Working Chairman headquartered at Shillong because the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission might not have
enough time to devote to the Council’s work.  He suggested that  three members to be nominated by the President
should be of the rank and status of a Cabinet Minister.  While supplementing the points made by the Chairman of the
Forum, a member of the Forum stated that the Council should have an implementing agency under it so that it could
ensure timely execution of its projects/schemes.  He also stressed on the need for taking up employment generation
schemes by the Council.
 
11.       The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998,
in its sitting held on 30 October 2001 as under:
 
Clause 2
 
11.1     Clause 2 of the Bill relates to the inclusion of Sikkim in the North-Eastern Council.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
11.1.1  The Committee adopted clause 2 without any change.
 
Clause 3
 
11.2     Clause 3 seeks to restructure the composition of the Council and provides that the North-Eastern Council shall
consist of the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura and three other members to be nominated by the President. Thus, as against the existing provision, it
seeks to remove the Governors of these States from the Council.
 
11.2.1  The official amendment given notice of by the Home Minister, however, seeks to retain Governors as Members
of the Council and provides that the President shall nominate the Chairman of the Council.
 
11.2.2  With regard to the issue of retaining the Governors as Members of the Council, the Committee was,
overwhelmingly, of the view that only Chief Ministers of the constituent States should continue to be the Members and
the Governors should not be retained in the Council primarily because it meant duality of representation of the
constituent States without any plausible rationale. The Committee, therefore, felt that the earlier amendment which
provided for doing away with the existing provision of Governors as Members of the Council should not be dropped.
 
11.2.3  As regards nomination of three Members to the Council by the President, there were suggestions that it should
be specifically mentioned in the Act, as to who should be eligible for being nominated. It was suggested to the
Committee that these three nominees should be from amongst the Union Home Minister, Finance Minister, Minister for
the Development of North-Eastern Region and Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission. There was another
suggestion that members to be nominated by the President should be persons of eminence having expertise in the matter
of socio-economic planning and development.
 
11.2.3.1 After having considered the pros and cons of these suggestions, the Committee was of the view that nomination
of three members by the President should be left to the discretion of the President. Therefore, it did not deem it
necessary to specify any eligibility criterion for the members to be nominated by the President.
 
11.2.4  In relation to the Chairmanship of the Council, the Committee endorsed the official amendment given notice of
by the Home Minister which provided that the Chairman of the Council was to be nominated by the President. In this
regard, the Committee considered the suggestions that Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission or Union Finance
Minister or Union Home Minister or Union Minister for Development of North-Eastern Region should be nominated as
the ex-officio Chairman of the Council. The Committee was of the considered view that the nomination of the Chairman
of the Council should also be left to the wisdom and discretion of the President.
 
11.2.5  While the Committee overwhelmingly opposed the proposal to retain the Governors as members of the Council,
it, however, strongly felt that there was need for inclusion of MPs of North-Eastern States and Sikkim in the Council so
as to broadbase its representative character. It opined that every member State should be represented at least by one of
its MPs in addition to its Chief Minister. The Committee was of the view that by including MPs in the Council, people’s
aspirations vis-à-vis development of their region could be aired in a more articulate manner. Accordingly, it
unanimously endorsed the view that the seven North-Eastern States and Sikkim should have adequate and equitable
representation of their MPs in the Council. However, it was of the opinion that it should be left to the Government to
devise the mechanism to elect/nominate at least one MP each from the constituent States in consultation with the
Presiding Officers of both Houses of Parliament.
 
11.2.6  Subject to the above, clause 3 and the amendments given notice of by the Home Minister, pertaining to the
nominations of three Members and Chairman  of the Council by the President, were adopted by the Committee.
Clause 4
 
11.3     Clause 4 seeks to identify the Council as a regional planning body for the North-Eastern Region. It also provides
that the Council shall give priority to schemes and projects which will benefit two or more States with a proviso that in
case of Sikkim, the Council shall formulate specific projects and schemes for that State including review of their
implementation. Besides, it also provides for setting up of a Screening Committee for vetting a particular scheme before

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
recommending it to the Council.
 
11.3.1  The official notice of amendment given by the Home Minister, however, seeks to delete the provision for setting
up of the Screening Committee.
 
11.3.2  The Committee felt that keeping in view the peculiar geographical make-up of the region, projects/schemes of
regional character might not have equitable impact on all the States. Therefore, like Sikkim, it was essential to have
State specific projects/schemes for other States also so as to ensure balanced development of all of them. Accordingly,
the Committee was of theview that a specific provision to this effect should be inserted in the Billso that the Council
could formulate State specific projects/schemes also in addition to its regional projects/schemes.
 
11.3.3  As regards the deletion of sub-clause 2A pertaining to the setting up of the Screening Committee, the Committee
was convinced with the justification given by the Secretary, Department for Development of North-Eastern Region that
since a Steering Committee was already in existence to examine all projects/schemes of the Council, it was felt that
there was no need for a Screening Committee.
 
11.3.4  Subject to the above, clause 4 and the amendment given notice of by the Home Minister, pertaining to the
deletion of provision for the Screening Committee, were adopted by the Committee.
 
Clause 5
 
11.4     The notice of official amendment given by the Home Minister has added a new clause 5 which provides that the
Council shall meet at least twice in a year.
 
11.4.1  The Committee adopted clause 5 without any change.
 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
 
11.5     Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, ‘1998’ and ‘forty-ninth’ to be substituted by ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’,
respectively.
 
General Observations/Recommendations
 
12.       After the clause-by-clause consideration was over, the Committee deliberated on a couple of other issues
pertaining to the North-Eastern Council. One of those issues was that the Council should be divested of its security role. 
The proponents of this view argued that the basic concept behind setting up of the Council was to have a nodal agency
for achieving all round development of the North-Eastern region.  Therefore, the focus of the Council should be only on
development.  Moreover, ever since its creation, no security duty had been assigned to the Council because of which the
relevant provision in the principal Act had remained dormant. After deliberations, theCommittee was of the view that
the Council should not have any security related matters in its mandate.
 
13.       The Committee also discussed the issue of conferring executive powers vis-à-vis its schemes/projects on the
Council.  The Committee took note of the fact that most of the schemes/projects of the Council were suffering time and
cost over-runs due to their tardy execution.  As per the existing scheme of things, the execution and implementation of
Council’s schemes/projects were entrusted with the concerned States due to which the Council had no role to play in the
execution of its schemes.  Therefore, the Committee recommended that the Council should be vested with executive
powers to ensure better and timely implementation of its schemes/projects. 
14.       The issue of making a specific provision to enable the Council to formulate specific projects/schemes for tribal
areas under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution was also deliberated upon by the Committee. It was of the view that
in addition to State-specific projects/schemes, the Council should be empowered to formulate specific projects/schemes
for the development of tribal areas under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. Besides, the Council should have the
powers to review the implementation of such projects and schemes.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
15.       Another issue discussed by the Committee pertained to the inclusion of Chief Executive Members (CEMs) of
Autonomous District Councils in the North-Eastern Council.  It was suggested that the inclusion of CEMs in the
Council would lead to greater appreciation of the developmental needs of these autonomous areas.  Keeping that in
view, the Committee recommended that the Chief Executive Members of Autonomous Councils should be included in
the Council.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
           
 
Clause 2
*          The Committee adopted clause 2 without any change.
                                                                        (Para 11.1.1)
Clause 3
 
*          With regard to the issue of retaining the Governors as Members of the Council, the Committee was,
overwhelmingly, of the view that only Chief Ministers of the constituent States should continue to be the
Members and the Governors should not be retained in the Council primarily because it meant duality of
representation of the constituent States without any plausible rationale. The Committee, therefore, felt that the
earlier amendment which provided for doing away with the existing provision of Governors as Members of the
Council should not be dropped.
(Para 11.2.2)
 
*          As regards nomination of three Members to the Council by the President, there were suggestions that it should
be specifically mentioned in the Act, as to who should be eligible for being nominated. It was suggested to the
Committee that these three nominees should be from amongst the Union Home Minister, Finance Minister,
Minister for the Development of North-Eastern Region and Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission. There
was another suggestion that members to be nominated by the President should be persons of eminence having
expertise in the matter of socio-economic planning and development.
(Para 11.2.3)
 
*          After having considered the pros and cons of these suggestions, the Committee was of the view that nomination
of three members by the President should be left to the discretion of the President. Therefore, it did not deem it
necessary to specify any eligibility criterion for the members to be nominated by the President.
(Para 11.2.3.1)
 
*          In relation to the Chairmanship of the Council, the Committee endorsed the official amendment given notice of
by the Home Minister which provided that the Chairman of the Council was to be nominated by the President. In
this regard, the Committee considered the suggestions that Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission or Union
Finance Minister or Union Home Minister or Union Minister for Development of North-Eastern Region should
be nominated as the ex-officio Chairman of the Council. The Committee was of the considered view that the
nomination of the Chairman of the Council should also be left to the wisdom and discretion of the President.
(Para 11.2.4)
 
*          While the Committee overwhelmingly opposed the proposal to retain the Governors as members of the Council,
it, however, strongly felt that there was need for inclusion of MPs of North-Eastern States and Sikkim in the
Council so as to broadbase its representative character. It opined that every member State should be represented
at least by one of its MPs in addition to its Chief Minister. The Committee was of the view that by including
MPs in the Council, people’s aspirations vis-à-vis development of their region could be aired in a more articulate
manner. Accordingly, it unanimously endorsed the view that the seven North-Eastern States and Sikkim should
have adequate and equitable representation of their MPs in the Council. However, it was of the opinion that it
should be left to the Government to devise the mechanism to elect/nominate at least one MP each from the
constituent States in consultation with the Presiding Officers of both Houses of Parliament.
(Para 11.2.5)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
*          Subject to the above, clause 3 and the amendments given notice of by the Home Minister, pertaining to the
nominations of three Members and Chairman of the Council by the President, were adopted by the Committee.
(Para 11.2.6)
 
Clause 4
 
*          The Committee felt that keeping in view the peculiar geographical make-up of the region, projects/schemes of
regional character might not have equitable impact on all the States. Therefore, like Sikkim, it was essential to
have State specific projects/schemes for other States also so as to ensure balanced development of all of them.
Accordingly, the Committee was of theview that a specific provision to this effect should be inserted in the
Billso that the Council could formulate State specific projects/schemes also in addition to its regional
projects/schemes.
(Para 11.3.2)
 
*          As regards the deletion of sub-clause 2A pertaining to the setting up of the Screening Committee, the Committee
was convinced with the justification given by the Secretary, Department for Development of North-Eastern
Region that since a Steering Committee was already in existence to examine all projects/schemes of the Council,
it was felt that there was no need for a Screening Committee.
(Para 11.3.3)
 
 
*          Subject to the above, clause 4 and the amendment given notice of by the Home Minister, pertaining to the
deletion of provision for the Screening Committee, were adopted by the Committee.
(Para 11.3.4)
 
Clause 5
 
*          The Committee adopted clause 5 without any change.
(Para 11.4.1)
 
 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
 
*          Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, ‘1998’ and ‘forty-ninth’ to be substituted by ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’,
respectively.
(Para 11.5)      
 
General Observations/Recommendations
 
*          After the clause-by-clause consideration was over, the Committee deliberated on a couple of other issues
pertaining to the North-Eastern Council. One of those issues was that the Council should be divested of its
security role.  The proponents of this view argued that the basic concept behind setting up of the Council was to
have a nodal agency for achieving all round development of the North-Eastern region.  Therefore, the focus of
the Council should be only on development.  Moreover, ever since its creation, no security duty had been
assigned to the Council because of which the relevant provision in the principal Act had remained dormant.
After deliberations, theCommittee was of the view that the Council should not have any security related matters
in its mandate.
(Para 12)
 
*          The Committee also discussed the issue of conferring executive powers vis-à-vis its schemes/projects on the
Council.  The Committee took note of the fact that most of the schemes/projects of the Council were suffering
time and cost over-runs due to their tardy execution.  As per the existing scheme of things, the execution and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
implementation of Council’s schemes/projects were entrusted with the concerned States due to which the
Council had no role to play in the execution of its schemes.  Therefore, the Committee recommended that the
Council should be vested with executive powers to ensure better and timely implementation of its
schemes/projects.
(Para 13) 
 
*          The issue of making a specific provision to enable the Council to formulate specific projects/schemes for tribal
areas under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution was also deliberated upon by the Committee. It was of the
view that in addition to State-specific projects/schemes, the Council should be empowered to formulate specific
projects/schemes for the development of tribal areas under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. Besides, the
Council should have the powers to review the implementation of such projects and schemes.
      (Para 14)
 
*          Another issue discussed by the Committee pertained to the inclusion of Chief Executive Members (CEMs) of
Autonomous District Councils in the North-Eastern Council.  It was suggested that the inclusion of CEMs in the
Council would lead to greater appreciation of the developmental needs of these autonomous areas.  Keeping that
in view, the Committee recommended that the Chief Executive Members of Autonomous Councils should be
included in the Council.
(Para 15)
 
 
MINUTES
XXXI
THIRTY-FIRST    MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 13 September 2001 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Hiphei
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
6.         Shri K.M. Saifullah
7.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
8.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
9.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
LOK SABHA
 
10.       Shri M.O.H. Farook    
11.       Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
12.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
13.       Shri Arun Kumar
14.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15.       Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
16.       Shri Shriniwas Patil

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
17.       Shri Subodh Ray
18.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
19.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
20.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
21.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
22.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
23.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
24.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
 
1.
      Dr. P.D. Shenoy, Special Secretary (NE)
2.      Shri Surendra Kumar, J.S.
3.      Shri A.K. Singh, D.S.
4.      Shri P.K. Jain, U.S.
 
2.         *                                              *                                              *
2.1       *                                              *                                              *
2.2       *                                              *                                              *
2.3       *                                              *                                              *
2.4       With regard to North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998, he requested the Members to send notices of
amendments to the Secretariat by 4 October 2001 for consideration of the Committee.
2.4.1    The Committee then decided to invite some Members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and Chief Secretaries of
North-Eastern States and Sikkim to elicit their views on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 as its
provisions had a direct bearing on those States and authorised its Chairman to decide   the names of the MPs to be
invited for the purpose.  As regards, inviting the Chief Secretaries, the Committee authorised its Chairman to seek
permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose.
3.         Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and made opening
observations on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998.  He invited Special Secretary (NE), Ministry of
Home Affairs to make a presentation on the Bill.
 4.        While thanking the Chairman and Members, the Special Secretary (NE), Ministry of Home Affairs sketched a
brief outline of the genesis and mandate of the Council as provided for in the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
4.1       He made an audio-visual presentation of the various aspects of the North-Eastern   Council.  While tracing the
genesis of the present Bill, he stated that the proposed amendments emerged from the meeting of Prime Minister with
the Chief Ministers of seven north-eastern States and Sikkim held on 8 May 1998 at Shillong.  He then gave a brief
overview of the main features of the Bill which inter-alia included (i) inclusion of Sikkim as a Member State; (ii)
cessation of Governors as Members of Council; (iii) nomination of three Members on the Council by the President, etc.
4.2       Having touched upon the main features of the Bill, the Special Secretary stated that due to efflux of time it was
felt that Governors may be retained as Members of the Council keeping in view the special role envisaged for them in
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  Similarly, the provision for having Screening Committee was also considered to
be of no use.  It was also considered necessary to provide for having at least two meetings of the Council in a year. 
Accordingly, the notice for amendments was submitted by the Home Minister and the Statement of Objects and Reasons

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
was revised.  He then made a brief mention of the final proposals with regard to the proposed amendments.
***Relates to other matters.
4.3       He concluded his presentation by highlighting some major achievements of the North-Eastern Council ever since
its inception.
5.         After the Special Secretary’s presentation, Chairman and Members raised a number of queries ranging from the
composition of North-Eastern Council to time and cost overruns of its projects, to the revised Statement of Objects and
Reasons, Governors’ role in Scheduled Areas, nomination of MPs of North-Eastern States to the Council, the Budget
allocated to the North-Eastern States; etc.
6.         Most of the Members expressed their disagreement to retain Governors as Members of NEC and suggested that
Chief Executives of Autonomous Councils be associated with the North-Eastern Council.  The Members suggested that
the MPs of the North-Eastern States and Sikkim should also be associated with the Council.
6.1       Certain Members strongly expressed their disappointment that most of the amendments were cosmetic and failed
to reflect the needs and aspirations of the region.  They felt that the North-Eastern Council needed to be radically
restructured so as to reflect the sub-regional sentiments.
7.         While summing up the points raised by the Members, the Chairman asked the Special Secretary to send written
comments on the questions/queries of the Chairman and Members by 30 September 2001.
8.         A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9.         The meeting then adjourned at 1.24 P.M.  to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 14 September 2001. 
 
XXXIV
THIRTY-FOURTH   MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 4 October 2001 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee ––Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
6.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
7.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
LOK SABHA
 
8.         Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee     
9.         Shri Vinay Katiyar
10.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
11.       Shri Subodh Ray
12.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
13.       Shri Anadi Sahu
14.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
15.       Shri Manabendra Shah
16.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
17.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
18.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
19.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
           
WITNESSES
 
            Representatives of North Eastern Council , Shillong
 
            1.         Shri H.W.T. Syiem, Secretary
2.         Shri P.L. Thanga, Advisor
3.         Shri Rajesh Mathur, Dy. Secretary
 
 Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1.
                  Shri Surendra Kumar, Joint Secretary, (NE)
2.                  Shri D.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary (NEC)
 
Representatives ofPlanning Commission
1.
                  Smt. Kiran Aggarwal, Principal Adviser and Secretary
2.                  Dr. Rajan Katoch, Adviser (State Plans-NE)
 
            Representatives ofGovernment of Mizoram
1.                  Shri H.V. Lalringa, Chief Secretary
2.                  Shri B.V. Selvaraj, Resident Commissioner
           
Representative ofGovernment of Nagaland
1.                  Shri R.S. Pandey, Chief Secretary
 
            Representatives ofGovernment of Sikkim
1.                  Shri S.W. Tenzing,  Chief Secretary
2.                  Shri Anil K. Ganesiwala, Additional Resident Commissioner
 
            Representatives ofGovernment of Tripura
1.                  Shri V. Thulasidas, Chief Secretary
2.                  Shri R.K. Mathur, Resident Commissioner
 
            Representatives ofGovernment of Meghalaya
1.
                  Shri J.P. Singh, Chief Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
2.                  Shri A.K. Srivastava, Resident Commissioner
 
 
2.         *                                                          *                                              *
2.1       *                                                          *                                              *
2.2       *                                                          *                                              *
2.3       *                                                          *                                              *
 
*** Relates to other matters.
3.         The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, North-Eastern Council and his colleagues and made some opening
observations with regard to the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998.
3.1       He requested the Secretary to furnish the details to the Committee on the areas where NEC was deficient and
how they might be removed, and whether the basic objectives for which the Council was created    had been achieved. 
4.         The Secretary, NEC in his presentation highlighted various aspects and functions of the NEC.  He stated   that
North-Eastern States were administratively and economically very weak.   There was   decline in traditional vocations,
employment opportunities for the local youth and value addition activities.
5.         The Secretary, NEC impressed upon the Members that more than ninety per cent of the NEC schemes were
implemented by agencies of the constituent States and the Central Government.
6.         He opined that there was need for opening up of the North-Eastern region for economic investment from outside
the region.  Promotion of tourism was also one the areas which required attention.
7.         He was of the view that security need not be a part of the functioning of the NEC.  It should confine itself only to
development activities.
8.         The Secretary, NEC was also of the view that the Steering Committee and the organisational structure of NEC
needed to be reviewed.
8.1.      With regard to membership of Governors in NEC, he opined that they brought to bear a more balanced and
objective outlook to the discussions and therefore should be retained as members.
9.         After the presentation of Secretary, NEC was over, the Chairman referred to the note circulated by North-
Eastern Council and sought clarifications as to why NEC had failed in many areas including its basic objective of
having an integrated approach to the development of North-Eastern region; how NGOs and others could be involved in
the developmental process; how specifically the Governors’ inputs had been of relevance; how the NEC could be
developed into a  mini Planning  Commission for the North-Eastern  region and NEC’s views with regard to  the
composition of its membership.
9.1       The Chairman, then invited the Members to seek clarifications from the witness.
9.2       A Member desired to know the justification for constituting the Council and whether a kind of federal body
could better serve as a platform for the development of the North-Eastern States.
9.3       A Member felt that the NEC had outlived its utility and therefore its existence called for review.  He also sought
to know whether the security aspect of the NEC should be done away with completely.
10.       The Chairman then requested the Secretary, NEC that replies to the queries may be sent to the Secretariat in a
week’s time.
(The witnesses then withdrew. The Committee adjourned and reassembled at 12.45 P.M.)
11.       Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Planning Commission and made some general
observations.   He requested the Secretary, Planning Commission to apprise the Members has to how the proposed
legislation would improve the functioning of the North-Eastern Council and how its deficiencies could best be removed.
11.1     He requested the Secretary also to touch upon whether the inclusion of Sikkim in the NEC would affect the total
resource availability and whether there would be a separate plan for Sikkim in the NEC framework in view of its

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
geographical location.
12.       While making a presentation before the Committee, the Secretary, Planning Commission stated that originally
three distinct roles were envisaged for NEC.  First as a regional planning body; second as a zonal council for North-
East; and third as a coordinating agency for security matters.  However, the focus of the Council had been on
development only.
12.1     Further elaborating NEC’s role, the Secretary stated that in order to secure a balanced development of the region,
the Council was required to formulate regional plans; prioritize the projects/schemes; and thereafter make
recommendations to the Central Government for consideration of those projects/schemes.
12.2     As regards the financing pattern for the projects/schemes of the Council, the Secretary apprised the Committee
that Planning Commission provided funds for the annual plans of the NEC out of the available Central assistance to
State plans.  Such allocations were then placed at the disposal of the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Home
Affairs.  The draft annual plans were proposed by the Council to the Ministry of Home Affairs which, in turn,
recommended the plans for approval to the Planning Commission which formally accorded final approval to the plans.
12.3     The Secretary informed that there was a slight shortfall in the expenditure of NEC in the Ninth Plan period.
12.4     She also informed that, recently, a decision had been taken by the Government to reallocate the business relating
to the NEC from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the new Department for Development of North-Eastern Region. 
Therefore, the Tenth Plan allocations would henceforth be reflected in the budget of that Department and not the budget
of Ministry of Home Affairs.  It had also been proposed to intensify review and monitoring of NEC Plans through
interaction between the Planning Commission and the Department for the Development of North Eastern Region.
13.       At this point, the Chairman, sought a clarification as to why the NEC allocation had markedly come down in the
Ninth Plan.
14.       A Member wanted to know why the North-Eastern Council failed to play an effective role in developmental
activities. 
15.       Another Member wanted to know whether Secretary, NEC would be the ex-officio  Secretary of the Department
for the Development of North-Eastern Region and whether it was  possible to include  nine  autonomous regions in the
Planning Commission’s approach towards NEC.  He further wanted to know if those nine autonomous councils could be
independently  thought  of, in terms of Sections 2 and 7  of Schedule Sixth  of the Constitution  so that funds were
allocated separately for them. He also sought to know specifically as to whether the Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission should be appointed as Chairman of NEC or the Chief Ministers of member States should be made
Chairman on rotation basis.
16.       The Chairman then requested the Secretary, Planning Commission that written replies to the queries be sent
within the next seven days.
(The witnesses then withdrew. The Committee adjourned at 1.20 P.M. and reassemble at 3.30 P.M)   
17.       The Chairman welcomed the Chief Secretaries of four North-Eastern States, namely, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland and Tripura, and Sikkim and briefly traced the history of the NEC.  He wanted to know as to how the
proposed amendments would strengthen the Council and
what more provisions were required to be incorporated other than the proposed amendments    He stated that there had
been demand that people’s representatives other than the Chief Ministers of these States should be included in the NEC. 
He wanted to know the response of the North-Eastern States and Sikkim to the demand.   The Chairman, then requested
the Chief Secretaries to present the views of their respective State Governments on the Bill.
18.       The Chief Secretary, Meghalaya stated that Chief Ministers should alone be the Members of the Council.  There
was no reason for restoration of Governors as Members of the Council.  As regards the Chairmanship of the Council, a
new dimension had been added with the appointment of a separate Minister for Development of North East.  He stated
that all these issues were scheduled to be taken up by the Chief Ministers of North-Eastern States to evolve a consensus
in their meeting to be held at Shillong on October 19, 2001. 
19.       Thereafter, the Chief Secretary, Mizoram while presenting the view-points of his Government, welcomed the
inclusion of Sikkim in the Council but did not support the membership of Governors in the Council.  Regarding

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
Chairmanship, he was of the view that Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission or the Home Minister should be
nominated as the Chairman. He also welcomed the appointing of a Minister for the Development of North-Eastern
States.  With regard to the nomination of three members to the Council by the President, he opined that they should be
of the same status as Chief Minister of a State.
20.       Following the presentation of Chief Secretary, Mizoram, the Chief Secretary, Tripura made a presentation.  He
also did not support the inclusion of Governors as members of the Council. Regarding the nomination of three members
by the President, he was of the view that they should be from amongst the Union Home Minister, the Finance Minister,
the Minister for the North-East and the Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission.  With regard to the Chairman of the
Council, he expressed that one of the members alone should be nominated as the Chairman.  And if Chairman was to be
specified in the Act itself then either the Union Home Minister or the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission
should be nominated as Chairman of the Council.  He emphasised the need to have State-specific projects for States like
Tripura and Mizoram.  He suggested that fifty per cent of NEC funds should be earmarked for regional projects while
remaining fifty per cent should be allocated for State specific projects.  He supported the provision that the Council
should meet twice a year and felt that there was no need for increasing the membership of NEC.  He felt that NEC
should play a more important role in regional development and the recommendations of the Shukla Commission for
building infrastructure projects in the North East should be taken into account while funding NEC plans.
21.       The Chief Secretary, Nagaland in his presentation, welcomed the inclusion of Sikkim in the Council. He urged
that funds should correspondingly be increased.  Regarding Chairman of the Council, he was of the view that Deputy
Chairman of the Planning Commission should be the Chairman of the NEC.  With regard to three members to be
nominated by the President, he was of the view that they should be persons of eminence having expertise in the matter
of socio-economic planning and development.  He welcomed the provision which assigned the role of a regional
planning body to the NEC and felt that state specific schemes should also be considered by the Council.   He also
welcomed the provision for holding the meetings of the Council twice a year.  He too opposed the provision for
Governors as Members of the Council.
22.       In his presentation, the Chief Secretary, Sikkim expressed gratitude for the inclusion of Sikkim in the Council. 
He stressed on the need for proportionate increase in the annual outlay for the NEC in the Tenth Plan.  He too supported
state specific projects.  As for other provisions, he concurred with the observations of his counterparts from North
Eastern States.
23.       Thereafter, the Chairman summed up that most of the witnesses were against continuance of Governors as
Members of the Council and favoured Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission or Home Minister or Minister in
charge of the North-East as Chairman of NEC.  He then invited Members to seek clarifications from the witnesses.
24.       Members raised a number of queries pertaining to development of the North- Eastern States including generation
of employment opportunities, status of regional and state specific projects, proposals for maintenance of security in the
North-Eastern region, the relevance of Screening Committee, inclusion of autonomous Councils in the Council etc.
25.       The Chairman requested the witnesses that written replies to the queries may be sent for consideration of the
Committee within a week’s time. 
26.       *                                                          *                                              *
27.       A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
28.       The Committee then adjourned at 4.52 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 5 October 2001.
 
*** Relates to other matters.
 
XXXVII
THIRTY-SEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday 16 October 2001 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee ¾Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Hiphei
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6.         Shri S.Ramachandran Pillai
7.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
9.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
LOK SABHA
 
10.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee     
11.       Shri M.O.H Farook
12.       Shri Rajen Gohain
13.       Shri Arun Kumar
14.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15.       Shri Shriniwas Patil
16.       Shri Subodh Ray
17.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
18.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
19.       Shri Anadi Sahu
20.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
21.       Dr. Raghvansh Prasad Singh
22.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
23.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
 
            WITNESSES
 
            Representative of Government of Assam
            Shri P.K. Bora, Chief Secretary, Government of Arunachal Pradesh
            Representative of Government of Assam
            Shri Lalit Sharma, Chief Secretary, Government of Arunachal Pradesh
            Representatives of North-East MPs Forum
     
            1.   Shri P.R. Kyndiah, MP(LS), Meghalaya
            2.   Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma, MP (RS), Assam

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
            3.   Shri Apok Jamir, MP (RS), Nagaland
            4.   Shri Holkhomang, MP (LS), Manipur
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman straightway posed certain questions pertaining to the membership of Governors in
the Council, role of Governors in the Council, role of Governors in Scheduled Areas, Screening Committee as provided
for earlier and later dropped, Chairmanship of the Council, remodeling of the Council as a regional planning body,
inclusion of MPs of North-Eastern States in the Council, etc. and stated that the Committee would have to formulate its
views on these questions. The Chairman then welcomed the Chief Secretaries of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh and
gave a brief overview on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998.  While hitting the nail on the head, the
Chairman then invited the Chief Secretaries to apprise the Committee of their respective Government’s views on the
Bill and requested them to touch upon the points raised by him in his initial observations.
 
3.         The Chief Secretary of Assam stated that his Government was opposed to the idea of retaining Governors as
Members of the Council.  He emphasised that only Chief Minister of the State should be the Member of the Council
because giving dual representation to a State served no purpose.  He further stated that North-Eastern Council should be
divested of its security role.  Its focus should be on developmental activities. He was of the view that the Council should
play a supportive role to Planning Commission.  Accordingly, the Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission should be
the Chairman of the Council. 
 
3.1       Apart from this, the Union Finance Minister and Minister of newly created Department of Development of
North-Eastern Region should be members of the Council.  Welcoming the inclusion of Sikkim into the Council, the
Chief Secretary, Assam   emphasised the need for pro rata increase in its annual budget.  With regard to Screening
Committee, he had no comments to offer.  Besides, he also emphasised the need for taking up of State specific schemes
by the Council keeping in view the physical geography of the region.
 
4.         After the presentation of the Chief Secretary, Assam was over, the Chief Secretary of Arunachal Pradesh began
his presentation by stating that Chief Minister alone should remain the Member of the Council.  He was also of the view
that the Council should be divested of its security role.    As regards screening of projects, he was of the view that it
should be left to the Council to devise its own mechanism for the purpose.  He endorsed the idea that Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission should be the Chairman of the Council.  In addition to this, Union Ministers directly concerned
with the development of North-Eastern region could be nominated to the Council.  In his concluding remarks, he stated
that NEC should have flexibility in its role in the regional planning and it should have the powers equivalent to those of
a Union Ministry.
 
5.         Thereafter, the Chairman invited the Members to raise queries/points and seek clarifications from the witnesses.
 
5.1       One of the Members stated that there was a special constitutional arrangement for two hill districts of Assam,
namely,  Karbi Anglong and North Cachar.  The Chief Minister of Assam had no executive powers over these two
districts as they were autonomous and had their separate Chief Executives.  He wanted that Chief Executives of these
Councils should be made members of the NEC.
 
5.2       Another Member raised a query regarding the role of NEC as a regional Planning Commission.  One Member
wanted to know if NEC was divested of its security role then who would take care of that role.
 
6.         Thereafter, the Chairman requested the witnesses to send their written replies to the points/queries raised in the
meeting within a week’s time.
 
                                    (The witnesses then withdrew)
 
7.         While welcoming the representatives of North-East MPs Forum, the Chairman of the Committee gave a brief
overview of the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 and requested them to enlighten the Committee with
their views on the Bill.
 
8.         Speaking on behalf of the North-East MPs Forum, Shri P.R.Kyndiah, M.P., Lok Sabha stated that the idea of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
setting up the North-Eastern Council emerged in 1960s with the reorganisation of Assam.  The main purpose of setting
up the Council was to achieve an accelerated and coordinated development in the North-East.  Though the Council was
entrusted with both developmental and security related matters in its mandate, over the years it assumed the role of a
developmental instrument only.  As a result, the Council did not discuss the security related matters.
 
8.1       While touching upon the role of the Governor in the Council, he stated that by virtue of being members of the
Council both the Governor and the Chief Minister of a State presented similar views in its meetings.  It was so primarily
because both were dependent on the same State machinery and got the same feedback.  Thus, the presence of the
Governor in the Council was nothing but duplication of representation of States.  Therefore, there was no reason for the
Governors to be members of the Council.  Moreover, now that the Council was being recognised as a regional planning
body with its focus on development, he felt that Governors had no role to play in developmental activities.
 
8.2       He welcomed the inclusion of Sikkim in the Council.  He emphasised that the Council must function as a
regional planning body for all purposes.  It must play a dynamic role of its own instead of playing the role of a glorified
post office.  The Council must also play a role in achieving coordinated development in a balanced manner in the
region.  In addition to that the Council must extend projects/schemes to those areas which were economically backward
and neglected.  He opined that the Council should not just be an advisory body.  It should have some teeth.   He was of
the view that the Council should not have any role to play in security related matters.
 
8.3       As regards the representation of MPs in the Council, he stated that the Council should have a representative
character to ensure its accountability.  Therefore, MPs should be represented in the Council.  He informed that after
great deal of deliberations, their Forum reached the consensus that five MPs of North-Eastern States (three from Lok
Sabha and two from Rajya Sabha) to be elected by Parliament should be the members of the Council.
 
8.4       With regard to the Chairmanship of the Council, he stated that the Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission should be the Chairman of the Council.  He further opined that the three members to be nominated by the
President should be of the rank and status of a Cabinet Minister.  He suggested that the Council should have a working
Chairman headquartered at Shillong because the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission might not have enough time
to devote to the Council’s work.  Before winding up his presentation, he drew the attention of the Committee to a couple
of other  issues such as control of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the Council, bureaucratic delays, need for having
full-time advisors, setting up of centres of excellence  by the Council, etc.
 
8.5       While supplementing the points made by the Chairman of the Forum, one of its members present stated that the
Council should have an implementing agency under it so that it could ensure timely execution of its projects/schemes. 
He suggested that the Council should implement regional plans based on the employment generation.  Another member
of the Forum spoke of the need for encouraging border trade in the region.
 
9.         After the presentation of the representatives of North-East MPs Forum was over, the Chairman and Members of
the Committee sought clarifications from them.  The Chairman asked them to come up with concrete suggestions with
regard to the number of MPs to be included in the Council and the manner of their election/nomination.
 
9.1       This apart, Members raised several points such as converting the North-Eastern Council Secretariat into a
Department, maintenance of roads constructed by the Council by Border Roads Development Board or Border Roads
Task Force, conferring of powers of an Inter-State Council on the NEC, integration of the people of North-East with the
mainstream of the nation, etc.
 
10.       Thereafter, the Chairman requested the witnesses to formulate their views on the points raised by the Members
and send them to the Secretariat for Committee’s consideration.
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
 
11.       While summing up the proceedings of the day, the Chairman stated that some prominent issues had emerged on
which the Committee was to formulate its views.  Those issues were  (i) whether Governors should be retained as
Members of the Council; (ii) whether the Council should have executive powers; (iii) who should be the Chairman of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
the Council; (iv) to what extent the Council should focus on regional plans only; (v) whether the powers of an Inter-
State Council should be conferred on the North-Eastern Council;  (vi) who should be the persons to be nominated by the
President; (vii) number of MPs to be included in the Council; and (viii) what mechanism  should be evolved  to take
care of the security related matters if the security role of the Council is divested of?
 
12.       A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
13.       The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 17 October 2001.
 
XLI
FORTY-FIRST MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 30 October 2001 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Hiphei
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5.         Shri K.M. Saifullah
6.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
7.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
8.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
9.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
LOK SABHA
 
10.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
11.       Shri P.H. Pandian
12.       Shri Shriniwas Patil
13.       Shri Subodh Ray
14.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
15.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
16.       Shri Anadi Sahu
17.       Shri  Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
18.       Shri Manabendra Shah
19.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
20.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
21.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
22.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
 
            WITNESSES
 
            Representatives of Department of Development of  North-Eastern Region
 
1.   Dr. P.D. Shenoy, Secretary
2.   Dr. Rajan Katoch, Joint Secretary
3.   Shri D.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary (NEC)
4.   Shri P.K. Jain, Under Secretary (NE-II)
     
            Representative of Department of Legal Affairs
 
      Shri B.A. Agrawal, JS & LA
 
            Representative of Legislative Department
 
            Smt. Sarada  Jain, Asst. Legislative Counsel
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members and made some general observations on the North-Eastern
Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998.  He stated that the Committee would have to inter alia formulate its views on the
question of retaining the Governors in the North-Eastern Council (NEC); nomination of the Chairman of the Council
and three members by the President; inclusion of MPs of North-Eastern States in the Council; question of retaining the
Screening Committee; security role of the Council; and also vesting in the North-Eastern Council power to resolve inter-
State disputes.
 
3.         The Chairman, thereafter, placed the NEC (Amendment) Bill, 1998 before the Committee for clause-by-clause
consideration and requested the Members to express their views on the various provisions of the Bill.
 
 
Clause 2
 
4.         Clause 2 of the Bill relates to the inclusion of Sikkim in the North-Eastern Council.
 
4.1       The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 3
 
5.         Clause 3 seeks to restructure the composition of the Council and provides that the North-Eastern Council shall
consist of the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura and three other members to be nominated by the President. Thus, as against the existing provision, it
seeks to remove the Governors of these States from the Council.
 
5.1       The official amendment given notice of by the Home Minister, however, seeks to retain Governors as Members
of the Council and provides that the President shall nominate the Chairman of the Council.
 
5.2       With regard to the issue of retaining the Governors as Members of the Council, the Committee was,
overwhelmingly, of the view that only Chief Ministers of the constituent States should continue to be the Members and
the Governors should not be retained in the Council primarily because it meant duality of representation of the
constituent States without any plausible rationale. The Committee, therefore, felt that the earlier amendment which
provided for doing away with the existing provision of Governors as Members of the Council should not be revoked.
 
5.3.      As regards nomination of three Members to the Council by the President, there were suggestions that it should
be specifically mentioned in the Act, as to who should be eligible for being nominated. It was suggested to the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
Committee that these three nominees should be from amongst the Union Home Minister, Finance Minister, Minister for
the Development of North-Eastern Region and Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission. There was another
suggestion that members to be nominated by the President should be persons of eminence having expertise in the matter
of socio-economic planning and development.
 
5.4       After having considered the pros and cons of these suggestions, the Committee was of the view that nomination
of three members by the President should be left to the discretion of the President. Therefore, it did not deem it
necessary to specify any eligibility criterion for the members to be nominated by the President.
 
5.5       In relation to the Chairmanship of the Council, the Committee endorsed the official amendment given notice of
by the Home Minister which provided that the Chairman of the Council was to be nominated by the President. In this
regard, the Committee considered the suggestions that Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission or Union Finance
Minister or Union Home Minister or Union Minister for Development of North-Eastern Region should be nominated as
the ex-officio Chairman of the Council. The Committee was of the considered view that the nomination of the Chairman
of the Council should also be left to the wisdom and discretion of the President.
 
5.6       While the Committee overwhelmingly opposed the proposal to retain the Governors as members of the Council,
it, however, strongly felt that there was need for inclusion of MPs of North-Eastern States and Sikkim in the Council so
as to broadbase its representative character. It opined that every member State should be represented at least by one of
its MPs in addition to its Chief Minister. The Committee was of the view that by including MPs in the Council, people’s
aspirations vis-a-vis development of their region could be aired in a more articulate manner. Accordingly, it
unanimously endorsed the view that MPs of North-Eastern States and Sikkim should have adequate and equitable
representation in the Council. However, it was of the opinion that it should be left to the Government to devise the
mechanism to elect/nominate at least one MP each from the constituent States in consultation with the Presiding
Officers of both Houses of Parliament.
 
5.7       Subject to the above, clause 3 and the amendments given notice of by the Home Minister, pertaining to the
nominations of three Members and Chairman of the Council by the President, were adopted by the Committee.
 
 
Clause 4
 
6.         Clause 4 seeks to identify the Council as a regional planning body for the North-Eastern Region. It also provides
that the Council shall give priority to schemes and projects which will benefit two or more States with a proviso that in
case of Sikkim, the Council shall formulate specific projects and schemes for that State including review of their
implementation. Besides, it also provides for setting up of a Screening Committee for vetting a particular scheme before
recommending it to the Council.
 
6.1       The official notice of amendment given by the Home Minister, however, seeks to delete the provision for setting
up of the Screening Committee.
 
6.2       The Committee felt that keeping in view the peculiar geographical make-up of the region, projects/schemes of
regional character might not have equitable impact on all the States. Therefore, like Sikkim, it was essential to have
State specific projects/schemes for other States also so as to ensure balanced development of all of them. Accordingly,
the Committee was of the view that a specific provision to this effect should be inserted in the Bill so that the Council
could formulate State specific projects/schemes also in addition to its regional projects/schemes.
 
6.3       As regards the deletion of sub-clause 2A pertaining to the setting up of the Screening Committee, the Committee
was convinced with the justification given by the Secretary, Department for Development of North-Eastern Region that
since a Steering Committee was already in existence to examine all projects/schemes of the Council, it was felt that
there was no need for a Screening Committee.
 
6.4       Subject to the above, clause 4 and the amendment given notice of by the Home Minister, pertaining to the
deletion of provision for the Screening Committee, were adopted by the Committee.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
 
Clause 5
 
7.         The notice of official amendment given by the Home Minister has added a new clause 5 which provides that the
Council shall meet at least twice in a year.
 
7.1       The Committee adopted clause 5 without any change.
 
 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
 
8.         Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, ‘1998’ and ‘forty-ninth’ to be substituted by ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’,
respectively.
9.         After the clause-by-clause consideration was over, the Committee deliberated on a couple of other issues
pertaining to the North-Eastern Council. One of those issues was that the Council should be divested of its security role. 
The proponents of this view argued that the basic concept behind setting up of the Council was to have a nodal agency
for achieving all round development of the North-Eastern region.  Therefore, the focus of the Council should be only on
development.  Moreover, ever since its creation, no security duty had been assigned to the Council because of which the
relevant provision in the principal Act had remained dormant. After deliberations, the Committee was of the view that
the Council should not have security related matters in its mandate.
 
9.1       Another issue which engaged the attention of the Committee was the suggestion that the Council should be
vested with the powers of an Inter-State Council for resolving inter-State disputes amongst the States of North-Eastern
region.  After having gone into the intricacies of the issue, the Committee decided not to press the suggestion further.
 
9.2       The Committee also discussed the issue of conferring implementation role vis-à-vis its schemes/projects on the
Council.  The Committee took note of the fact that most of the schemes/projects of the Council were suffering time and
cost over-runs due to their tardy execution.  As per the existing scheme of things, the execution and implementation of
Council’s schemes/projects were entrusted with the concerned States due to which the Council had no role to play in the
execution of its schemes.  Therefore, it was suggested that the Council should be vested with executive powers to ensure
better and timely implementation of its schemes/projects.  The Committee decided to make a general observation in this
regard in its report. 
 
9.3       The issue of making a specific provision to enable the Council to formulate specific projects/schemes for tribal
areas under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution was also deliberated upon by the Committee. It was of the view that
in addition to State-specific projects/schemes, the Council should be empowered to formulate specific projects/schemes
for the development of tribal areas under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. Besides, the Council should have the
powers to review the implementation of such projects and schemes.
 
9.4       Another issue discussed by the Committee pertained to the inclusion of Chief Executive Members (CEMs) of
Autonomous District Councils in the North-Eastern Council.  It was suggested that the inclusion of CEMs in the
Council would lead to greater appreciation of the developmental needs of these autonomous areas.  The Committee
decided to make a suitable general observation to that effect in its report.
 
10.       After the deliberations of the Committee were over, the Chairman asked the Secretary, Department of
Development of North-Eastern Region to respond to the views expressed by the Members on various issues pertaining
to the North-Eastern Council.
 
10.1     While responding to the views of the Members, the Secretary stated that inclusion of MPs of North-Eastern
region in the Council would make it unwieldy.  With regard to the suggestion that Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission should be the Chairman of the Council, the Secretary stated that because of his commitments in the
Planning Commission its Deputy Chairman might not be able to do justice with the work relating to the North-Eastern

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
Council.
 
10.1.1  As regards the inclusion of Chief Executive Members of Autonomous District Councils as Members of the NEC,
the Secretary responded that such a provision too would render the Council unwieldy.
 
10.1.2  With regard to the Governors as Members of the Council, the Chairman pointed out that first the Ministry
proposed to exclude the Governors from the Council and then it wanted to retain them as Members vide notice of
amendments given by the Home Minister.  In response, the Secretary stated that the exclusion of Governors was done at
the behest of the Chief Ministers of NE States.  Later, the Governors of these States wrote to the Centre that they had
certain constitutional duties to perform in regard to the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and therefore they should be
retained as Members of the Council.  Accordingly, the membership of Governors was sought to be restored as per the
notice of amendment given by the Home Minister.  The Chairman expressed displeasure that the Ministry did not apply
its mind while coming forward with the proposal in the first place.
 
10.1.3  In reply to the query as to why the provision pertaining to the Screening Committee was scrapped, the Secretary
stated that since a Steering Committee had already come into existence, the provisions relating to Screening Committee
had become redundant.
 
10.1.4  Insofar as the suggestion for conferring the powers of an Inter-State Council on the NEC for resolving inter-state
disputes of the region, the Secretary replied that NEC might not be the proper forum for the purpose.
 
11.       A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
 
12.       The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 31 October 2001.
 
XLVIII
FORTY-EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, 4 December 2001 in Committee Room No.63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
           
2.
                  Dr. L.M. Singhvi
3.                  Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
4.                  Shri Drupad Borgohain
5.                  Shri Kuldip Nayyar
 
            LOK SABHA
        
6.
                  Shri M.O.H. Farook
7.                  Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
8.                  Shri Shriniwas Patil
9.                  Shri Subodh Ray
10.              Shri Anadi Sahu
11.              Shri Manabendra Shah
12.              Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
13.              Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
14.              Shri E. Ponnuswamy
15.              Shri Jaisingrao  Gaikwad Patil

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri A. K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
2.         *                                                          *                                              *
3.0       The Committee then considered the draft Report on the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 and
adopted the same.
 
 
*** Relates to other matters.
3.1       The Committee decided   to present /lay the report and evidence tendered before it on the Bill, to both the
Houses on 12 December 2001.  The Committee authorised  its  Chairman or  in his absence Shri S. Ramachandran
Pillai, Member, Rajya Sabha, to present/lay the Report and evidence in the Rajya Sabha.
3.2       The Committee nominated Shri Anadi Sahu and in his absence Shri P.H. Pandian to simultaneously lay the
Report alongwith evidence tendered before the Committee on the Bill,  in the  Lok Sabha. 
4.0       *                                                          *                                              *
4.1       *                                                          *                                              *
5.0       *                                                          *                                              *
5.1       *                                                          *                                              *
5.2       *                                                          *                                              *
 6.        *                                                          *                                              *
7.         The Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 11December 2001.
 
*** Relates to other matters.
ANNEXURE
ANNEXURE - I
(See page 1, para 1 of the Report)
AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8 DEC., 1998
Bill No. XL of 1998
THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
A
BILL
 
further to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
 
            BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
 
 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 1998.
 
Short title and
commencement.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
 
 
5
      (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 2.
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 3.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 4.
2.  In section 2 of the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in clause (b), for the words “Nagaland and Tripura”, the words
“Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura” shall be substituted.
 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:-
      
       “(1) There shall be a Council to be called the North-Eastern Council which
       shall consist of the following members, namely:-
(a)
    the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunchal Pradesh, Assam Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura;
 
  Provided that, if there is no Council of Ministers in any State referred to in
clause (a), the Governor of that State shall represent such State in the Council
for so long as there is no Council of Ministers, in such State;
 
(b)   three members to be nominated by the President”.
 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
  
(a)    for sub-section (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:-
“(1) The Council shall function as a regional planning body for the north
eastern area.
 (2) While formulating the regional plans for the north-eastern area, the
Council shall give priority to schemes and projects which will benefit two or
more States:
 
Provided that in case of Sikkim, the Council shall formulate specific projects
and schemes for that State including the review of implementation of such projects
and schemes.
 
(2A) No scheme shall be placed before the Council unless it has been
recommended by a screening committee consisting of the following:-
 
(i) Secretary of the Council                  -        Chairperson;
 
(ii) Planning secretaries of the
     States of the north-eastern are          -         Members.”;
 
(b)
   in sub-section (3), clause (c) shall be omitted;
 
(c)    after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
      
       “(5) The Council shall have such power as may be delegated to it by the Central
Government.”
84 of
1971.
 
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
 
 
30
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
            Under the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971, the North-Eastern Council was set up as an advisory body.  The
functions of the Council, inter alia, include discussion of matters of mutual interest of north-eastern States and giving
advise thereon to the Union or any member State; to review implementation of the projects and schemes being part of
the regional plan for the development of member States and to look after the maintenance of security and public order in
those States.   The Council presently consists of the Governors as well as Chief Ministers of the seven North-Eastern
States, namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.  One of the
Members of the Council is nominated by the President of India as the Chairman of the Council.
 
2.         The North-Eastern States have been demanding restructuring of the Council so as to make it more effective. 
Therefore, it is proposed to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
 
3.         The main features of the proposed amendments are as follows:-
 
(i)
                  inclusion of  Sikkim as one of the members of the Council;
(ii)                Governors, who are the constitutional heads, shall cease to be members of the Council;
(iii)               nomination of three members to the Council by the President of India;
(iv)              the Council shall function as a regional  planning body for the north-eastern area and shall have such 
powers  as may be delegated to it by the Central Government;
(v)                while formulating regional plans, the Council shall give priority to schemes  and projects benefiting two
or more States.  However, Council shall formulate ad review the implementation of specific projects and
schemes   for Sikkim;
(vi)
              no scheme shall be placed before the Council unless it has been recommended by a screening committee
consisting of the Secretary of the Council as Chairperson and the Planning Secretaries of the States  of
the north-eastern area as members.  This provision  is intended to ensure that the schemes selected by the
Council  for implementation have a regional character and reflect the needs of the member States of the
Council.
 
4.         The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                          L.K. ADVANI
The 30
thNovember,  1998
 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL, ACT, 1971
(84 OF 1971)
 
                              *                                                           *                                              *
Definitions. 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
  *                                                                *                                                   *
 (b) “north-eastern area” means the area comprising the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.
  *                                                               *                                                    *

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
Setting up and
composition of
the North-Eastern
Council
3. (1) There shall be a Council to be called the North-Eastern Council which shall consist of the
following members, namely:-
     (a) the person or persons for the time being holding the office of the Governor of the States or
the office of Administrator of the Union territories in the north-eastern area;
    (b)  the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.
   *                                                             *                                                     *
 Provided that if there is no Council of Ministers in any State or Union territory referred to in
clause (b), the President  may nominate not more than one person to represent such State or
Union  territory in the Council for so long as there is no Council of Ministers in such State or
Union territory.
  *                                                              *                                                     *
Functions of the
Council.
4. (1) The Council shall be an advisory body and may discuss any matter in which some or all  of
the States represented in that Council, or the Union and one or more of the States represented in
that Council, have a common interest and advise the Central Government and the Government of
each State concerned as to the action to be taken on any such matter, and, in particular, may
discuss and make recommendations with regard to,-
     (i)  any matter of common interest in the field of economic and social planning;
     (ii)  any matter concerning inter-state transport and communications;
 
     (iii) any matter relating to power or flood control projects of common interest,
 (2) For securing the balanced development of the north-eastern area, the Council shall forward
proposals,-
      (a) formulating for the States represented in the Council a unified and coordinated regional
plan (which will be in addition to the State Plan) in regard to matters of common importance to
that area;
      (b) regarding the priorities of the projects and schemes included in the regional plan and the
stages in which the regional plan may be implemented; and
     (c) regarding the location of the projects and scheme included in the regional plan
 to the Central Government for its consideration.
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
A
BILL
further to amend the North  Eastern  Council Act, 1971
 
 
(Shri L.K. Advani, Minister of Home Affairs)
 
ANNEXURE –II
(See page 1, para 2 of the Report)
L.K. ADVANI
HOME MINISTER
 
D.O.No.3/1/97-NE.II
 
To
 
            The Secretary General,
            Rajya Sabha,
            New Delhi
 
Sir,
 
            I give notice of my intention to move the following amendments given in the Annexure after the adoption of the
motion that the Bill “The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998” be taken into consideration.
 
 
 
Yours faithfully,
 
 
Sd/-
(L.K. Advani)
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
(AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA)
 
NOTICE OF AMENDMENTS
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
______________________________________________________________________________
Sl.No.              Name of Members and text of Amendment                               Clause No.
______________________________________________________________________________
 
                        Shri L.K. Advani
 
1.                     Page 1, line1, for
 “Forty-ninth Year”,                                    Enacting Formula
                        substitute “Fifty-second year”
 
2.                     Page1, line3, for  “1998”, substitute “2001”                                      1
 
3.                     Page 2, for
  clause 3, substitute-                                                                    3
 
                        “3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
 
(a)
    for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:-
 
                        “(1) There shall be a Council to be called the North-
                                Eastern Council which shall consist of the following
                                 members, namely:-
 
(i)
                  the person or persons for the time being holding the
office of the Governor of the States;
                       
(ii)                the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura.
 
Provided that if there is no Council of Ministers in any
State referred to in clause (b), the President may nomi-
nate not more than one person to represent such State
in the Council  for so long as  there is no Council of
Ministers in such State.
 
(iii)
               three members to be nominated by the President.”
 
(b)    for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:-
 
“(3) The  President  shall nominate the Chairman of the
       Council”.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
 
4.         Page 2, omit lines 25 to 29.                                                                           4
 
5.         Page 2, after
 line 33, insert                                                                       New clause
                                                                                                                                5
 
Amendment of              “5.  In section 5 of the Principal Act, in sub-
Section 5.                     section (1), for the words “The Council shall
                                       meet at least twice in a year at such times” shall
                                       be substituted.”
 
ANNEXURE –III
(See page 2, para 7.4 of the Report)
L.K. ADVANI
HOME MINISTER
 
 
No.3/1/97-N.E.II
To
 
            The Secretary General,
            Rajya Sabha,
            New Delhi
 
Sir,
 
            The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998 was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 8.12.1998.  After the
introduction of the Bill, certain amendments in the Statement of Objects and Reasons have become necessary.  I am,
therefore, forwarding herewith a revised Statement of Objects and Reasons duly signed, to be attached with the North
Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998, introduced in Rajya Sabha on 8.12.1998 for taking further necessary action
by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
 
 
Yours faithfully,
 
 
Sd/-
(L.K. Advani)
 
           
 
REVISED STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS TO BE ATTACHED WITH
THE NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998 INTRODUCED IN
RAJYA SABHA ON 8/12/1998
 
 
            Under the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971, the North-Eastern Council was set up as an advisory body.  The
functions of the Council, inter alia, include, discussion of matters of mutual interest of North-Eastern States and giving

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/82ndreport.htm[30-06-2016 17:47:07]
advice thereon to the Union or any member State; to review implementation of the projects and schemes being part of
the regional plan for the development of member States   and to look after the maintenance of security and public order
in those States.  The Council presently consists of the Governors as well as the Chief Ministers of the seven North-
Eastern States, namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.  One of the
Members of the Council is nominated by the President of India as the as the Chamber of Council.
 
2.         The North-Eastern States have been demanding restructuring of the Council so as to make it more effective.  It is
proposed, therefore, to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
 
3.         The main features of the proposed amendments are as follows: -
 
(i)
                  Inclusion of Sikkim as one of the members of the Council;
(ii)                President would nominate the Chairman of the Council;
(iii)               Nomination of three members to the Council by the President of India;
(iv)              The Council shall function as a regional planning body for the north-eastern area and shall have such
powers as may be delegated to it by the Central Government;
(v)                While formulating regional plans, the Council shall give priority to the schemes and projects benefiting
two or more States.  However, the 
Council shall formulate and review the implementation of specific projects and schemes for Sikkim;
(vi)
              The Council shall meet at least twice a year.
 
4.         The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 
 
            New Delhi                                                                                      (L.K. ADVANI)
            The 3 August, 2001                                                                                                                                         