PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                 146 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23 JUNE, 2010) 
(FORWARDED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23 JUNE, 2010) 
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 30 JULY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 30 JULY, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JUNE, 2010/ASADHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-hf@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 

 
C.S. (H.A.) 283 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23 JUNE, 2010) 
(FORWARDED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23 JUNE, 2010) 
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 30 JULY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 30 JULY, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JUNE, 2010/ASADHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
   
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii)  
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1-4  
 C HAPTER-I 
Introduction ............................................................................................................ 
1-3 
 C HAPTER-II 
Clause-by-clause consideration of Bill and Observations/ 
Conclusions and Recommendationsof the Committee ................................................... 
4 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE ................................................................... 5-13 
5. A NNEXURE ....................................................................................................................... 15-16 
 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010 ............................................. 17-22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Constituted on 31st August, 2009) 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu   ----- Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 *2. Vacant 
 3. Shri Rishang Keishing  
 4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
 5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
 
@6. Vacant 
 7. Shri Brijesh Pathak  
 8. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 9. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 10. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Shri L.K. Advani 
 12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala  
 13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 14. Shri Ramen Deka 
 15. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque 
 16. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 17. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat)  
 18. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 19. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel  
 20. Shri L. Rajagopal 
 21. Shri Nilesh Narayan Rane 
 22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 23. Shri A. Sampath 
 24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 25. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
 26. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 27. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 28. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 29. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure  
 **30. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
* Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy, ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent  upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
   21 June, 2010. 
@ Due to demise of Shri Janeshwar Mishra, Member, Rajya Sabha on 22nd January, 2010. 
**Nominated w.e.f. 14 October, 2009 vice Shri Akhilesh Yadav who was nominated to the Committee on Science and Technology,  
  Environment and Forests. 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director  
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One 
Hundred and Forty-sixth Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
2.  In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred
@ the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010 ( Annexure) 
as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 15th March, 2010 and pending therein, to the Committee on 5th April, 
2010 for examination and report within three months i.e. by 4th July, 2010. 
3.  The Committee considered the Co de of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010 in its sittings 
held on 28th May and 11th June, 2010. The Committee heard the official presentation of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on 28th May, 2010 on the Bill. The Committee considered 
the Bill clause-by-clause in its sitting held on 11th  June, 2010. The Committee au thorized its Chairman to 
finalise the report on the Bill and present the same to Hon’ble Chairman since the House was not in 
Session. As per practice, the Secretaries and senior  officers of the Legislative Department and the 
Department of Legal Affairs were also present in those sittings to respond to the queries of the Members. 
4.  The Committee has made us e of the following documents in finalising the Report:---- 
(i) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974); 
(ii) 111
th Report of the Committee on Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003; 
(iii) 128 th Report of the Committee on Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006; 
(iv) Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008 (5 of 2009); 
(v) Background note on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010; and 
(vi) Oral evidence tendered before the Committee. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
  M. VENKAIAH NAIDU  
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
21 June, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary 
  Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
@ Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 47110 dated 5th April, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
CHAPTER-1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.0  The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010, seeks to further amend Section 41 (1)(b), 
[as amended by Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Section 5)] and Section 41A [as 
inserted by Section 6 of the said Amendment Act] of Cr. PC 1973. 
1.1.1 The Ministry, in the background note, stated th at the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 
2006 passed by the Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2008 and by the Lok Sabha on 23 December, 2008, 
received the assent of the President on 7 January, 20 09. Accordingly, the Code  of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2008 (5 of 2009) was published in th e Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, Section I 
dated 9.1.2009. 
1.1.2 The Ministry further stated th at before the Act could be enforced through official notification (as 
provided for under Section 1 (2) of the Act), a number of representations were received from all over the 
country, particularly from the Lawyers’ Associatio ns and the Bar Associations against some of the 
provisions of the Act. To address the misgiving of  the lawyers and others, the Home Minister wrote a 
letter to the Chairman, Law Commission on 22.06.2009 to take initiative and to hold “consultation” with 
very select number of persons representing the premier Bar Associations to bring about a consensus on the 
two issues that seemed to be agitating the minds of lawyers. 
1.1.3 It was also stated that the Chairman, Law Commission of India called a meeting on 20 August, 2009 
for discussion/consultation with all concerned in resp ect of the amendments in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 brought about by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, especially the 
provisions amending Section 41 of the Code, at which the Chairman, Bar Council of India and the 
Chairman, Bar Councils of Maharashtra and Goa were also present. 
1.1.4 The Ministry informed the Committee that after a lot of deliberation, the meeting ended with a 
general consensus on the following: 
(a) to accept both the suggestions made by the Chairman in his note: 
(i) That in Section 41 A, the word ‘may ’ be substituted by the word ‘shall’; 
(ii) That in case of issuance of notice under S ection 41 A, if a person who is not arrested 
and to whom a notice will be issued is unwilling to identify himself, that could be a 
ground for his arrest. 
(b) The police officer be obliged to record his reasons not only fo r making an arrest under Section 
41, but also for not making an arrest under that Section. 
1.1.5 The Ministry further informed the Committee that the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) 
Bill, 2010 had been prepared on the basis of th e recommendations of Law Commission of India and 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 15 April 2010. 
1.2  PREVIOUS  COMMITTEE’S  RECOMMENDATIONS  ON  EARLIER  AMENDMENT  
BILLS 

1.2.1 It is relevant to mention that the previous Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs had considered the Criminal Law (A mendment) Bill, 2003 and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 and presented its 111th and 128th Reports thereon, respectively. 
1.2.2  The Committee in the 111th Report, after cons idering the Criminal Law(Amendment) Bill, 2003, 
clause-by-clause, had recommended that Government should come forward with a comprehensive Bill, 
particularly in the light of reports of various co mmissions, committees and studies on criminal justice 
system. 
1.2.3  In regard to Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006, the previous Committee, in its 
128
th Report, observed that some of the new definitions /concepts/provisions introduced in the Bill, which 
sought to introduce fundamental changes in the Criminal Law of the country, seemed to be not well 
thought of and they were based solely on the recommendations of the Law Commission and due 
deliberations had not taken place on various pros and cons and consequences that may flow from those 
provisions. The Committee felt that no useful purpose would be served by proceeding further with the 
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill as the Committee could not be convinced of the rationale for 
introducing drastic changes in the criminal jurispru dence of the country. The Committee recommended to 
the Government to have a re-look at the entire Bill and to attempt to bring forward a comprehensive Bill 
for revamping the criminal justice system. In spite of  this, the Government went ahead with the enactment 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) B ill, 2006, although some of the objections of the 
Committee on certain provisions were considered by the Government and agreed to and appropriate 
amendments were moved by the Home Minister in the Rajya Sabha at the time of consideration and 
passage of the Bill. 
1.3  SALIENT  FEATURES  OF  THE  BILL  
1.3.1 The salient features of the Code of Criminal  Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010 are briefly as 
under:---- 
(i) Clause 2 of the Bill aims to amend Section 41 (1) (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, to make it 
compulsory for the police to record the reasons not only for making an arrest, but also for not 
making an arrest under Section 41. 
(ii) clause 3 seeks to amend Section 41A of the Code by substituting the word ‘may’ by ‘shall’ in 
sub-section (1) and also substituting sub-section (4) by the following: 
 “(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to  comply with the terms of the notice or is 
unwilling to identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been 
passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the 
notice.” 
1.4  ORAL  EVIDENCE  OF  HOME  SECRETARY  
1.4.1 When the Home Secretary, during the course of  his oral deposition before the Committee, was asked 
to comment on the suggestions made by the Committee in its earlier Reports, i.e., 111
th and 128th Reports, 
that the Government should bring forward a comprehensive Bill to reform the criminal law, stated that 
Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon had submitted a draft National Policy on Criminal Justice to the Government. 
Since the ‘administration of the criminal justice system is the responsibility of both the Centre and the 
States, comments and views of the State Governments have been sought on the Report of Prof. Madhava 

Menon. However, the same have been received from a few States only. He also stated that after the receipt 
of the comments from all the States, the Government would take a view and bring forward a 
comprehensive legislation on the subject. The Home Se cretary also told the Committee that given the fact 
that comprehensive amendments would have to be brought in the criminal law, it would take at least one 
year before the proposal could be brought before the Cabinet and then in Parliament. 
1.4.2 Explaining about the background to the present Bill, the Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated that a number of representations were received from individuals and associations after the 
enactment of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Ame ndment) Act, 2008. The basic objections came from 
the Bar Councils and Lawyer Associations, who were against Section 41, which is the law of arrest, and 
Section 309, which is on adjournments in courts. She further stated that the main objection of the 
Associations was that the mandatory provision of arrest had been taken away from the Police and that they 
had been given total discretion to arrest or not to arrest in cognizable offences where punishment was less 
than seven years. The Special Secretary further st ated that the second objection was on the provision 
giving notice for non-arrest, according to which if the Police does not want to arrest, it will first have to 
give a notice to a person to come to the police statio n. Apprehensions of possible misuse of this provision 
were expressed. She informed the Committee that keeping in view the widespread agitation of the Bar 
Councils, the Home Minister wrote to the Chairman of the Law Commission on 22nd June, 2009 to take 
the initiative and hold discussions with the select number of persons, who represented the Bar Councils 
and to bring about some sort of consensus. The Chairman, Law Commission, held a meeting on 20th 
August, 2009, which was attended by Bar Council of India and Bar Councils of Maharashtra and Goa. She 
further stated that the Law Commission recommended for amendment of Sections 41 and 41A, which had 
been accepted by the Government and the present Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
had been prepared on the basis of the recommendations of the Law Commission. 
 
CHAPTER-II 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL AND  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
2.1.1 The Committee took up clause-by-consideration of the Bill, in its sitting held on 11 June, 2010. The 
observations/recommendations of the Committee on the various clauses are given in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Clause 2 
2.2.1 The clause provides for amendment in Section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 {as 
amended by Section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008}. 
2.2.2 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause 3 
2.3.1 The clause provides for amendment in Section 41 A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 {as 
inserted by Section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008}. 
2.3.2 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title 
2.4.1 Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title are adopted without any change. 

2.5.1 Since the recommendations of the Law Commission have been incorporat ed in the Bill and 
there appears to be unanimity amongst the lega l community on the proposed amendment, the 
Committee recommends that the Bill be passed. 
2.5.2 The Committee notes that the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, has been amended ten times so 
far. The present Bill is eleventh in  the series. Adhocism of the Government in the matter of reforming 
the Criminal Justice System is self-evide nt. In this context the Committee recounts the 
observations/recommendations made by it in its 111 th and 128 th Reports on the Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Bill 2003 and the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill 2006, respectively, to the 
effect that there is an imperative need to reform and rationalize the criminal law of the country by 
introducing a comprehensive legislat ion in Parliament instead of br ing amendment bills in piecemeal. 
The Committee would like to reiterate the observations/ recommendations made by it in its cited reports 
and urges upon the Government not to bring forward amendments in bits and pieces. In this context the 
Committee is happy to note that Prof. N.R. Madh aya Menon has submitted a report to the Government 
containing a draft National Policy on Criminal Justice. The Committee would like the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to act upon the draft policy with expedition in consultation with the State Governments, legal 
fraternity and other stakeh olders. The Committee also advises the Ministry to circulate the draft policy 
amongst the Members of this Committee as well so as to  set in motion a debate on the subject inside and 
outside Parliament thereby facilitating wide consulta tions across the board and helping Government to 
finalise the National Policy and thereafter to lay it on the Table of both the Houses, followed by 
introduction of a composite draft legislation for revamping of the Criminal Justice System in the 
country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 28 May, 2010 in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu      ------        Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy  
 3. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA 
 5. Shri Ramen Deka 
 6. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque  
 7. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 8. Shri Jitender Singh Malik  
 9. Shri A. Sampath 
 10. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed  
 11. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 12. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary  
 2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Special Secretary  
 3. Shri K.C. Jain, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Consultant 
 5. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director 
 6. Shri S.K. Gupta, Director 
  Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary  
 2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary 
  Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice  
 1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary 
 2. Shti N .K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
 3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Council 

 4. Shri K. Sreemannarayana, Assistant Legislative Council 
ACCIDENT OF GYANESHWARI EXPRESS 
2.0 * * * 
2.1 * * * 
2.2 * * * 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
3.0   The Chairman then informed Members that  the meeting had been convened to hear the 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 
2010 and hold discussion thereon. He informed the Members that the Law Secretary and the Secretary, 
Legislative Department had also been invited to the sitting so that they could respond to the legal and 
legislative queries of the Members. 
3.1   The Chairman apprised the Members that the Bill  seeks to further amend Section 41(1) (b) of Cr. PC 
1973, as amended by the Code of Criminal Proce dure (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Section 5) and Section 
41A of the Code, as inserted by the said Amendmen t Act (Section 6). The Chairman also informed the 
Members that the previous Committee had considered the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 and presented its One Hundred Eleventh and One 
Hundred Twenty Eighth Reports thereon, respectively. The Committee in the One Hundred Eleventh 
Report had recommended that Government should come forward with a comprehensive Bill particularly in 
the light of reports of various commissions, committees and studies on criminal justice system. 
3.2   The Chairman further stated that on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006, the 
Committee in its One Hundred Twenty-eighth Report, after considering a few clauses in detail, found that 
some of the new definitions/concepts/provisions introduced in the Bill, seemed to be not well thought of 
and they were based solely on the recommendations of the Law Commission and due deliberations had not 
taken place on various pros and cons and conseque nces that might flow from those provisions. The 
Committee felt that no useful purpose would be served by proceeding further with the clause-by-clause 
consideration of the Bill as the Committee could not be convinced of the rationale for introducing drastic 
changes in the criminal jurisprudence of the co untry. The Committee while making certain general 
observations recommended to the Government to have a relook at the entire Bill in the light of its 
observations/recommendations and should attempt to bring forward a comprehensive Bill for revamping 
the criminal justice system. In spite of those recommendations of the Committee, the Government went 
ahead with the enactment of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006. 
3.3   The Chairman observed that piecemeal amendments  to the Cr.P.C. were testimony to the fact that 
the Government was continuing with adhocism in so far as the criminal justice system was concerned and 
not taking the recommendations of the Committee seriously for bringing forward a comprehensive bill for 
revamping the criminal justice delivery system. 
[At this stage the witnesses were called in] 
3.4   The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials. 

3.5   The Chairman asked the Home Secretary to brief the Committee on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendation of the Committee made in its One Hundred and Eleventh and one 
Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report for bringing forward a comprehensive Bill for revamping the Criminal 
Law. 
3.6   The Home Secretary informed the Committee that Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon had submitted a draft 
National Policy on Criminal Justice to the Government. Since the ‘administration of the criminal justice 
system’ is the responsibility of both the Centre  and the States, comments and views of the State 
Governments have been sought on the Report of Prof. Madhava Menon. However, the same have been 
received from a few States only. He also stated that after the receipt of the Comments from all the States, 
the Government would take a view and bring forward a comprehensive legislation on the subject. The 
Home Secretary also told the Committee that given th e fact that comprehensive amendments would have 
to be brought in the criminal law, it would take at least one year before the proposal could be brought 
before the Cabinet and then in Parliament. 
3.7   The Chairman then asked the Home Secret ary to commence the presentation on the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Speci al Secretary made a presentation on the salient 
features of the Bill. The highlights of the presentation were as follows: 
z The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was passed by the Rajya Sabha on 
18th December, 2008 and by the Lok Sabha on  23rd December, 2008. The Bill received the 
assent of the President on 7th January, 2009 and published in  the Gazette on 9th January, 
2009; 
z Before the Act could be enforced through official notification (as provided for under section 
1(2) of the Code of Criminal  Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008 a number of representations 
were received in the MHA from all over the country, particularly from the Lawyer’s 
Associations and Bar Associations against some of the provisions of the Act; 
z To address the misgivings of the Lawyers and others, the Hon’ble Home Minister wrote a 
letter to the Chairman, Law Commission on 22nd June 2009 to take initiative and hold 
consultations with select number of persons representing the premier Bar Associations to 
Bring about a consensus on the two issues that seemed to the agitating the minds of Lawyers; 
z Section 41 (1) of the Code of Criminal Proced ure 1973, as amended by the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Act 2008 provides that a police officer may arrest a person if 
reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment of less than seven years, with or without fine, and the police officer shall record 
while making such arrest, his reasons in writing. Law Commission after holding consultation 
with various stakeholders, made recommendation that the following be added in section 41 
(1). 
“Provided that a police officer shall in all cases where the arrest of a person 
is not required under the provision of th is sub-section, record the reasons in 
writing for not making the arrest.” 
z Section 41A of Cr PC, inserted vide Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act 2008, 
provides that the police officer ‘may’, in all cas es where the arrest of a person is not required 
under the provisions of Section 41 (1); issue a notice directing that person to appear before 
him at such place, as may be specified in the notice. The Law Commission has recommended 
that the word ‘may’ may be substituted by the word ‘shall’ . 

z In case of failure to comply with the notice, Section 41A (4) provides that where such person, 
at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice, it shall be lawful for the police officer 
to arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice, subject to such orders as may have been 
passed in this behalf by a competent court. 
z The Law Commission has recommended that in case of issuance of a notice under Section 
41A, if a person who is not arrested and to whom a notice will be issued, is unwilling to 
identify himself, that could be a ground for his arrest. 
 The Law Commission has accordingly recommended modification in Section 41A (4) on the 
following lines: 
 “Where such person, at any time, fails to comply  with the terms of the notice or is unwilling to 
identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been passed by a 
competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice.” 
z The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010 has been prepared on the basis of 
the recommendations of the Law Commission of India. 
3.8   The Chairman and the Members of the Committee, thereafter, raised certain issues on the provisions 
of the Bill which were clarified by the Home Secretary and the Secretary, Legislative Department. 
3.9   The Chairman observed that as the Law Commission, after due deliberations with the Bar Council of 
India and some Bar Associations of the States, had suggested the amendments and there was unanimity on 
the proposed amendments, the Committee may approv e this Amendment Bill. The Committee endorsed 
the suggestion of the Chairman. The Committee decided to consider the Bill clause-by-clause in its next 
sitting. 
[At this stage the witnesses withdrew] 
4.0 * * * 
4.1 * * * 
[At this stage the witnesses were called in again] 
4.2 * * * 
4.3 * * * 
4.4 * * * 
4.5 * * * 
4.6 * * * 
4.7 * * * 
5.0 * * * 
5.1 * * * 
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 P.M. 
 
***relates to other matter. 

XXV 
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, 11 June, 2010 in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu     --------      Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA  
 5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar  
 7. Shri Ramen Deka 
 8. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque  
 9. Shri Jitender Singh Malik  
 10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel  
 11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel  
 12. Shri Nilesh Narayan Rane  
 13. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 14. Shri A. Sampath 
 15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 16. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh  
 17. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 18. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay  
 19. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 20. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopa1 K. Pillai, Home Secretary  
 2. Smt. Anita Chaudhary, Special Secretary  
 3. Shri U.K. Bansal, Special Secretary  
 4. Shri K.C. Jain, Joint Secretary 
 5. Shri D. Diptivilasa, Joint Secretary  
 6. Shri J. L. Chugh, Director 
 7. Shri S.K. Malhotra, Deputy Secretary  

 8. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Consultant 
  Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri D .R. Meena, Law Secretary  
 2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary 
  Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary 
 2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
2.0   The Chairman welcomed the Members to the si tting of the Committee a nd apprised them of the 
agenda for the day. 
3.0 * * * 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
4.0   Thereafter, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010. Clauses 2 and 3 were adopted without any change. Clause 1, the 
Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill were adopted without any change. 
4.1   The Committee authorised its Chairman to finalise the report on the Bill and present the same to 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha since Parliament was not in session. 
5.0 * * * 
6.0 * * * 
6.1 * * * 
6.2 * * * 
6.3 * * * 
6.4 * * * 
7.0 * * * 
8.0 * * * 
9.0 * * * 
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M. 
 
 
***relates to other matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 2009. 
2 of 1974 
 
 
 
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 29 of 2010
 
 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 1973. 
 B E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first 
Year of the Republic of India as follows:---- 
 1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2010   
 ( 2)  It shall come into force on such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 2. On and from the date of commencement 
of section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2008, in section 41 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 [as amended 
by section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2008], in sub-section ( 1), in 
clause ( b), the following proviso shall be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 41. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 
41A.
 
inserted at the end, namely: 
 “Provided that a police officer shall, in all 
cases where the arrest of a person is not required 
under the provisions of this sub-section; record 
the reasons in writing for not making the 
arrest.”. 
 3. On and from the date of commencement 
of section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2008, in section 4lA of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 [as inserted 
by section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2008] 
 ( a) in sub-section (1 ), for the words 
“The police officer may”, the words “The 
police officer shall” shall be substituted; 
 ( b) for sub-section ( 4), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:---- 
 “( 4) Where such person, at any time, 
fails to comply with the terms of the 
notice or is unwilling to identity himself, 
the police officer may, subject to such 
orders as may have been passed by a 
competent Court in this behalf, arrest 
him for the offence mentioned in the 
notice”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 2009. 
2 of 1974
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  In the light of objections from certain quarters to certain provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, the said Act could not be brought into force. These provisions, inter 
alia, relate to the power of the police to arrest withou t warrant. A reference in th e matter was made to the 
Law Commission of India to take the initiative to bring about a consensus on the issues. The Law 
Commission discussed the issues with  all concerned including the Chairperson(s) of some of the Bar 
Councils and the Chairman of the Bar Council of India. After holding consultations, the Law Commission 
recommended further amendment in the provisions of am ended section 41 of the aforesaid Act to make it 
compulsory for the police to record th e reasons for making an arrest as well for not making an arrest in 
respect of a cognizable offence for which the maximum punishment is up to seven years. The Law 
Commission also suggested further changes in the newly inserted section 41A of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure Act, 1973 (inserted by Act 5 of 2009) to make it compulsory for the police to issue a notice in 
all such cases where arrest is not required to be made under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of the amended 
section 41. It was also suggested that the unwillingness of a person who has not been arrested to identify 
himself and to whom a notice has been issued under the aforesaid section 41A could be a ground for his 
arrest. It has been decided to accept the suggestions of the Law Commission of India and to amend the 
Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 1973 as amended by  the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 
2008. 
2.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
N
EW DELHI;     P. CHIDAM B
The 2nd March, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When police may arrest 
without warant. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
(2 of 1974) 
* * * * 
CHAPTER V 
ARREST OF PERSONS 
 41.  ( 1) Any police officer may 
without an order from a Magistrate and 
without a warrant, arrest any person 
* * * * 
 ( b) against whom a reasonable 
complaint has been made, or 
credible information has been 
received, or a reasonable suspicion 
exists that he has committed a 
cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may 
be less than seven years or which 
may extend to seven years whether 
with or without fine, if the 
following conditions are satisfied, 
namely:--- 
 ( i) the police officer has 
reason to believe on the basis of 
such complaint, information, or 
suspicion that such person has 
committed the said offence; 
 ( ii) the police officer is 
satisfied that such arrest is 
necessary ---- 
 ( a) to prevent such 
person from committing 
any further offence; or 
 ( b) for proper 
investigation of the offence; 
or 
 ( c) to prevent such 
person from causing the 
evidence of the offence to 
 

disappear or tampering with 
such evidence in any 
manner; or 
 ( d) to prevent such 
person from making any 
inducement, threat or 
promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of 
the case so as to dissuade 
him from disclosing such 
facts to the Court or to the 
police officer; or 
 ( e) as unless such 
person is arrested, his 
presence in the Court 
whenever required cannot 
be ensured, and the police 
officer shall record while 
making such arrest, his 
reasons in writing. 
 41A. (1) The police officer may, in 
all cases where the arrest of a person is 
not required under the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 41, issue a 
notice directing the person against 
whom a reasonable complaint has been 
made, or credible information has been 
received, or a reasonable suspicion 
exists that he has commiitted a 
cognizable offence, to appear before 
him or at such other place as may be 
specified in the notice. 
* * * * 
 ( 4) Where such person, at any 
time, fails to comply with the terms 
of the notice, it shall be lawful for 
the police officer to arrest him for 
the offence mentioned in the notice, 
subject to such orders as may have 
been passed in this behalf by a 
competent Court. 
* * * * 

LOK SABHA 
---------------------------- 
A 
Bill 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 1973. 
---------------------------- 
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs) 