ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 29th August, 2013)
Strengthening of the working of Ministry 
of DoNER for Effective Implementation 
of Policies, Programmes, Schemes and 
Projects meant for North Eastern Region
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadra, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
173
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

103
C.S.(H.A.)-338
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
Strengthening of the working of Ministry
of DoNER for Effective Implementation
of  Policies, Programmes, Schemes and
Projects meant for North Eastern Region
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  29 th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  29 th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadra, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (v)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—54
Chapter–I Background and Presentation of the Ministry of Development
of North Eastern Region .................................................................... 1—5
Chapter–II Interaction with select line Ministries ............................................. 6—14
Chapter–III Discussion with Chief Secretaries/Representatives of State
Governments of NER .......................................................................... 15—32
Chapter–IV V iews of Cabinet Secretary; Secretary, Planning Commission
and Secretary, Ministry of Finance ............................................... 33—40
Chapter–V Observations/Conclusions and Recommendations of the
Committee ............................................................................................. 41—54
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 55—84
6. A NNEXURES ..........................................................................................................................   85— 102
(i) List of Major infrastructure line Ministries which were  heard  by the
Committee ............................................................................................................... 87
(ii) List of other line Ministries which were requested to furnish their
written comments on the subject. ..................................................................... 88—89
(iii) List of other line Ministries which furnished their written comments ....... 90
(iv) Issues raised/suggestions made by other Ministries/Department ................... 91—102

COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
^2. Vacant
Â 3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
#8. Vacant
§ 9. Vacant
%10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
*16. Shri Pa wan Kumar Bansal
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
Â Shri Santiuse Kujur, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the resignation
of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on Home Affairs w.e.f. 22nd February, 2013.
§ Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries on 28 th October, 2012.
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f.  28 th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the
appointment of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet on 28 th October, 2012 and Shri D. Raja,
Member, RS ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013.
* Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f.  7 th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the
Appointment of Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary as Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 17 th June, 2013.
# Shrimati Kanimozhi ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013.
% Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013 and
Dr. V . Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha was re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27 th July, 2013.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One-Hundred Seventy Third Report on Strengthening of the working of Ministry of
DoNER for Effective Implementation of Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects Meant for
North Eastern Region.
2. The Committee considered the subject in six sittings held on 30
th May, 10 th & 21 st June, 4 th,
18th July and 27 th August, 2013. The Committee in its sitting held on 30 th May, 2013 heard
presentation of Secretary, Ministry of DoNER on the subject. In order to have a holistic view of
problems being faced and status of implementation of projects, the Committee, in its sitting held
on 10
th June, 2013 heard the Secretaries of major infrastructure Line Ministries viz., Civil Aviation,
Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, Home Affairs, Power, Department of Telecommunications
and Chairman, Railway Board on the subject. (Annexure-I)
3. The Committee also sought written comments of other line Ministries. Out of 46 Ministries
(Annexure-II), which were requested 27 Ministries/Departments furnished their comments (lists at
Annexure-III). The issues raised/suggestions made by these line Ministries in their written
comments have been culled out and are at Annexure-IV .
4. The Committee, in order to understand the problems of the State Governments in execution
of the schemes and projects meant for NER, in its sitting held on 21
st June 2013,  heard Chief
Secretaries/representatives of all the North Eastern States, alongwith Secretaries, Ministry of
DoNER and North Eastern Council, on the subject. The Committee also heard Cabinet Secretary;
Secretary, Planning Commission; and Secretary, Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance)
on the subject on 4
th July 2013 to take a view on the planning and financing aspects of the
schemes and projects in North Eastern Region.
5. The Committee discussed and finalised views on the subject in its sitting held on 18 th July, 2013.
6. The Committee in its sitting held on 27 th August, 2013 considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
7. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has relied mainly upon the
following papers received from the Ministry of DoNER:–
(i) Background note on the subject “Strengthening the working of the Ministry of DoNER”;
(ii) Note on the subject as received from Line Ministries i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs;
Ministry of Power; Ministry of Road Transport & Highways; Ministry of Railways;
Ministry of Shipping; Ministry of Civil Aviation; Ministry of Communications and IT,
Department of Telecommunication;
(iii) W ritten note received from other line Ministries;
(iv) Response of the Ministry of DoNER on the issues raised by Line Ministries/State
Governments;
(v) Notes/written replies received from Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and
Cabinet Secretariat;

(vi) Clarifications received from Ministry of DoNER, Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance on the issues raised by the Committee;
(vii) Written submissions of North Eastern States Governments and oral evidence of Chief
Secretaries/representative of State Governments of North-east Region.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI Department-related Parliamentary
27th August,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
(iv)

ACRONYMS
ACG Airport Connectivity Guidelines
A T&C Aggregate Technical and Commercial
A R Assam Riffles
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission
ACA Additional Central Assistance
AIR All India Radio
BADP Border Area Development Programme
BTC Bodoland Territorial Council
B M Border Management
BSF Border Security Force
BMS Basic Minimum Services
CEA Central Electrical Authority
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CPWD Central Public Works Department
CSS Centrally Sponsored Schemes
CoS Committee of Secretaries
DoNER Development of North Eastern Region
DPRs Detailed Project Reports
DDK Door Darshan Kendra
DBMS Data Base Management System
EPC Engineering Procurement and Construction
E-GoM Empowered Group of Ministers
FRBM Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
GBS Gross Budgetary Support
HADP Hill Area Development Programme
HRD Human Resources Development
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India
IQM Integrated Quality Management
JNNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban renewal Mission
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forest
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development
(v)

NER North-Eastern Region
NLCPR Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
NEC North Eastern Council
NEDFi North East Development Finance Corporation
NERAMAC North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited
NEHHDC North Eastern Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation
NHPC National Hydro Power Corporation
NRHM National Rural Health Mission
NQM National Quality Monitors
NIT National Institute of Technology
PMO Prime Minister’s Office
PMGSY Pardhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
PWD Public Works Department
QPRs Quarterly Progress Reports
R-APDRP Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programmes
Ro-Ro Roll on-Roll Off
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Service
RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete
RGGVY Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidhut Yojana
SIDF Social and Infrastructure Development Fund
SARDP Special Accelerated Road Development Programme
SSA Sarva Siksha Abhiyan
SOR Schedule of Rates
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal
SE Superintending Engineer
SARDP-NE Special Accelerated Road Development Programme in North East
UCs Utilization Certificates
V A T Value Added Taxes
WAPCOS W ater and Power Consultancy Services
(vi)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
BACKGROUND AND PRESENTATION OF THE MINISTRY
OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION
1.1 The North-Eastern Region (NER) of India encompasses eight States viz. Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura, covering an area of
2.62 lakh sq. km. i.e. 7.9% of total geographical area of the country with a total population of
39 million accounting for 3.8% of total population of India. The NER of India is land-locked area
characterised by its unique culture, diversity of ethnic groups, rich natural resources and flora and
fauna with long international borders and above all only a chicken neck corridor via Silliguri
connecting it with the mainland India. The economy of the North-East has a distinctive identity due
to its peculiar physical, economic and socio-cultural dimensions but the paradox of the fact is that
notwithstanding its rich natural endowment, the region stands as one of the least developed-
economically and industrially–regions of the country. It is due to hilly and inhospitable terrains,
porous borders, highly inadequate connectivity, limited air services, inadequate rail links and weak
telecommunication infrastructure.
1.2 With an objective to fast track economic growth of the region, the Department of North
East Region was formed in September 2001 which was upgraded to the status of a full-fledged
Ministry in 2004 to push further socio-economic development of the region. This Ministry, rather
than an administrative unit, acts as a facilitator between the Central Ministries/Departments and the
State Governments of the North Eastern Region for accelerating economic development including
removal of infrastructural bottlenecks, provision of basic minimum services, creating an
environment for private investment and to remove impediments to lasting peace and security in the
region.
1.3 The Ministry implements the mandated work through the formulation of appropriate policies,
and implementation of specific Plan Programmes. As per the Government of India (Allocation of
Business) Rules, 1961, the mandate of the Ministry of DoNER is as under:–
(i) Matters relating to the planning, execution and monitoring of developmental schemes
and projects of North Eastern Region including those in the sectors of power,
irrigation, roads and communications;
(ii) Hill Area Development Programme and Border Area Development Programme in North
Eastern Region;
♣
(iii) Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources for North Eastern Region (NLCPR);
(iv) North Eastern Council (NEC);
(v) North East Development Finance Corporation (NEDFi);
1
♣ Included in the original mandate of the Ministry of DoNER but has not been transferred from Planning Commission
and MHA, respectively.

2
(vi) North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (NERAMAC);
(vii) North Eastern Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation (NEHHDC);
(viii) Road works financed in whole or in part by the Central Government in the North
Eastern Region; and
(ix) Planning of road and inland waterways transport in the North Eastern Region.
1.4 The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region seeks to realize the following goals:
(i) Accelerating the pace of socio-economic development in the North Eastern Region;
(ii) Synergizing the efforts of Central/State Governments/Other Stakeholders for balanced
development of the Region;
(iii) Integrated and holistic planning for the region, taking into account the heightened
consciousness of the people of the region, their aspirations, needs and sensitivities;
(iv) Evolving a common approach for all the agencies working for the development of the
region;
(v) Formulating appropriate policies for the rapid development of the region.
(a) Development of cities and roads in the North Eastern States (externally aided
projects); and
(b) Schemes for creation and upgradation of infrastructure facilities, specially in Arunachal
Pradesh and other border areas in the North Eastern Areas, under the Social and
Infrastructure Development Fund (SIDF).
1.5 Despite the mandate and good intentions, the Ministry has failed to achieve its objectives
and has not been able to improve the situation on the ground as a whole. During its interaction
with the Ministry while considering Demands for Grants for various years and other subjects, the
Committee felt that the performance of the Ministry was not upto the mark and much is still left
to be desired. It was in this spirit that the Committee made the following recommendations in its
170
th Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region:
“The Committee fails to understand that a Ministry, which was carved out to focus and
expedite development in the North East region, after more than a decade of its existence has
realized that it lacks sufficient power and necessary infrastructure to carry out its mandate,
and is completely dependent on various Line Ministries/Departments for execution of projects.
The Committee takes a serious view of the situation and feels that a holistic view at the
functioning and powers of the Ministry should be taken at this stage. The Committee is not
at all impressed with the functioning of the Ministry and gets an impression that the line
ministries are not supporting or paying heed to the suggestions/requests of the Ministry. The
Committee intends to discuss this issue separately at a later stage with all stakeholders and
authorities. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry should furnish a detailed
note, based on the last 12-13 years of experience indicating about the bottlenecks and
shortcomings and the desired solutions. The Committee also proposes to discuss the matter
with the Cabinet Secretary and Secretaries of all the line Ministries and the Chief Secretaries
of the State Governments so as to enable the Ministry to effectively tackle the issues faced
by it. The Committee also intends to discuss with the Planning Commission about the need
for reviewing all the schemes being implemented in the North East to have a holistic view
in the matter and also to find solutions to the problems faced by the Ministry.”
(Para 3.1.2 of 170
th Report )

3
1.6 The Committee, therefore, decided to study the functioning of the Ministry of DoNER and
accordingly took up the subject “Strengthening of working of the Ministry of DoNER for effective
implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and projects meant for North Eastern Region”.
1.2 Views of the Ministry of DoNER
1.2.1 The Committee heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of DoNER on 30
th May, 2013. The
Secretary, Ministry of DoNER, explaining about the delay in the approval of Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs), stated that when the State Governments formulate projects, they do not have the
wherewithal to make the proper investigations. Because of this, most of the DPRs submitted by
the State Governments are defective. The Ministry, therefore, has to send them back again and
again for clarifications. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Ministry suggested to the
State Governments to outsource it.
1.2.3 Commenting further on the undue delay in the vetting of DPRs, the DoNER Secretary
submitted that in certain cases, projects were retained on the basis of the concept papers. But
when the Ministry wrote back to the State Governments for giving DPRs, it took time. So, the
delay started from there only and the delay also continued in the vetting of the DPR. The Ministry
had taken an administrative decision to guillotined those retained projects which had been retained
in the year 2008-09 as they had no relevance any more due to very high cost escalation.
1.2.4 The Secretary f urther stated that the Ministry of DoNER and the North-Eastern Council
(NEC) combined together contributed less than four per cent of the total fund flow to the North-
Eastern Region in the 11th Five Year Plan. He was, therefore, of the view that the impact of NEC
and the Ministry of DoNER in financial terms was very marginal. The DoNER Secretary mentioned
as under–
“The Ministry of DoNER and the NEC combined together contributed less than four per
cent of the total Fund flow to the North-Eastern Region in the Eleventh Five Year Plan
and the financial impact of the NEC and the Ministry of DoNER was very marginal. The
approved State outlays given by the Planning Commission formed 48.62 per cent of the
gross budgetary support. The NEC contributed only 1.76 per cent; the Ministry of DoNER
through NLCPR contributed only 1.92 per cent and the 10% Budget of the Central
Ministries/Departments, was 47.70 per cent.”
1.2.5 Explaining about the necessity of an institutional mechanism, the Secretary explained that,
according to the present system, the plenary session of the North-Eastern Council, which was
supposed to happen twice in a year, is held only once in a year and there is no time for review,
and, only when the Secretary, DoNER or the Secretary, NEC visits the States, they review it. He,
therefore, felt the need of an institutional mechanism for review of projects.
1.2.6 The DoNER Secretary pointed out that the Ministry of Minority Affairs also had earlier
faced problems similar to that of the Ministry of DoNER. The said Ministry was monitoring
projects, targeting the minority people in their own budgets and a mechanism was built and things
moved forward. In the context of advocacy, on a pointed query regarding remedy available for not
following advice, the DoNER Secretary admitted that there was no constitutional mechanism for
that remedy. He suggested that for strengthening the Ministry of DoNER, as far as advocacy is
concerned, there should be an empowered Group of Ministers.
1.2.7 The DoNER Secretary mentioned that the most of the Ministries wanted to be exempted
from mandatory provisioning for earmarking 10% of its GBS for North East, which, actually,
reflected their antipathy towards this. He further mentioned that the non-lapsable pool fund was
maintained by notional accounting procedure under the Department of Expenditure and the Ministry
of DoNER does not have access to it. The Ministry was required to make budgetary demands but

4
as per the outlay given by the Planning Commission. He also submitted that the accrued amount
in the fund was growing. On a specific query whether the Ministry was being consulted before
designing the programmes, the DoNER Secretary replied in negative.
1.2.8 The DoNER Secretary apprised the Committee that funds were transferred to Assam for the
Bodoland Territorial Council under a package on the basis of a peace accord signed by the Ultras
and if these funds are not transferred to the Bodoland Territorial Council, they might revert back
to their old ways. He expressed his helplessness as funds could not be given directly to them
bypassing the State Government.
1.2.9 The Ministry of DoNER, in the background note, has highlighted the following issues and
suggestions for improving the functioning of the Ministry and for strengthening it:
· Central Ministries/Departments should earmark 10% of GBS for only such schemes of
NER, which are appropriate to the specific needs of the region and effectively and the
schemes should be efficiently implemented so that outcome is achieved.
· Ministries should frame broad based schemes or a component within existing scheme
to suit NER.
· Ministries should not mechanically earmark 10% allocation regardless of their
suitability.
· Distributing available kitty of 10% should be done to suitable schemes only even if
allocation is higher. 10% is floor and not a ceiling. Where there is need, higher
allocation can be made.
· Conceptualising schemes should be done exclusively for NER.
· Central Ministries should conduct analysis of their on-going schemes from the view
point of their suitability to the special needs of NER.
· They should critically study off take trends under the scheme by each of the NE
States and appraise reasons for poor off take, if any.
· The difficulties faced by the State Governments in preparing proposals under the
existing schemes should be analysed by the Ministries/Departments.
· The Ministries should prepare alternate/sub scheme for NER or have a broad based
“umbrella scheme” within which individual projects suitable for North East States
could be implemented.
· Empowered Group of Ministers needs to be set up to review key infrastructure
programmes.
· A high level monitoring committee by each of NER States should be constituted.
1.2.10 The Ministry has stated that the following factors are responsible for time and cost over-
runs:
· Inadequate investigations and project formulation
· Changes in scope and revision of drawings due to inadequate project preparation
· Delay in clearances from various regulatory agencies
· Delay in land acquisition
· Delay in release of funds

5
· Management problems such as personnel, labour and contractor disputes, mismatch of
equipment etc.
· Unforeseen reasons such as adverse geo-mining conditions, natural calamities, etc.
· Geographical constraints of terrain.
· Inappropriate and inadequate procurement and faulty contractual management system.
· Poor selection of contractors due to low bids with no technical capability to handle
the project will lead to cost overruns, schedule delays, poor quality etc. Most qualified
contractor should be identified.

6
CHAPTER-II
VIEWS OF SELECT MAJOR LINE MINISTRIES
2.1 In its meeting held on 10 th June, 2013, the Committee heard the views of the Secretaries
of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Power, Communication
& Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications), Chairman, Railways Board and
Secretary (BM), Ministry of Home Affairs. The submissions of the representatives of the said
Ministries during the meeting as well as their written notes on the problems faced by them in
implementing projects in the NE region and the suggestions made by them are dealt in the following
paragraphs.
2.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation
2.2.1 The Civil Aviation Secretary informed the Committee that there are 11 operating airports in
all the North-Eastern States except Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. In case of Sikkim, a new airport
was under construction and expected to get commissioned by June, 2014. So far as Arunachal
Pradesh is concerned, an airport had been sanctioned for Itanagar and the land acquisition was
going on. Funds had been allocated for the purpose and with the completion of this project, all
the North-Eastern States would be having operating airports.
2.2.2 He furt her informed that airports in the region were having certain problems with regard
to the night landing facilities. Though they had got all the ground base facilities and visual facilities
were already in place, some instrument landing facilities were required to be provided in some
States. The Ministry had already drawn out a programme, according to which, by end of the
financial year 2013-14, all these North-Eastern airports are going to be equipped with instrument-
related night-landing facility.
2.2.3 He also informed that all the airports in the North-East were making losses. The total loss
on account of these airports to the Airport Authority in one year was about Rs.110 crore. Airlines
were also operating under loss in the North-Eastern States. According to the Route Disbursal
Guidelines, airlines were obliged to deploy 10 per cent of their capacity, which they were operating
on the metro routes, to the North-East. However, this policy had a drawback and they were
operating a lot of services to Guwahati and Bagdogra. While these two services from the metro
cities have become viable to a very great extent, the main problem of the connectivity within the
North-East persisted. The Secretary stated that the coverage was, therefore, very poor and airlines
were not able to increase it on account of this cost factor.
2.2.4 He further informed that there was a scheme under which Alliance Air, a subsidiary of Air
India, was operating services within the North-Eastern Region, for which, the North-Eastern
Council was giving subsidy. On the yearly subsidy basis, the services were being run. In 2012,
Rs.60 crore of subsidy was not cleared by the NEC and it decided to drop services of Air India
on the grounds of expensive cost and explore services of private airlines. Consequently, the Air
India had to stop the services to three airports of Shillong, Lilabari and Tezpur. He suggested that
since the functioning of the North-Eastern Council was cumbersome, a Cell should be created in
the PMO or in the Cabinet Secretariat for the civil aviation purposes which can take quick
decisions in this matter.
6

7
2.2.5 In its written note, the Ministry of Civil Aviation raised the following issues and made the
suggestions:
1. Scale of operations in NER is very less.
2. None of the airports is able to make profits. Accumulated losses in operations/
maintenance of airports are more than Rs.100 crore.
3. Separate DPRs are causing delay. Separate MoU for all small projects instead of DPR
was suggested for reducing delay. However, it was not accepted.
4. DPRs should not be insisted for works up to Rs.100 crore.
5. Main problems are delay in getting fund sanction, non-availability of land/delay in land
acquisition and issues with defence at the joint user airports.
6. DoNER/NEC should give 100% financial support.
7. There may be Airport Connectivity Guidelines (ACG) and Code Sharing with national
and regional Airlines.
2.3 Ministry of Power
2.3.1 According to the Power Secretary, the Ministry of Power was mandated to prepare
programmes, policies for generation, transmission and distribution of power in the North-East.
Many of these works are done by the concerned States and particularly distribution and
infrastructure are entirely in the domain of the States. The Secretary underlined the need for a
comprehensive plan for adequate road network in a time-bound manner in the North-Eastern Region
to expedite the development of projects in the North-East as these projects are located in very
remote places.
2.3.2 The second handicap, according to the Secretary, was the clearances that were required
from different organisations, particularly the environment and forest, which were held up from time
to time. The environment and forest clearances have to be obtained at the State level as well as
at the Central level. There are a lot of delays at the State level also. Even holding of public
hearings, which was one of the first things that needed to happen in the particular district where
the project was going to be located, could not be conducted. According to him this had been a
contentious issue in case of many projects. He cited the example of 3,000 MW Debang project to
be executed by NHPC and informed that the public hearing could not be held 12 times because
of law and order situation and after a lot of intervention by the Ministry and the personal
intervention of the Minister of Power, the public hearing was conducted.
2.3.3 Regarding forest clearance at the State level and the Central level, he suggested, that the
clearances should be given in the prescribed time limit and there should be sub-limits for different
stages. He observed that these limits were generally not adhered to and these limits do not even
have sub-limits. For instance, 210 days were the time that has to be taken for providing a
particular clearance. Generally there is no time limit for any particular agency to give the clearance
from its side. He, therefore, suggested that within this limit of 210 days, limit for the Central and
State governments and their concerned agencies should be fixed and adhered to.
2.3.4 He further informed that transmission infrastructure and sub-transmission infrastructure
were also not in a very good shape in the North-East which needed to be fixed. Regarding the
distribution projects, there were difficulties in getting adequate contractors.

8
2.3.5 The Committee noted from the background note received from the Ministry that delay in
completion of projects ranged between one to nine years. The Following are some other issues/
suggestions submitted by the Ministry in its written note submitted to the Committee:
2.3.5.1 Issues
1. In several schemes, construction is mainly held up due to environmental and forest
clearances.
2. Concurrence to schemes by CEA is also delayed due to multi-disciplinary discussion
process and inadequate man power in CEA.
3. Survey and Investigation of the schemes are hampered due to lack of infrastructure
like roads and telecommunications.
4. Environmental clearances are delayed by the State Governments and the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
5. Forest clearances by the State Forest Departments are also delayed.
6. Difficult working conditions like prolonged monsoon and flood in Assam adversely
influence the progress.
7. AT&C losses are among the highest in NER in Distribution Sector.
8. For implementation of R-APDRP in NER, three States are yet to submit Part-B
DPRs.
9. Non-availability of construction materials is a big handicap.
2.3.5.2  Suggestions
(a) Non-availability of construction materials like cement, steel etc. and long procurement
time makes the Hydro Projects costly and unviable. Industries for construction
material needed to be set up in NER States to meet the requirement of construction
material.
(b) DoNER should have an assured mechanism to fund CCEA approved projects through
the designated budget head.
(c) Comprehensive plan should be implemented for road and communication network.
(d) DoNER should arrange adequate allocation in NLCPR funds for timely allocation to
the approved projects.
(e) DoNER should tie up with NE States for quick decision making for finalisation of
MoUs for Transmission projects and issues like Right of Way and forest clearance
need to be addressed by the States without delay.
(f) Since the NER areas have poor road and communication infrastructure, there is need
to implement a comprehensive plan for adequate road network as well as waterways
in a time bound manner taking into consi deration various development projects
including remotely located hydro power station sites . Various agencies like the Border
Roads Organisation, Ministry of Roads and Highways, State PWDs, etc need to work
in a coordinated manner.
(g) Local issues and problems of law and order situation should be addressed by the
local administration and State authorities.

9
(h) The Survey and Investigation works, preparation of DPRs etc. for projects require
time bound clearances from various organizations including importantly from MoEF.
(i) Emphasis also needs to be placed on adequate security measures to safeguard
personnel and machinery deployed for the implementation of various projects without
time and cost overrun.
(j) DoNER in coordination with NE States should take proactive steps for timely
resolution of problems.
2.4 MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
2.4.1 The Secretary brought to the notice of the Committee that the most glaring infrastructure
deficit in the NE Region was in the road sector and to address this gap in road infrastructure, the
Government came up with an ambitious programme called the Special Accelerated Road
Development Programme (SARDP) for the North-East in 2005. This programme had been broken
up into two phases. He further submitted that the programme consisted of not only the national
highways which was the main mandate of the Ministry of Road Transport, but also consisted of
a substantial stretch of State roads. According to him, the basic focus of the programme was to
(i) upgrade National Highways connecting State capitals to two or four lane roads (ii) connect all
88 district headquarters in the North-East Region by at least a two-lane road, (iii) improve roads
of strategic importance in border areas and (iv) improve connectivity to neighbouring countries.
2.4.2 For Arunachal Pradesh, given its importance and also it’s geographical size, a special
package for a total length of 2,319 kms. consisting of 1,472 kms. of National Highways and 847
kms. of strategic roads had been announced. Out of this, about 1,342 kms. had already been
awarded and it was mainly being executed through BRO. The Secretary further informed that the
Ministry was in the process of addressing the SARDP Phase-A and Arunachal package aggregating
to 6,418 kms. In addition to this, there was SARDP Phase-B for another length of 3,723 kms.,
for which the issue of preparation of DPRs was being addressed and no allocation during the
Twelfth Plan for SARDP Phase-B had been made and the same would be taken up in the next Five
Year Plan period. The financial implications involved for the programme i.e. SDDPE phase A and
Arunachal Package, that was already under way in the Twelfth Plan, was of the order of Rs.34,000
crore.
2.4.3 The Secretary further informed that money was not a constraint and adequate funds have
been kept aside for the SARDP as well as the Arunachal package. The constraints were other than
the financials. The main concerns were regarding the implementation of the plans. So far, only
1,000 kms. had been completed under SARDP Phase-A and only 68 kms. had been completed
under Arunachal package. He further felt that while the programme for awarding works was
reasonably on target but the outcome in terms of roads completed was not taking place. There
were other reasons responsible for it also.
2.4.4 The Transport Secretary further informed that a few years back when the matter was
reviewed, it was assessed that local contractors didn’t have the capacity to take up such a large
programme. A conscious decision in this regard was taken to take the road lengths in larger
packages, involving larger financial outlays and to encourage big contractors from outside the
North-East Region to come and build these roads. Unfortunately, this did not pay the dividends that
were envisaged at that point of time. He cited an example, wherein under the Arunachal package,
the Ministry had taken up 740 kms. in two packages—one of about 300 plus kms. and the other
of 440 kms. Both these were awarded two years back, but still land acquisition for these stretches
could not be completed. He further informed the Committee that the Ministry had decided to award
projects only when 90% of the land was available so as to avoid a situation wherein projects were

10
awarded, contractors had been mobilized but the programmes were not executed for want of land
acquisition.
2.4.5 The Transport Secretary also submitted that another decision was taken to encourage local
contractors because there was a limit for outside contractors to come and perform. The Ministry
was consciously taking project lengths in such a manner which would permit local contractors to
participate in the bid process. Invariably what was noticed was that in case the project lengths
were very large, outside contractors got the contracts but they sub-contracted it to local
contractors. He further informed that the Ministry was getting the feedback that the capacity of
contractors, particularly in Assam area, was growing to take up projects in other areas as well.
2.4.6 The Transport Secretary also opined that as far as timely sanction was concerned, unlike
the other projects of the Ministry, for the North-East projects, there was a fast-track mechanism,
including a high-powered committee, for sanctioning and it was working reasonably well.
2.4.7 The Transport Secretary drew the attention to a particular problem that the Ministry was
facing in the State of Nagaland. Projects for four stretches were awarded at a total cost of Rs.
1,300 crore. The revised estimate came for Rs. 2,900 crore. It was quite apparent that the local
requirement for these four stretches was completely at variance with the project report. He added
that no programme of this size can be run with escalation to the magnitude of 200 per cent. In
view of this he suggested that the contractors/consultants should be penalized at the stage of
project formulation itself in such cases. When State PWDs, receive the project reports, they should
have a look at the local situation before accepting it because they are the main agencies for
implementation. He stated that in order to improve their capabilities for the same, the Ministry was
now shifting from ‘item rate’ mode-of-delivery to the ‘Engineering Procurement Contract’ mode-
of-delivery. He argued that any contract beyond Rs. 5 crore shall get implemented through the EPC
mode to automatically bring pressure on the State PWDs as also the contractors to ensure timely
completion of the projects. The Secretary agreed that the Ministry was willing to accept a higher
bid price but not any escalation thereafter, once the bid had been accepted.
2.4.8 He also brought to the no tice of the Committee another problem encountered by the
Ministry was that it was overtly dependent on BRO for substantial stretches, particularly closer to
the border areas. BRO had been organized in a manner where they are able to take up only
departmental activities. A single unit of BRO at best can take up 10 kms. in a year. At this pace
of road construction, the Ministry will never be able to achieve objectives of this programme.
2.4.9 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in its written note made the following
submissions:
· BRO is executing the works departmentally due to which there is slow progress. Main
problem is delay in environmental/forest clearances for projects of BRO.
· Delays in handing over of land/obtaining of forest clearances by State Governments.
· Non-availability of construction material due to restriction imposed by the Supreme
Court.
· Normal working condition in NER is tough. Monsoon period is long i.e. 8-9 months.
· Due to tough terrain, accessibility of manpower and machine is difficult.
· There is lack of technical knowledge at State PWDs in implementing the projects.
· There is dearth of local contractors with sound financial and technical capabilities.
· Participation of contractors from other parts of the country in the tenders is meagre.

11
· Model document for Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC) prepared by the
Planning Commission has been approved by the Cabinet. By implementing this, the
liability of the Government will be reduced. There is some resistance in accepting EPC
mode.
·  Weak consultancy is the biggest problem. Project reports do not reflect reality on the
ground. In some cases, project report has been made without even a single visit to
the local situation.
· Revised estimates are more than double within a short period of the approval of the
project.
· State PWDs should have a look at the local situation before accepting project reports.
· There are problems of land acquisition in implementation of Arunahcal Pradesh
package.
2.5 MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
2.5.1 The Chairman, Railway Board informed the Committee that at present total projects with a
provision of around Rs.48,000 crore had been allocated for the region out of which Rs.16,000
crore had already been spent. As per the availability of funds, the Ministry needed about Rs.7,000
crore every year to complete these projects in a designated time-frame, but the Ministry was only
able to get about Rs.3,000 crore, less than half of what it actually needed. He further informed
that there were three very important projects, namely Rangiya – Rangapara – Harmoti – Nahar
Lagoon – North Lakhimpur – Murkongselek – Pasighat, Lumding – Silchar – Jiribam – Badarpur
- Kumarghat and the Bogibeel Bridge. He further opined that if they were completed within the next
few years, they will change the rail transportation network in the North-Eastern Region. He further
informed that, because of the resource crunch, the Ministry was concentrating on these projects
and would dedicate to complete to these three projects within Twelfth Five Year Plan period.
2.5.2 The Chairman, Railway Board further informed that the Ministry was dependent on the
Gross Budgetary Support for allocation of funds for all these projects. The Gross Budgetary
Support had however not been adequate and whatever promised by the Planning Commission, the
Ministry was not able to get even that amount also. As a result, the projects had suffered time and
cost overrun. These two issues were definitely generic to the construction activity in the Railways.
2.5.3 On a pointed query regarding absence of targeted time period for completion of certain
projects in North East, the Chairman, Railway Board informed that the Ministry was concentrating
on certain critical works in the North-East so as to avoid spreading of finances too thin because
of the constraint of finances. In view of this it would like to complete certain important projects
and then go for other projects. That was why it had not indicated completion dates in respect of
certain projects.
2.5.4 The Chairman, Railway Board, responding on the issue of transfer of railway land at Pandu
Terminal, informed the Committee that there were 6,000 sq. metres of railway land which had to
be given and thereafter the alignment had to be fixed. But, there were 2,150 encroachments which
were to be cleared by the State Government. There was no other alignment possible at present.
2.6 MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
2.6.1 The Shipping Secretary informed the Committee that insofar as the Ministry of Shipping
was concerned, the subject pertaining to the North-Eastern Region was limited to the inland
waterway transportation. The North-Eastern Region was richly endowed in terms of rivers and,

12
therefore, the effort of the Ministry had been to transport as much cargo and divert as much from
the road and rail as possible to the Inland Waterways system of the North-East.
2.6.2 The Inland Waterways Authority of India had declared about 900 km. of the Brahmaputra
River, starting from Dhubri to Sadia, as the National Waterway-2. The Inland Waterways Authority
of India had been, over the years, trying to develop and maintain the National Waterway-2 for inland
waterway transportation. The fixed terminal at Pandu was nearing completion. There were already
nine existing floating terminals. The Roll on-roll off (Ro-Ro) terminals had been sanctioned and the
work had been awarded to the CPWD in January 2013. The work was being taken up on the Dhubri
side but on the other side of the river there was problem of soil erosion. The matter had been taken
up with the Brahmaputra Board and the Irrigation Department of the Government of Assam to stop
soil erosion so that work could be started on the Hatsinghimari side of the Ro-Ro terminal. He further
informed that the fixed terminal at Pandu was going to get completed by June, 2014. Dedicated road
connectivity has been sanctioned at a cost of Rs.11 crore to connect to National Highway-31 and
for this, land was required from the Railways. The requisite amount had been paid but the land had
not been transferred owing to encroachment and work had not started. Either that encroachment had
to be removed or an alternative piece of land for an alternative alignment has to be given, because
this dedicated connectivity from the Waterway Terminal to the National Highway will be an essential
requirement. Without that, the cargo flow will not be smooth. According to the Shipping Secretary
the other things, which the IWAI was doing, were related to maintaining navigational facilities,
navigational aids, both for day and night navigation.
2.6.3 The Shipping Secretary further informed that there was a scheme for providing 100 per-
cent Central assistance to the North-Eastern States for taking up river development works. Apart
from the National Waterway-2, that is, the Brahmaputra River, there are other river stretches also
which can be developed for cargo transportation. But the response or the initiative from the States
of the North-Eastern Region was lacking. The Central Government, on its own, engaged
M/s. RITES to identify river stretches which could be developed for such cargo transportation and
RITES had identified 22 river stretches in all the States of North-Eastern Region which can be
developed. Those identified river stretches had been shared with the concerned State Governments
and they had been requested to send proposals for assistance. However, so far, only three
proposals had been received, one of which had been sanctioned. The Secretary observed that
North-Eastern States needed to be little more proactive in sending proposals for development of
these river stretches for cargo transportation.
2.6.4 The Shipping Secretary further informed that there was a Transport Subsidy Scheme, up
to 90 per cent subsidy, which was under implementation in the North-East. Under that Scheme,
Siliguri rail point had been identified and for any transportation beyond Siliguri to the industrial unit
through road, subsidy was provided. However, Inland waterway had not been included under its
ambit. The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion had issued the notification recently and
now, the inland waterway transportation was also eligible for Transport Subsidy in the North-East.
2.6.5 The Ministry of Shipping in its written note made the following submissions:–
· For Protocol Route for inland Water Transit & Trade, present validity of Protocol is
upto 31
st March, 2015. Steps are being made to make it co-terminous with the “Trade
Agreement between India and Bangladesh”.
· Declaration of Barak River as National Waterway would improve transport services in
between Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura. A Bill to the effect is pending in Rajya Sabha.
· 20 floating terminals on river Brahmaputra are to be completed by 2007-08 but due to
slow progress of implementation by Government of Assam, it is now expected to be
completed by December, 2013.

13
2.7 DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
2.7.1 The Telecom Secretary informed the Committee that the approach of the Department was
to make use of conventional technologies and take advantage of existing infrastructure by way
of seeking cooperation of all other players and to look at the new and innovative technologies
to cover remote areas. Presently the system in North-east was linear which if broken at a point
would disturb the whole segment. This happens during the expansion of roads during which
inadvertently optical fibre cables are cut. The Department had adopted the approach of laying
ring connections to ensure that the system continued to function through alternative path in spite
of a cut at a point. The Department had suggested an alternative connection from Tripura to
Akhora in Bangladesh to provide an alternative path. The Department was using the offices of
External Affair Ministry to negotiate with Bangladesh for the purpose. The Department was also
trying to use the existing infrastructure available with organizations like Power Grid Corporation,
Railtel etc.  along with State Governments to provide right of way on a reasonable cost as this
was a national cause.
2.7.2 The Secretary also informed that the Power Grid Corporation was requested to give one
pair of fiber from the cable going on the transmission lines on cost sharing basis, but it was not
agreed to by them and they were ready to give the bandwidth on lease so as to earn more money
commercially. The matter had been brought to the notice of the PMO and Cabinet Secretary, but
with no avail. The matter will again be brought to the notice of the PMO. He further informed
that the State Governments were also being requested to give right of way on the similar lines.
2.7.3 Other issues which were brought to the notice of the Committee in the Ministry’s written
note are as follows:–
· Use of appropriate technology for providing unhindered energy to mobile telecom
infrastructure is necessary.
· Viability gap funding is needed to ensure commercial feasibility for regular provision of
telecommunication services in North East.
· Co-ordination with DoNER is required for telecom infrastructure in North East.
· State Governments should give permission or right of way to have the telecom cable
in the 33 KV lines.
2.8 MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
2.8.1 Secretary (BM) informed the Committee that the Home Ministry was having major problems
in getting environment clearances for its projects in the region which were mainly of strategic
importance located on international borders or near them. The projects were of immense
importance for the safety of the country as the absence of such infrastructure would severely
hamper the movement of artillery and logistics in times of border tension especially in case of
China which has a strategic advantage over India.
2.9 COMMENTS OF OTHER LINE MINISTRIES
2.9.1 Besides, the major line Ministries providing infrastructures, various other non-exempted
Ministries/Departments were also requested to send issues and suggestions on the subject. In
response, 18 Ministries/Departments have furnished the information. Most of the Ministries/
Departments have sent their issues/suggestions on the specific schemes, programmes, etc. The
following are some of the general issues raised by the Ministries/Departments:–
(i) Delay in release of matching grants;

14
(ii) Lack of available technical/scientific experts;
(iii) Lack of IT connectivity;
(iv) Difficult terrain;
(v) Low contracting/absorption capability;
(vi) Delay in environment and forest clearances;
(vii) Non-achievement of targets – physical and financial;
(viii) Law and order problems;
(ix) Poor response for tenders;
(x) Security-related issues;
(xi) Inadequate infrastructure;
(xii) Non-utilization of funds;
(xiii) Non-submission of utilization certificates/Detailed Project Reports;
(xiv) Low implementation of schemes;
(xv) Cost escalation due to delay in implementation; and
(xvi) Maintenance of infrastructure
2.9.2 Most of the above general issues have already been dealt in the preceding paragraphs. The
specific issues raised by the Ministries and the suggestions made are at Annexure-II.

15
15
CHAPTER-III
DISCUSSION WITH CHIEF SECRETARIES/REPRESENTATIVES
OF STATE GOVERNMENTS OF NORTH EASTERN REGION
3.1 In its meeting held on 21 st June, 2013, the Committee heard the representatives of various
State Governments of the North eastern region. The views of the State Governments are dealt in
the succeeding paragraphs:
3.2 Government of Arunachal Pradesh
3.2.1 The State Government of Arunachal Pradesh in its written submission stated that it takes
very long for vetting of DPRs by the Line Ministries. During the course of the meeting of the
Committee held on 21 st June, 2013, the representative of the State Government dwelt upon the
cumbersome process of preparation DPRs and its clearance and made suggestion for improvement
thereon as under:–
 ”First of all, we prepare a priority list for DoNER – we are just looking if some of the
steps could be cut out – then, the DoNER approves some of those projects from the priority
list of the States and then sends them back to the State for preparation of the DPRs. Then,
DPRs are made in the State and the project is sent back to the DoNER and, then, it goes
to the Line Ministry for clearance. Then, in the Line Ministry, it comes back several times
with queries, on and off, on and off. All these transactions take place through the DoNER.
So, a lot of time gets wasted in this process. Then, finally, it goes to the NLCPR. So, some
of these steps could be cut out because the officers keep running either to the DoNER or
to the Line Ministry for the same project, alternatively. The parameters for all the schemes,
sanctioned by the Line Ministry, are same for the entire country. For the North-East, there
should be separate kind of guidelines, or, some separate conditions because we have the
same kinds of problems, like, bad roads, weather conditions, untrained manpower, etc.
Moreover, several things are readily available in the rest of the country, but they are not
available in the North-Eastern Region. Then, there was one suggestion that, in each Line
Ministry, we can have a nodal officer for the North-Eastern Region who could understand
these problems and could expedite our clearances, considering the ground realities of the
North-East. We would also like to put forth one more suggestion. If the capacity-building
training — especially in putting up the DPRs or making good projects and good proposals,
which would not get shot down every now and then, or, even if not shot down, returned
for various technical problems — could be there in the Shillong or some other place where
these projects could better first run, instead of having to come back and forth quite
frequently.”
3.2.2 According to the representative, the entire process was delayed and resulted in time/cost
escalation of the projects. It was therefore suggested that in order to address the problem of delays
by the Line Departments, a strict time-frame should be given for clearing all DPRs. If need be,
the DPR vetting teams in the Ministries could be strengthened. Alternatively, a separate and self-
sufficient team of engineers in the Ministry of DoNER may be constituted for vetting of DPRs so
that minimum time was taken for sanction of the projects after submission of the DPRs by the
State Governments. 

16
3.2.3 The written note of the State Government also stated that the components of schemes
sanctioned by the Central Ministries were same for the entire country, whereas the conditions in
the North-Eastern Region were different and accordingly, schemes needed to be different for
NER as per the requirements of the States. Therefore, the Line Ministries may be asked to
formulate the schemes in consultation with the State Governments. It would be better if, under
the broader guidelines, the State Governments were allowed to frame their own schemes. For
example, under Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA) there was an acute shortage of residential quarters
for teachers in the remote locations in Arunachal Pradesh. Without residential accommodation, it
had become very difficult to retain teachers in those locations particularly in border areas. Like-
wise, under NRHM, lack of residential accommodation for the staff posted in sub-centers was
also a limiting  factor.  Therefore, the Line Ministries must take into account the views of the
State Governments while formulating the schemes for the North-Eastern Region. It was further
suggested that the Line Ministries should appoint a Nodal Officer specifically responsible for the
North-Eastern Region. 
3.2.4 The representative of the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh also suggested that the
use of video-conferencing in various Ministries/ Departments may be adopted with the State
Governments of the North Eastern Region as it takes officers one day to reach Delhi and one day
to come back for a meeting, apart from financial burden on the cash-deficient States. She also
suggested that the third party monitoring for quality and quantity of works of the projects
sanctioned by the Ministry of DoNER should be done by them through their own consultants/
experts appointed by them.
3.3 Government of Assam
3.3.1 The State Government of Assam in its written submission stated that Ministry of DoNER
was still to come up with a regional perspective plan to implement Vision-2020. A comprehensive
plan for NER development should be mooted by the Ministry of DONER with flexibility for State-
specific modification.
3.3.2 The Ministry of DoNER provides infrastructure support for projects based only in NER.
The State Government of Assam was of the opinion that Ministry of DoNER should expand its
scope to include the ‘welfare of the people of NER’  staying outside the region as well as the people
from NE venturing outside NER for education, health needs, employment and tourism. It was also
suggested that Ministry of DoNER should take an active role to provide them with student hostels,
working women’s hostels, accommodation at healthcare hubs etc. It should also focus on the
issues of human trafficking, child labour and security of the people from NE in various places
across the country.
3.3.3 The written note of the State Government of Assam also suggested that Ministry of DoNER
should expand its project portfolio to include projects other than those in infrastructure sector like
big projects in tourism, agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry etc., besides loan linkages for
these sectors.
3.3.4 The State Government also felt that Ministry of DoNER must augment its technical
capacity. It should create a Technical Division of its own for vetting the projects, instead of
depending on Line Ministries. It could do so in-house by recruiting manpower or by taking people
on deputation. Alternatively, it could ask the line ministries to partially put their technically
competent manpower under the command of Ministry of DoNER for vetting the proposals as per
predetermined schedule. It also suggested that as far as possible, the staff and officers of the
Ministry of DoNER should have people who have experience of working in the NER. It would help
in better appreciation of the situation and need of the NER.

17
3.3.5 The State Government also suggested after vetting of the projects by the competent
Departments of the State Governments and approval by the State Level High Power Committees,
the funding from DoNER should follow without repeating the process of vetting the projects. This
would also help the State save precious working time.
3.3.6 The State Government of Assam further suggested that the guidelines of programmes with
all-India nature need special tailoring for the NER. An example was of PMGSY programme where
construction of RCC bridges was funded only up to a length of 50 meters. Assam’s land was
crisscrossed by many rivulets where bridges of more than 50 meters were required. Ministry of
DoNER should look into the guidelines of various programmes to find such anomalies specific to
the NER and to correct them with the Ministry concerned.
3.3.7  It was brought to the notice of the Committee that Government of India’s missions such
as NRHM and SSA had tremendously impacted the human development in the NER. Once funding
from the Central Government stopped the States might not be able to sustain the initiatives and
maintain its expansion. The State Government, therefore, suggested that in case the State fell short,
Ministry of DoNER should step in with funding and help them in continuing with those missions.
3.3.8 The State Government also suggested that in its projects, Ministry of DoNER should
incorporate the provision of five year maintenance. Presently, the practice was to immediately
transfer the project to the State Governments who find it difficult to make the immediate provision
for maintaining big infrastructure created. This provision would provide necessary cushion to the
State Governments to take over the project gradually.
3.3.9 Another suggestion was that the projects should be sanctioned timely. The timeline analysis
of project life cycle reveals that the delay starts in project sanctioning by the Ministry of DoNER
itself (typically 2-5 years) that leads to substantial cost escalation. This was further compounded
by cumbersome NLCPR fund release modalities and a short window for execution available in
Assam due to recurring natural calamities.
3.3.10  Another important issue, according to the note, was the divergent procedures adopted by
Ministry of DoNER in sanction of NLCPR projects under Bodoland Territorial Council  (BTC)
package vis-à-vis projects in normal areas. In BTC packages, the Ministry of DoNER sanctions the
projects approved by the State Level Standing Committee with their DPRs vetted by the Competent
Authority in Assam Government. Surprisingly, for normal areas DPRs were sent for vetting to the
Line Ministries in Government of India. Ministry should synchronise these divergent procedures in
favour of simplified procedure adopted for sanctioning BTC packages.
3.3.11  According to the State Government most projects have a precondition that the land should
be made available by the State Governments. However, with increasing pressure on land and loss
of land due to erosion, it’s becoming increasingly difficult for the States to fulfill this criterion.
Most of the times, the land was available at unviable locations. The State Government’s view was
that Ministry of DoNER should incorporate the land cost in projects. It should also help NER
States to procure land for projects of other GOI ministries, if necessary.
3.3.12  The note stated that the entire NER was a highly hazardous zone prone to multiple natural
disasters. Its geography made it especially vulnerable to carry out speedy rescue and recovery
missions. The State Government suggested that Ministry of DoNER should strongly focus on
building dual use infrastructure capacity such as Equipment Bank, Bailey Bridges, Helicopter
Service, Speed Boats and Air Ambulances in the NER. At the same time, it should help in
strengthening the human capacities in the NE for disaster control.
3.3.13  On the issue of State’s share, the Additional Chief Secretary, Government of Assam stated
as under:–

18
“… May I draw the attention of this hon. Committee that a major chunk of State Plan
funds, which we have, is earmarked? ... NLCPR and NEC Funds have also been now put
into the State Plan finances. … Around 20-25 per cent funds of the Plan are only available
to the State Governments for managing the schemes in the way they like to have. Now, in
a State like Assam, 25 per cent funds which we get for taking up our own schemes provide
very little scope for us to provide State funds to various schemes which are now being
available under the Central Government Ministries... Estimates used to be about Rs.1500
crores to Rs.1800 crores, while I was in a position only to provide about Rs.1100 crores to
Rs.1200 crores as State’ s share... the question is that our resources do not permit me to do
that. If I put all my resources to the State’ s share, then I am left with nothing; no
Department in the State Government would be able to take up any independent or
innovative scheme on its own. This is our limitation… We need to have some support from
the Ministry of DoNER in case we need to have that... With the non-availability of funds
which we have already been complaining for the last so many years, it will become very
difficult for us to continue with such innovative schemes like this. … this entire role of the
DoNER Ministry has to be given a new dimension. Perhaps they can come in the areas
where we are finding it difficult to maintain even a scheme which is not infrastructure in
nature. For that kind of a scheme, both the DoNER and the NEC can come in and support.
That will be better.”
3.3.14  The Additional Chief Secretary, in his oral evidence also submitted that time frame of two
years for completion of schemes should be enlarged.
3.4 Government of Meghalaya
3.4.1 The State Government in its background note submitted that under NLCPR, the process of
approval and sanction of NLCPR projects took a very long time in view of the fact that the DPRs
have to be routed through the concerned Line Central Ministries for technical vetting. Consequently,
NLCPR projects retained 3 or 4 years earlier were finally approved which created a lot of difficulty
as there were no takers to implement the projects due to escalation of costs. The State Government
suggested that in such cases, the Ministry of DoNER may allow updating the rate for such
schemes as per the current SOR prevailing in the State. Further, the need to create a Technical
Wing in the Ministry of DoNER was often flagged to provide technical vetting within the Ministry
and speed up the process of approval and sanction of NLCPR projects. The State Government,
therefore, suggested that immediate steps to facilitate prompt decision in approving NLCPR projects
should be taken by the Ministry of DoNER.
3.4.2 On  the question of the technical appraisal of scheme, fund release and V AT, etc., the
representative of State Government submitted as under:–
 “ insofar as the technical aspects are concerned, there is also the possibility of having a
full-fledged wing with the DoNER itself which can take care, and which will ensure that,
at least, the DPRs do not go to the line Ministries for detailed views, and then take a lot
of time before sanction. The mechanism for release of funds and the question of adoption
of the Vat and also the agency charges are also eroding into the States’ capability of
funding the schemes and programmes.”
3.4.3 Commenting on the limited period for execution of projects, he further mentioned as under:-
“Apart from the time taken for the technical appraisal, it is also a fact that the working
season in almost the entire North-East is quite limited. Normal time to complete the work
given by the DoNER is two years. Given the climatic conditions and difficulties of terrain
topography, a lot scheme would need a slightly larger timeframe, at least, three years.”

19
3.4.4 The written note also mentioned that the State Governments do not prepare the DPRs
before retention of the projects as it involves huge expenditure to prepare DPRs. It is done only
after retention of the projects, when the State Governments were asked to do. It was suggested
that the Ministry of DoNER should accept the idea of concept papers for proposing projects under
NLCPR and only after retention, the specific details in the form of DPRs may be called for.
3.4.5 The State Government also observed that Utilization Certificates (UCs), Quarterly Progress
Reports (QPRs), etc of NLCPR projects submitted to the Ministry of DoNER by the State
Government during the quarter January-March of each year were often delayed for want of latest
QPRs (as the QPRs submitted during such period were for the Quarter ending December of the
year). During processing for sanction of such on-going projects, the Ministry usually asks for the
latest QPRs ( i.e. ending March) and consequently the approval for further release of funds for the
projects gets delayed. The State Government, therefore, suggested that the releases for the quarter
January-March could be made on the basis of QPRs for the quarter ending December of the
preceding year.
3.4.6 Regarding resource crunch, the State Government opined that lack of funds had been the
common problem among the North Eastern States which in turn made them difficult to ensure
maintenance of assets created with funds provided by the NEC/Ministry of DoNER. According to
the State Government, it was difficult for low resource based States like Meghalaya to meet the
requirement for maintenance from their own funds. To mitigate the problem, sufficient funds could
be earmarked under the Ministry of DoNER for this purpose.
3.4.7 The State Government further felt that while substantial funds were reported to have been
accumulated in the non lapsable pool, the allocations to the States from this pool, however, get
regulated by the yearly budget ceilings fixed for DoNER by the Ministry of Finance. It was
suggested by the State Government that the non-lapsable pool should be kept in a Revolving Fund
to be operated by DoNER and the funds should be made available to the States based on their
demand and capacity and not constrained by yearly budgetary ceilings. A portion of this could also
be placed at the disposal of NEC for funding their activities. As per the existing arrangement,
10% of the GBS was supposed to be invested in the North-Eastern region and the shortfall, if any,
was to go into the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR). 10% of the GBS of the
concerned Union Ministries should be treated as an entitlement for the development of the North
Eastern Region in its entirety.
3.4.8 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Meghalaya during the meeting of the Committee
held on 21
st June, 2013 was also of the view that the role of the DoNER in coordinating and
liaising with the line Ministries needed to be redefined and normal time to complete the work given
by the DoNER should be at least, three years instead of two years due to climatic conditions and
difficult topography.
3.5 Government of Mizoram
3.5.1 The State Government of Mizoram in its written note submitted that the present system of
obtaining technical approval of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) submitted to the DoNER from
outside Line Ministries was a time consuming process and by the time DPRs were approved, cost
estimates were invariably rendered obsolete, thus, adversely affecting the execution of projects.
3.5.2 The State Government also submitted that the nature of the observations conveyed to the
State were at times arbitrary, irrelevant, and not concerned to civil works matters (especially those
from the CPWD). The State Government observed that DPRs for NLCPR projects were prepared
based on the Guidelines for Administration of NLCPR. However, DPRs were revised umpteen times
due to the fact that the reports were subjected to scrutiny against arbitrary standards which were

20
not specified in the Ministry’s Guidelines. The State Government was of the view that the role of
the technical vetting authority for DPRs of NLCPR projects was to examine the broad outline
feasibility and correctness of the DPR instead of raising observations on a particular drawing/
estimate being countersigned or not, or raising arbitrary observations. The State Government
accordingly made the following suggestions:
(a) If DPRs for retained NLCPR projects were examined and countersigned by a ‘Chief
Engineer’ of the State (as per NLCPR Guidelines), the Ministry may explore
possibilities of according administrative approval based on it; at least for projects
below Rs 10 crore, or
(b) The Ministry may reconsider on insisting countersignature of an officer of CE level,
due to the fact that the DPR will be scrutinised by competent authorities of relevant
line Ministries in any case, so that private consultants can be utilised for preparation
of the reports, or
(c) The technical wing of the Ministry may be strengthened.
3.5.3 It was further submitted by the State Government that delayed release in subsequent
instalments of approved ongoing projects, in spite of submission of all requisite documents to the
Ministry, affected implementation of the projects, due to interruption in the fund flow and thus
resulting in time and cost overruns. In the case of NLCPR projects, there was no scope for
revision of costs. It was, therefore, felt that in such cases, gap funding from the States’ meagre
resources was usually difficult.
3.5.4 According to the State Government, the NLCPR financing pattern of 90% grant and 10%
loan implied borrowing of huge amounts of funds from open markets to finance projects, thus
proving a burden for the States’ finances. The State Government felt that the requirement of 10%
loan component should be done away with so that the heavy financial burden of the State can be
eased. Various Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) administered by various Central Ministries had
varied funding patterns of 50:50, 75:25, 80:20, 90:10, and 100:00 etc. The State Government felt
that since the requirement of the State share was met out of the limited untied Plan Fund, the State
was left with less funds for implementation of its own prioritised schemes and projects. The State
Government suggested that  NLCPR funds should be made an entitlement, with the 10% GBS placed
entirely at the disposal of Ministry of DoNER so that the region catches up with the rest of the
country in infrastructure development. In an exercise taken up by the State to avail of the 10%
GBS from Central Ministries, it had been observed that most Ministries, except for the MoUD
perhaps, allocated the entire earmarked funds to Central agencies located in the North East, eg.,
for BSF/SSB/AR etc under the Home Ministry, DDK/AIR under the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting (which in any case were purely under the purview of the Central Ministry) or for
financing CSS/Flagship schemes.
3.5.5 The State Government also submitted that in some cases final approved cost of projects
based on techno vetting from Line Ministries differ from the projected estimated cost in the DPR,
and the deleted components were not informed to the State Government thus creating problems in
implementation.
3.5.6 It was also observed by the State Government that most of Central Ministries spend only
a very little portion of their 10 % GBS meant for NE States, and Ministries were not handling the
matter as provisioned by the policy initiative of 10 % GBS for NE State development promulgated
by the Central Government. Normally late finalisation of Annual Plan size by the Planning
Commission, according to the State Government, leads to delay in approval of Annual Plans &
expenditures, thus resulting in delayed implementation of schemes.

21
3.5.7 Commenting on the fund flow to the States under new policy of 10 per cent of the GBS
and fund management Member Secretary, State Planning Board, Government of Mizoram submitted
during the committee’s meeting held on 21 st June, 2013 as under:–
“the role of the DoNER in availing funds from various Central Ministries is far more
important. Last year, the total fund available under the 10 per cent GBS was more than
Rs. 25,000 crores. If Mizoram could get even 10 per cent of that, it would be, compared
to Rs.50 crores or Rs.60 crores that you get from the NLCPR, more than 100 times. So, we
would like a change in the perception and role of the Ministry of DoNER in supporting
various North-Eastern States, so that we get more funds from the various Central Ministries,
minimise the contribution of 10 per cent also. It benefits us in more than one way. One,
we get the expertise of the concerned Central Ministries. Two, the fund flow to the North-
East will be more than double. Sir, I think that the Ministry of DoNER should be entrusted
to facilitate and support the States in having better access to the 10 per cent GBS fund.
We appreciate what the Government of India has done. But we have availed very, very
little. So, it will help us a lot if that can be strengthened”.
3.5.8 Ex plaining about the need for separate guidelines for NE States, the representative of
Government of Mizoram made following suggestions:–
“we need policy support in various sectors. There are many areas where we have not
availed. Many of the North-Eastern States cannot avail many Central schemes because of
the guidelines. There are technical guidelines prescribed for a purpose. For example, we
want to strengthen our trauma centres which the Ministry of Health runs. For the last 10
years, we have been asking for relaxation of the norms and the guidelines. Because of the
prescribed model which says so many doctors should be in place and so many instruments
should be in place, none of our district hospitals is qualified even today. So, we need policy
support for changing things like these. Under NRHM, the national guidelines stand in the
way of implementation. Let us say, we want to provide computers in schools. But the power
connection facility given under RGGVY is only one unit per school. Even one computer
cannot be run with this. The Ministry of HRD has sent us 10 computers. The connection
power given under the scheme does not permit that. And the conflict in the Central
guidelines stand in the way of implementation. We would like the DoNER Ministry to take
up such issues, so that their advocacy solves the problem of guidelines which come in the
way of availing funds.”
3.5.9 The State Government suggested that the selection of projects should be based on
consultations with the State. In the existing system, except for prioritization of projects, the State
had no role in the process for selection of projects to be funded under NLCPR. Considering that
the development of the States’ infrastructure was at stake, there should be a representative of the
State, possibly the Chief Secretary or the Commissioner/Secretary i/c Planning, in the NLCPR
Committee for retention and sanctioning of projects.
3.5.10  The State Government also suggested that there should be provision of funds from the
Ministry for monitoring and evaluation of projects at the State level so that a dedicated Cell can
be set up under the Nodal Department for the State i.e. , the Planning and Programme
Implementation Department.
3.5.11 The State Government was of the view that there should be a clear cut defined relationship
between the Planning Commission, the Ministry of DoNER, and the NEC for dovetailing and
synergizing of developmental plans, projects, and schemes and a mechanism for such coordination
should be evolved.

22
3.5.12 The State Government felt that due to the present level of economic activity in the NE
region no private investors were interested in infrastructure development initiatives, and therefore,
investments in infrastructure have to come from the public sector or the Government. Due to its
strategic location and requirement of massive infrastructural requirements on the one hand, and
resource constraints on the other, investments in infrastructure should be allocated in higher
proportions from the Central Ministries.
3.6 Government of Manipur
3.6.1 The State Government was of the view that resources of Ministry of DoNER were distinct
from and additional to what the States were entitled to get as part of their normal planning process
and devolution from the Planning Commission. By making them part of the Plan outlays, the States
have not only been denied their legitimate share in the plan resources meant for the States, it had
also affected their flexibility in use of these resources. This was not in tune with the broad
objective of Ministry of DoNER’s functioning. The State Government was of the opinion that the
Central Government should either revert to the earlier practice wherein NEC and NLCPR outlays
were kept beyond the ambit of State Plan or agree to this regime only if the Ministry of DoNER
was given a larger political role in deciding the developmental priorities of the region and financial
outlays under the Plan for the region as a whole, as determined by the State Governments through
a democratic interaction with the Ministry of DoNER.
3.6.2 Strongly objecting to the factoring of NLCPR and NEC funds in State Plans, the Chief
Secretary during the course of his oral evidence also stated as under:–
 “ By their very nature, both the NEC and NLCPR funds are Central funds. Especially, the
NLCPR funds are those which the Central Ministries could not utilize under the mandated
ten per cent GBS spending in the North-East. That is why they accrued the NLCPR, and
now they are being made part of the State Plans. The net effect for which we are worried
about is that, to that extent, our State Plans have been reduced, whatever they have added.
For Manipur, it is about Rs.200 crores, which we were getting as part of the State Plan
earlier. And from this year, the NEC and NLCPR are being factored in. So, to that extent,
there is actually a reduction in our State Plan outlay. So, we request if the Committee can
consider it, and recommend to the Planning Commission that the NLCPR and the NEC
funds should be kept out of the States’ Annual Plans. ”
3.6.3 The State Government was of the view that decentralisation of powers by the central line
Ministries to the DoNER should be accompanied by empowerment of the State Governments in
deciding and finalising the CSS funded schemes, projects, sectors either through the Line Ministries
of the Central Government or the Ministry of DoNER.
3.6.4 The State Government was also of the view that the Ministry of DoNER was still acting
as a distant arm of the central line Ministries. It merely represented them in choosing and
implementing projects. It was not able to play a proactive role in planning and implementing the
central project/ schemes/ policies implemented in the NE States. It could play a bigger political role
in shaping the regional developmental priorities and implementing the Regional or State-specific
programmes and projects. Active involvement of the Ministry of DoNER was called for in deciding
the policy programme, schemes, and projects by the Planning Commission and line Ministries meant
for NE Region. For this purpose the Government should integrate the Ministry of DoNER and the
NEC as these two instrumentalities could function in a more cohesive manner.
3.6.5 The State Government further submitted that the NEC had the technical manpower in place
for most of the sectors. The main constraint with the NEC was its limited budgetary outlays and
the inflexible sectoral approach followed by the NEC in allocation to States. This can easily be

23
overcome if the two bodies were united and integrated. While the outlays of the NEC can be a
part of the overall outlays of the Ministry of DoNER, the decision making process in respect of
allocations and schematic or sectoral priorities could be democratised through the NEC. In fact,
it could be as the Standing Council or Consultative Body for the Ministry of DoNER and the
Ministry itself could be located in Shillong with its headquarters in the present NEC. This would
help a strong organisational structure grow within a democratic set up with proper financial
outlays, competent technical manpower and delivery mechanisms.
3.6.6 Chief Secretary, Government of Manipur, while commenting on the issue of undue delay in
processing of the DPRs submitted by the States, elaborated as under:–
 “... the DoNER itself does not have any in-house technical expertise or technical
manpower to do the appraisal and vetting of these DPRs. Over the years, of course, they
have set up a small Cell, but it has its own limitations. The net effect is that most of the
DPRs get referred to the various line Ministries, CPWD for vetting and appraisal of the
projects. This can take anything from a minimum of six months to about three years or even
more, at times. In the meantime, what happens is the cost escalation goes up. The
escalation, again, under the NLCPR guidelines is not permitted. So, instead of it being
90:10 funding, it becomes anything like 60:40 or 70:30, depending upon the differential
which finally happens. The other thing which the NLCPR guidelines do not allow, though
these are permitted as per the CPWD’ s manual, is this. One is the Vat, the statutory levy
which every State has to deduct. This is not being permitted. So, that is also an
additionality over and above the ten per cent which the States land up in meeting. If they
do not do it, then, the project is stopped. One of the elements is the agency charges, which
every agency which does the execution is supposed to be provided for so that they meet the
in-house requirements and manage their own in-house manpower, etc. It does not mean
salaries or allowances, but, at least, for supervision of the implementation of the projects.
So, both these things are not being permitted under the NLCPR guidelines, which means
that there is an additionality over and above the ten per cent which the States have to
contribute.”
3.6.7 Suggesting for exploring the scope for bringing in synergy between the Ministry of DoNER
and NEC, the Chief Secretary, Manipur stated as under:–
“the NEC has an in-house technical manpower… have Chief Engineer level officers both
on the civil and electrical side, and also on the health side, and many other sectors… Then,
the synergy can be optimized with that the technical in-house manpower available with the
NEC and a lot of funding which is available with the Ministry of DoNER. The Ministry
of DoNER has much larger funds at its disposal, as we see from the figures of the Budget
in the Plan. The NEC has, more or less, stayed static, from Rs.700 crores, it has gone up
to Rs.770 crores now. It is just about Rs.70 crores over the last year’ s allocations. It was
Rs.700 crores in 2010-11, and it is Rs.770 crores in the current year ... whereas the
DoNER’ s NLCPR alone was Rs.800 cror es in 2010-11, and it has gone up to Rs.950 crores
in the current year ..... The technical manpower of the NEC could then be utilized for
assessing and appraising these DPRs ... I think, both the Ministry of DoNER and the NEC,
perhaps, can answer why presently the technical manpower of the NEC is not being used. ”
3.6.8 W ith regard to shifting of the headquarters of the Ministry in the North –East, the Chief
Secretary stated as under:–
“ the Ministry of DoNER, the Department came up in 2001, and the Ministry came up in
2004, and till today it is still housed in the Vigyan Bhawan Annexe. It has no proper
accommodation of its own. I have been a J.S. in the DoNER, and I know the kind of

24
limitations that they have, that they are not even able to function properly out of that
place, and over the years, they have not got a proper accommodation of its own. On the
other hand, the NEC has, probably, got one of the best Secretariats in the entire North-East,
located in Shillong. Just as we have the Department of Space operating out of Bangalore
and the Department of Atomic Energy operating out of Mumbai, if we have to have this
closer synergy, better coordination, better supervision, maybe, the Committee could think of
relocating even the Ministry of DoNER in Shillong itself, then, there could be much better
synergy between the two. I am sure, the States would all benefit, the Region would also
benefit, and then they will have very concrete and big projects being funded by the Ministry
of DoNER, which is a merged entity.”
3.7 Government of Nagaland
3.7.1 The State Government of Nagaland in its background note submitted that the State share
of 10% had been a difficult target to meet due to poor resources and a serious consideration should
be made to treat the 10% Gross Budgetary reservation from various Ministries as “State’s matching
share of the N-E States” because the principle to this reservation was to augment the developmental
gap in the N-E States and to keep pace with the rest of the country. While such special reservation
were made in recognition to the fact that the N-E States require special attention, severe penalties
were imposed on the State’s failure to meet the full 10% of the State matching share.
3.7.2 The State Government was of the view that the NEC consisting of no less than the
Governors and the Chief Ministers of the NE States as its members should have an appropriate
status and power to make decisions and provide the required funds for the development of the
region. It should not be reduced to the level of a Directorate under a Ministry of the Government
of India. The existence of Ministry of DoNER, while doing its share for co-ordination with the line
Ministries at the Centre, had, however, also led the line Ministries to neglect their responsibilities
for the development of the Region, leaving it all to Ministry of DoNER with its meager NLCPR
resources. The State Government of Nagaland also concurred with the recommendations of the
ARC to abolish the Ministry of DoNER.
3.7.3 The State Government also mentioned in its written note that there were many cases where
the retention and sanctioning of projects by Ministry of DoNER were arbitrary. Such arbitrary
retention of projects and unreasonable sanctioning of projects with much lower cost relative to the
proposed amount in the DPR became detrimental to the creation of infrastructure and completion
of many projects had been stalled as the sanctioned costs had fallen short of the actual project
cost.
3.7.4 The State Government stated in the note that recently sanction of projects under Power
sector for Nagaland was stalled on the ground that the cost of power projects appeared to be ‘two
times’ the normal cost of projects compared to the process prevailing in the rest of India. The
State Government felt that the Ministry should take the ground reality of cost in hilly/terrain region
such as difficult terrain, lack of vendors’ response, etc.
3.7.5 The representative of the Government of Nagaland stating that like other hill States or the
Special-Category States, Nagaland had certain problems, particularly with the functioning of the
DoNER, dwelt upon the issue of delay in DPRs and cost – escalation as under:–
“One of them is that DPRs are sent to the Line Ministries for vetting which entails a lot
of delays. There is also cost-overrun because of these delays. Sometimes, sanctions are not
commensurate with the prevailing Schedule of Rates (SoR). Therefore, projects tend to get
stalled. Our submission here is that DoNER should have a Cell which should be able to
vet DPRs and issue sanctions promptly. Of course, we would have to admit that States

25
would also have to speed up submission of their progress reports, completion reports, etc.
We would have to work in tandem. But our suggestion is that the Cell in the DoNER should
be empowered to clear DPRs, instead of sending them to Line Ministries. ”
3.7.6 To expedite sanction of projects retained for possible sanction under NLCPR, the State
Government suggested for setting up a cell in the Ministry of DoNER itself for vetting of DPRs
and accord sanction of project early instead of referring the DPRs of projects to the Line Ministries
for vetting. This would enable the State Government to complete the project within the stipulated
time frame and avoid escalation of cost.
3.7.7 Pointing out reso urce-crunch status of Government and therefore, inability, to meet 10
percent share of State Government over CSS project, the representative of the State Government
stated as under:–
“the resource-base of most of the States and, particularly of the State of Nagaland, is very
poor and we are finding it very difficult to meet the State’ s share. This is about the 90:10
basis of most of the CSS funding. Sir, we are resource-starved. We find it very difficult to
meet the ten per cent target. Our request is that the ten per cent reservation of the Budget
of the Line Ministries could also be dovetailed and treated as State’ s share for purpose of
CSS. In other words, if it could be made hundred per cent,perhaps, that would enable
implementation of a lot of projects, effortlessly and seamlessly.”
3.7.8 The State Government also suggested that  Guidelines of the various centrally sponsored
programmes and schemes have been framed in the perspective where PRIs are in existence. The
Guidelines are not fully suited to the State’s needs, requirements and situation as the ground
situation in terms of communication, topography and other linkages in the hill States are different
from that of the other States of the country. The State Government, therefore, felt that unless,
certain amount of flexibility and relaxation of the Guidelines allowed and adopted, difficulty in
implementing the schemes will be faced by States like Nagaland.
3.8 Government of Sikkim
3.8.1 The State Government of Sikkim felt that many major infrastructure projects constructed
at considerable cost have suffered wear and tear and were in need of maintenance which became
a burden for the State exchequer. It was therefore proposed by the State Government that
maintenance grant at 10% of the project cost should be allocated after 5 years of completion of
the project, sanctioned under NLCPR/NEC.
3.8.2 Development commissioner-cum-Secretary, DPER and NECA from the State Government of
Sikkim during the course of meeting of the Committee held on 21
st June, 2013 suggested on the
issue of cost escalation/revision and maintenance of completed projects as under:–
“the projects, which have been forwarded for cost revision, should be considered since most
of these are major projects that take time to complete since the cost is effected due to
inflation that is taking place. Further, projects framed under Schedule of 2006 Rates may
be considered for revision, as it is not possible to complete and implement the project at
the rates of 2006. Thirdly, cost escalation at 7 per cent per annum at 2012 SOR should
be allowed and contingency at 3 per cent should also be considered for the projects that
are being sanctioned by the Ministry of DoNER. Better performing States, like Sikkim,
should also be given additional allocation as incentive to encourage other States in the
North-Eastern Region to be more competitive. In addition, it is also seen that many major
infrastructure projects, constructed at considerable costs, have suffered wear and tear and
are in need of maintenance that become a burden for the State exchequer. It is, therefore,

26
proposed that maintenance grant at 10 per cent of the project cost should be allocated after
five years of completion of the projects sanctioned under the NLCPR and the NEC funds.
The completion time for projects sanctioned under the NLCPR and the NEC must also be
enhanced from 2 to 3 years in view of difficult terrain and topography of the State. At
present, time frame is two years.”
3.8.3 The State Government also submitted that the component of State’s share ( i.e.10%) was
being met by way of borrowing. Since the State was facing hardship in providing 10% under the
90:10 basis 100% funding under these projects should be provided. The representative of the State
Government pleaded as under:–
“the NLCPR and the NEC are presently being funded at the ratio of 90:10 per cent. The
10 per cent component of State share is being met by way of borrowing. Since the State
is facing hardship in providing 10 per cent State share, in view of its other developmental
programmes, we request for 100 per cent funding under the projects. This is also felt
because under the FRBM, the market borrowings are kept by the Planning Commission and
since the borrowings are kept, these have to be utilized by the State for other projects and
other core areas in the State Governments where we may be facing problems. So, if we have
100 per cent grant, inbuilt 10 per cent loan component within the project cost, would ensure
that the projects are completed in time.”
3.8.4 The State Government further demanded that the allocation of NLCPR and NEC schemes,
which have been included in the Annual Plan allocations during 2013-14 should be separated from
State Plan. The present dispensation of including NLCPR/NEC within the State Annual Plan would
give rise to undue procedural delay as any additionality over and above the projection made in the
Plan would call for revision of State Plan and thus obtaining of again a second approval from the
Planning Commission. The Development Commissioner cum Secretary DPER and NECA from the
State Government of Sikkim on the issue of the allocation for the NLCPR and the NEC Schemes
suggested as under:–
“the allocation for the NLCPR and the NEC Schemes have now been inbuilt in the Annual
Plan allocations from the current financial year. We feel that this should be separated and
status quo should be maintained because these funds, under the non-lapsable pool, should
be set aside to bridge the critical Plan gaps of the hilly areas. This will also pose a
problem because any additionality over and above the projection, made in the Annual Plan,
calls for the revision of State Plan that entails obtaining of second approval, maybe five-
six approvals from the Planning Commission, throughout the year. So, this will not only add
to the delay, but will add to the paper work also. ”
3.8.5 Another suggestion of the State Government was that all border roads construction and
maintenance, presently being implemented by Border Roads Organization in the border areas should
be funded by Ministry of DoNER. The pace of implementation under the present set-up was not
satisfactory, causing immense hardship to the State, public and tourists. Moreover, tourism being
one of the main source of revenue, the State was severely affected due to the prevailing condition
of the roads.
3.8.6 The State Government also suggested that the Ministry should have the required technical
cell/manpower for vetting of projects to reduce the time for according approval and sanction of
the project to a considerable extent. The State Government also suggested that the Secretary,
Ministry of DoNER should be equipped with more administrative and sanctioning powers to
facilitate the smooth implementation of developmental projects and there should be better co-
ordination between Ministry of DoNER and the Planning Commission for smoother implementation
of developmental schemes.

27
3.9 Government of Tripura
3.9.1 The State Government of Tripura in its background note submitted that there was no
specific demand initially from the North Eastern States for creation of a separate Ministry of
DoNER. The Chief Ministers of the North Eastern Region submitted a Memorandum requesting for
setting up of a Special Cell within the PMO for the North East to seek active cooperation of all
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government for solving the problems faced by the North
East. However, the subsequent developments have belied the expectations of the North East, the
State Government felt.
3.9.2 The representative of the Government of Tripura during the meeting of the Committee held
on 21
st June, 2013 submmited on the issue of  the delay in the sanction of the projects as under:–
“actually out of the retained projects pending for sanction, some of them pertain to even
as early as 2008-09, which means the DPR was prepared probably on the 2007 Schedule
of Rates. Such projects of 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and like that are pending for four
years, five years. Even if it is sanctioned at this juncture, the cost estimates would no
longer be valid. If we have to again go for cost estimate revision and fresh DPR, number
one, we will lose our priority slot which was given in that year and, again, the entire
process of getting the DPR would continue. This delay should be addressed by having an
empowered committee within the DoNER so that the line Department senior officers could
be part of that. Insofar as the issue of vetting of the DPRs is concerned, over the years
even in the North East, the quality of DPR is not what it was twenty years back. Today,
because of the various projects we have executed, the quality of the DPR is entirely good
and comparable. It is possible that here and there some queries could come. But our
experience in Tripura over the years is that the observations on the DPR from the line
Ministry do not come in one go. A certain set of observations are given. When they are
clarified, revised DPR is given and by that time the person in the line Ministry is changed
and a separate sets of observations are again given. Even in this process a lot of time is
being lost. The DoNER, more or less, has a thousand crore rupees worth of projects which
are being sanctioned every year. Certain senior level persons of civil, mechanical, etc. could
be kept there so that they could vet the DPRs. Basically, the DPR is only about the
Schedule of Rates and specifications which they can do it in-house and after that it should
be put to an empowered committee drawn from various Ministries including the Finance.
If there is still any objection, the representatives of the State Government could be invited
to such a meeting to give reply to the query on the spot and the sanction of the project
could be expedited. There should be some fixed timeline by which it will be mandatory to
clear the DPRs. ”
3.9.3 The background note furnished by the State raised the other following issues:–
· the current decision-making process in Ministry of DoNER for NLCPR Projects is
painfully slow. The Ministry of DoNER should develop internal capability for
evaluation/appraisal of the project submitted by North Eastern States for funding under
NLCPR.
· The Ministry of DoNER should set strict timelines for retention and sanction of
projects and for actual disbursement. In case of delay, Ministry of DoNER may fund
the entire cost over run.
· The Ministry of DoNER should adopt cost norms which are consistent with the situation
prevailing in the North East. This will also help in avoiding cost overruns. The cost of
land acquisition, which is quite substantial in infrastructure project may be allowed to be
included in Project Cost in view of resource constraints of the North East States.

28
· The current mechanism for monitoring NLCPR Projects needs strengthening, so that
the Projects are completed in time.
· There is overlap and duplication in the roles of NEC and Ministry of DoNER. There
is a need to delineate roles of these two key organs of Central Government such that
their roles supplement and complement each other and overarching objective of
bridging infrastructural gap in North East is seamlessly achieved.
· The Shukla Commission set up for looking into the problems of the North East
recommended that special provision need to be made for providing ‘Basic Minimum
Services( BMS)’ for development of infrastructure’ in the North East. However, the
manner in which NLCPR, has been administered, leaves much to be desired and
experience of the State Government had been of complete frustration and dismay.
3.9.4 For better  monitoring of the implementation of projects, release of funds, etc., the
representative suggested as under:–
 “ there is no reason why such an on-line system for funds transfer, even the State whether
it has released it to the particular project or not, every thing could be captured online. Once
based on-line, we have approved the data, then they should be able to release the next
instalment of money without any further delay. Sir, actually the officers of the DoNER
could visit. At least twice in a year if senior officers visit, they should be able to do it.
It so happens that when they visit on the field, they are convinced, but when they come
back here, they are not able to give because of their various internal bottlenecks and
procedural delays. Sir, a project is delayed for two, three or four years for sanction, but
the rule in the NLCPR is that cost escalation is permitted only up to 20 per cent. When
the inflation is almost like 10 per cent every year, for every three years or four years to
keep it limited to 20 per cent is impossible. In addition to 10 per cent which the State
Government has to give, by the time the project is completed in several cases, it is coming
to 30 or 40 per cent State share which probably is restricting us.”
3.10 Response of the Ministry of DoNER on the issues raised by the North Eastern State
Governments
3.10.1 In the meeting of the Committee held with the representatives of the State Governments of
North Eastern Region, the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER was also invited to offers it comments
on the various issues/problems/ suggestions raised by the State Governments. The Ministry of
DoNER sent its written comments on the issues raised by the States. The issues raised and the
comments of the Ministry of DoNER are given as under:–
3.10.2 Delay in vetting of DPRs by line Ministries leads to consequential delay in sanctioning of
project thereby making cost unworkable due to change in SoR.
3.10.2.1 This Ministry has been depending on the line Ministries for vetting of DPRs under
NLCPR Scheme. As such any delay caused in vetting of DPRs due to repeated observations or
otherwise results into further delay in sanctioning of projects which at time causes time and cost
overrun. This also necessitates revision in administrative and financial approval which finally delays
completion of projects abnormally.
3.10.2.2 The issue was taken up by Ministry of DoNER with Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
with request to establish a full fledged Technical Wing in Ministry of DoNER for timely vetting of
DPRs. The CoS considered the issue in its meeting held on 31.03.2005 and informed that, “it
would not be practical to establish an elaborate Technical Wing in Ministry of DoNER, possessing
all the skills to examine the various types of projects, as it would invariably lead to under

29
employment as well as unnecessary duplication of the available manpower resources in the
Government”. The CoS recommended that “Ministry of DoNER would initiate measures to have its
own small complement of technical manpower for preliminary checking of the projects and the
cost estimates”.
3.10.2.3 Accordingly, Ministry of DoNER established a Technical Wing in the Ministry in
January, 2010 headed by Superintending Engineer with an Executive Engineer and 2 Assistant
Engineers. However, as per CPWD norms SE is competent to issue technical sanctions of projects
upto 2.5 crore only. Whereas, minimum cost of projects to be considered for funding under
NLCPR Scheme is Rs.3.00 crore. As such, services of Technical Wing remains underutilized.
3.10.2.4 To obviate the present circumstances and to ensure expeditious vetting of DPRs under
NLCPR Scheme following measures are suggested:
(i) Technical Wing in the Ministry of DoNER may be strengthened by way of creation
of a post of Chief Engineer who is vested with full powers for issue of technical
sanctions of projects under NLCPR Scheme along with appropriate number of
Executive Engineers and Assistant Engineers of mixed discipline. This will short
circuit unnecessary delays in vetting of DPRs and streamline timely sanction of
projects.
(ii) Line Ministries be assigned time bound targets for techno economic vetting of
DPRs. Routine observations of repetitive nature be avoided and DPRs be corrected
at Ministry’s level to achieve time line of two months.
3.10.2.5 However for the time bing, Ministry of DoNER have already made an interim
arrangements with M/s WAPCOS Ltd. for techno-economic vetting of DPRs under NLCPR scheme
upto Rs.50.00 crore at competitive rate.
3.10.3 Inclusion of NEC and NLCPR by Planning Commission in the resources for Approved
Annual Plan outlays of North East States
3.10.3.1 The principle and objective behind NEC and NLCPR Schemes were to fill critical gaps
in normal developmental schemes. Therefore NEC and NLCPR have been treated as complement
to normal Plan programmes, as stated in the NLCPR guidelines..  “Funds available under the
Central Pool are not meant to supplement the normal Plan Programmes either of the State
Governments or Union Ministries/Departments/Agencies”.  Accordingly, outlays for NEC and
NLCPR were never counted as part of the resources for Annual Plan of North Eastern States in
the past. But in the current year, tentative amounts as NEC and NLCPR outlays have been included
in the Approved Annual Plans of NE States. The Ministry of DoNER objects to this sudden
departure from existing practice.
3.10.3.2 It may be noted that the annual budgetary allocation to NEC are utilized on priority
sectors for the region such as inter-State connectivity where State-wise allocation of funds is not
a feasible norm. The NEC does not follow any such practice of allocating any specific amount for
each State in any of the Annual Plans. It would not be out of place to mention here that the NEC,
as the statutory Regional Planning Body for the North Eastern Region, is mandated to give priority
to schemes and projects which will benefit two or more States. In case of NLCPR scheme, State-
wise allocation is only at the level of project retention. Actual flow of funds out of the annual
budgetary allocation under NLCPR scheme is determined, ultimately, by the pace of project
implementation by individual States.
3.10.3.3 Hence, it may not be very practicable to allocate specific amounts for the States and
State-wise allocation shown in the Approved Annual Plans of NE States are bound to be misleading.
In this regard a D.O. letter was already written to the Planning Commission on 21.06.2013.

30
3.10.4 10% counterpart funding of NLCPR projects by States may be waived in view of the
fiscal constraint faced by States.
3.10.4.1 NLCPR projects are funded on the basis of 90:10 sharing between Central and State as
practiced in other Central Assistance for State Plans to Special Category States (all NE States are
Special Category States). For General Category States it is 70:30 sharing between Central and State.
In this connection it may also be mentioned that Cabinet has in its meeting held on 20
th June, 2013
approved that for new CSS/ACA/Flagship scheme, at least 25% of funds may be contributed by
the General Category States and 10% fund by the Special Category States.
3.10.4.2 Under NLCPR scheme, funds are made available to State Governments for funding
development projects prioritized, implemented and owned by them with minimal interference in their
affairs. This arrangement and sharing of project cost is considered a necessary ingredient of
fostering sense of involvement, ownership and participation on the part of the States.
3.10.5 V A T and Agency Charges may be included in the sanctioned cost of projects.
3.10.5.1 The Ministry had not allowed State V AT to be included in the project costs on the
principle that the grant-in-aid provided for NLCPR project should not be taxed by the State at
source. Agency charges are not allowed when projects are implemented by State Departments and
agencies on the ground that implementation of such projects are the integral and routine work of
these Departments and agencies and their operating expenses are normally part of the non-plan
budget of the State Governments. The Ministry had earlier examined the issues in detail, involving
State Governments.
3.10.6 Mainte nance provision @10% of project cost may be included in the sanction cost of
NLCPR projects.
3.10.6.1 Many of the physical assets so created under NLCPR scheme have the potential to
generate stream of revenue in the form of user charges. Such revenues can be ploughed back to
meet a large part of the maintenance requirement of the assets. For assets which are not expected
to generate revenue such as roads and bridges, it is the practice for Finance Commission to look
into such requirements and recommend grants-in-aid to State Governments for maintenance
expenditure. In this regard the Ministry of DoNER had already advised NE States to prepare
realistic projections of maintenance expenditure and submit to the 14
th Finance Commission.
3.10.7 Ministry may be more liberal in release of the provision for contingency charges of
projects.
3.10.7.1 As per existing procedure, the provision of contingency charges included in the
sanctioned cost of NLCPR projects are to be released on reimbursement basis, on submission of
document on actual contingent expenditure. This issue was also examined in the Ministry along
with State Government representatives wherein it was decided that State Governments will submit
a statement indicating committed liabilities on account of contingencies while approaching for 3
rd
installment. None of the State Governments has so far submitted contingency claim as agreed in
the meeting.
3.10.8 Ministry may be more liberal in allowing cost revision in respect of sanctioned projects.
3.10.8.1 Proposals for cost revision of sanctioned projects are examined as per provision of
NLCPR guidelines. Relevant clauses of the guidelines are reproduced as under:
“The proposal relating to escalation in cost of the sanctioned projects for any reason
generally does not qualify for consideration under the Non-lapsable Central Pool of
Resources. However, in some deserving cases, if the enhancement of the cost is due
to change in scope of the works that was not envisaged at initial stage, the proposal

31
will be submitted to the NLCPR Committee at the appropriate juncture for consideration.
In cases where the increase in cost is not due to change in scope, and felt to be
justified due to factors beyond the control of the executing agency, NLCPR Committee
will take a view provided that in such cases in overall terms the escalation does not
exceed 20% of the originally approved cost. Financing of such increased cost may be
permitted on the basis of sharing between the Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources
and the State Government in the ratio of 1:1”.
3.10.9 Monitoring of NLCPR project by Independent Agencies
3.10.9.1 Considering the importance of monitoring and implementation of projects through
independent agencies, the Ministry introduced Third Party Monitoring of NLCPR projects in line
with JNNURM pattern of Ministry of Urban Development. Accordingly, State Governments of
North Eastern Region were provided a panel of independent agencies short listed from web portal
of MoUD who were willing to take up the work in the North Eastern States on 13.07.2011 along
with procedures to be adopted for selection of an IQM. The funding for such inspections by IQMs
was to be provided by Ministry of DoNER. However, due to poor response from State
Governments and not observing proper bidding procedures for selection of IQM, the scheme could
not take off finally.
3.10.9.2 As such, the Ministry has already proceeded to appoint retired central Government
senior engineers as National Quality Monitors (NQM). Preliminary procedures like NIT were issued
and list of applicants have been prepared and are under scrutiny. The panel of NQM is likely to
be finalized shortly and process for monitoring the NLCPR projects will commence shortly within
a month.
3.10.10 Projects duration of NLCPR projects is fixed as two years only by M/o DoNER
3.10.10.1 This observation does not seem to be correct. Ministry in no way prescribes project
duration on its own under NLCPR Scheme. The project duration is derived from the DPRs
submitted by State Governments. In this regard NLCPR guidelines stipulates that “normally a
project duration should not exceed maximum 3 to 4 years. Long gestation projects will not be
encouraged”. It may thus be seen that State Governments may in their own wisdom fix a suitable
time frame for completion of project.
3.10.11 On line submission of Utilization Certificates and Quarterly Progress Reports
3.10.11.1 Ministry had already introduced a web based Data Base Management System (DBMS)
called “intraDoNER” in 2006-07. Under DBMS, provision for on line submission of UCs and QPRs
by State Governments was introduced in 2007-08. Training was also conducted for the officers
in State Planning Departments during 2007-08. However, the module became non starter for want
of participation of State Government’s officials. The same provision is still in existence and the
same can be made operational, if State Governments so desire.
3.10.12 Status of Sanctioned Projects and Delay in completion of projects
3.10.12.1 An exorbitant delay in implementation of projects under NLCPR by the State
Governments has been observed. As on 31.03.2013, total 1408 projects have been sanctioned under
the scheme in respect of NE States. Out of these, State Governments have reported completion
of only 699 projects which comes out to 49.64% of the total projects sanctioned. Out of remaining
709 ongoing projects, 497 projects are running behind schedule. In 85 such cases completion is
delayed by more than 5 years.
3.10.12.2 In 170 cases Ministry have released full funds, excluding contingencies, but State
Governments are yet to submit completion certificates.

32
3.10.12.3 Such an abnormal delay in implementation of projects defeats the very purpose for
which the project was sanctioned. Resultantly, benefits of the projects are not being accrued to the
people. A table showing State-wise details of delayed projects is given below.
Projects delayed (Rs in crore)
State Less for >1 for >2 for >3 for >4 for >5 Total
than yr and yr and yr and yr and years
1 year =<2 yrs =<3 yrs =<4 yrs =<5 yrs
Arunachal No 21 10 7 10 8 6 62
Pradesh Cost 326.35 105.29 82.35 128.63 153.43 91.80 867.85
Assam No 31 18 15 26 7 40 137
Cost 181.13 163.78 96.44 177.73 67.48 300.38 986.94
Manipur No 22 16 10 5 8 10 71
Cost 1 19.26 51.63 171.25 68.10 69.93 159.94 640.13
Meghalaya No 16 7 10 6 1 10 50
Cost 129.58 121.23 133.15 28.32  9.01 80.89 502.17
Mizoram No 18 2 4 4 6 4 38
Cost 100.46 13.35 11.42  33.35 93.22 1 18.92 370.73
Nagaland No 9 6 15 2 2 8 42
Cost 139.55 82.99 193.92 23.92  26.79  151.04 618.23
Sikkim No 8 8 8 4 4 5 37
Cost 103.87 55.04 98.05 55.40 67.05 42.12 421.53
Tripura No 25 19 2 6 6 2 60
Cost 106.53 227.43 12.53 11 1.81 45.41  199.09 702.82
T
OTAL No 150 86 71 63 42 85 497
Cost 1206.73 820.76 799.12 607.27 432.31 1144.19 5110.38

33
33
CHAPTER-IV
VIEWS OF CABINET SECRETARY; SECRETARY, PLANNING
COMMISSION AND SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF FINANCE
4.1 In its meeting held on 4 th July 2013, the Committee heard the views of the Cabinet
Secretary, Secretaries, Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
on the subject. Their views are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs:
4.2 Views of Cabinet Secretary
4.2.1 The Cabinet Secretary submitted that the subject of development and growth of the
North-East was an extremely important one and engaged the Government as a whole. The
Government was trying its best to ensure speedy development of the North-Eastern Region.
According to him, the region required a lot of investment, particularly in agriculture. The funds
that were being made available to the States in the North-East were also, in per capita  terms,
higher than the national average. The Government was conscious of the need to strengthen the
infrastructure in the States under ‘Look East Policy’ and more funds had been given to the
North-East for strengthening infrastructure and connectivity. He further stated that there were a
lot of problems and the major problem was connectivity and infrastructure. In connectivity, he
stated, more intra-regional connectivity was required. The region required airports’ infrastructure
and intra-regional airlines or air services. Regarding roads, whether it was under the SARDP-NE
or the Arunachal Package, he submitted that the problem was not with the money, but with the
implementation of projects.
4.2.2 Commenting on the issue of shifting of the Ministry of DoNER to North East, the Cabinet
Secretary opined that since the Ministry of DoNER is a co-ordinating Ministry, co-ordination
could best done from Delhi where other Ministries are located, shifting of the headquarters on
the analogy of the Space Department and Department of Atomic Energy, would  not be of much
advantage. So, according to him, the Ministry of DoNER should continue to remain in the
national capital.
4.2.3 Regarding effectiveness of advocacy, the Cabinet Secretary submitted that the problems
related to advocacy role of Ministry of DoNER were not unique to it. Those were structural issues,
which could arise in other Ministries also where they were similarly placed and where the actual
work or some of the actual works was supposed to be done or executed or monitored by other
different line Ministries.
4.2.4 On the issue of spending of 10% earmarked allocation by the Ministries, he stated that
Ministries had now become more conscious of the need to spend which had been reflected in dip
in the accumulated balances and accruals in the Non-Lapsable Pool of Central Resources. The
Cabinet Secretariat was also trying its best to sensitize the Ministries to make them spend the funds
more quickly and more effectively.
4.2.5 The Cabinet Secretary also highlighted some of the generic problems related to capacity
constraint and DPR preparation. There was a huge untapped hydro power potential which had to
be developed in the Region for which environmental and forest clearances needed to be sorted out.

34
The local PWDs were often poor either in terms of funds or in terms of capacity. He suggested
that it would be better to move towards the EPC model as this would help to freeze the cost and
that would have a positive effect on time and cost over-runs. He informed that the Ministry was
now pushing all the projects in that direction.
4.2.6 He also stated that the lack of manpower and machinery was being addressed. He observed
that it was improving because big contractors had started to come to the North-East and many of
them after completion of the projects, leave the machinery behind because it was not economical
for them to transport the machinery back. He hoped that over the time, gradually, there would be
greater corpus of big machinery in the Region. He also informed the Committee that efforts were
being made to synchronise the construction in line with the dry season when actual construction
can go on at a quicker pace.
4.2.7 About the issues related to land acquisition, particularly, in Arunachal Pradesh, he observed
that ultimately, the States had to do address the issue since the major projects were essentially
executed through the State PWDs.
4.2.8 W ith regard to the security climate in the North-East, the Cabinet Secretary informed that
the Government was trying its best to see that on the one hand the security concerns and
administrative issues were addressed, and at the same time, the funds and governance issues
relating to the actual execution of the development projects can go ahead.
4.2.9 About increasing the technical expertise of Ministry of DoNER for vetting of DPRs, he
informed that the Ministry had engaged WAPCOS, a consultancy organization under the Ministry
of Water Resources, for getting of DPRs under the NLCPR scheme for up to Rs.50 crore. On
the issue of appointing Chief Engineer in the Ministry of DoNER to strengthen its capability to
vet projects, he informed that the opinion was divided because in practical terms and it was
unlikely that the Chief Engineer would be able to prevail upon the engineering wing in the line
Ministries.
4.2.10 About the need for appointing a senior officer in each Ministry and designate him as a
Nodal Officer to look after the projects, the Cabinet Secretary was of the opinion that in many
line Ministries, different projects might be handled by different Divisions, headed by a Joint
Secretary or some other officer. He, therefore, felt that instead of appointing one officer to deal
just with all these projects, it would be better that the Secretary himself reviews these projects
more frequently from time to time.
4.2.11 About having E-GoM to review the North-East matters, he informed the Committee that the
Prime Minister had asked him to regularly review matters related to the North East in the
Committee of Secretaries. This Committee of Secretaries would meet periodically from time to
time, on a continuous basis. In addition, Prime Minister had directed for setting up of a E-GoM.
He informed that the E-GOM would be set up after the Committee of Secretaries gave their
submissions. The Ministry of DoNER would be servicing the Committee and the GoM and that,
in turn, would also strengthen the hands of the Ministry of DoNER.
4.2.12 Regarding the North-Eastern Council, the Cabinet Secretary felt that it was essentially a
planning body and if there were specific suggestions in this regard, he would be happy to consider
them most seriously.
4.3 The Committee received written comments subsequent to the oral evidence on the issues
raised in the meeting from the Cabinet Secretariat. The following are some important issues
alongwith comments received:–

35
4.3.1 DISINTEREST ON THE PART OF LINE MINISTRIES AFTER FORMATION OF
MINISTRY OF DONER
Comments of the Cabinet Secretariat
4.3.1.1 The feeling that the implementing Ministries in the Government of India have ‘distanced’
themselves from interaction with NE States does not appear to be correct. In fact, not only the
outlay of the line Ministries for NE States but also percentage utilization of 10% earmarked funds
by non-exempted Central Ministries and Departments has been increasing steadily over the past 10
years.
4.3.1.2 It may also be mentioned that NE issues and projects have been taken up in a Committee
of Secretaries (CoS) from time to time. Recently, a Standing CoS has been constituted to review
important projects of the North East under implementation. The mechanism of regular review by
this CoS will ensure that the Ministries/Departments continue to focus on the North East.
4.3.2 EMPOWERING OF NEC
Comments of the Cabinet Secretariat
4.3.2.1 The issues of appropriately empowering NEC and enhancing the power of Secretary, NEC
have been raised by State Governments of the NER on various occasions. Based on these
suggestions, the following steps have been taken by the Ministry of DONER:–
(a) A decision was taken and an order issued in September, 2012, to enhance the financial
powers of Secretary, NEC from Rs. 5 crore to Rs. 15 crore for appraisal/approval of
Plan Schemes/Projects.
(b) The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 has been introduced in the Rajya
Sabha in March, 2013, which inter-alia, seeks amendment in the NEC Act to enable
the Council to discuss issues of mutual interest to two or more States in the Region
and to advise the Central Government thereon on matters of common interest to the
Region and make recommendations.
(c) Planning Commission has been asked to examine association of the NEC with the
annual Plan formulation exercise of the North-Eastern States and the preparation of a
10 year perspective plan for the entire Region.
4.3.3 EMPOWERED COMMITTEE WITHIN MINISTRY OF DONER TO A VOID DELAYS
Comments of the Cabinet Secretariat
4.3.3.1 The Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary, DoNER, having representatives, not
below the rank of Joint Secretary, from Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Home Affairs, the
Planning Commission and Internal Finance Division of Ministry of DoNER, called NLCPR
Committee already exists for sanction of projects under the NLCPR Scheme.
4.3.4 REPRESENTATION OF STATE GOVERNMENTS IN THE SELECTION OF PROJECTS
Comments of the Cabinet Secretariat
4.3.4.1 Ministry of DoNER has conveyed that the selection of projects under the NLCPR is done
in a transparent manner, from priority lists submitted by State Governments, by the NLCPR
Committee, which is chaired by Secretary, DoNER and Finance Secretary, Home Secretary,
Principal Adviser/Adviser in-charge of North Eastern States in the Planning Commission and
Financial Advisor, Ministry of DoNER as its members.

36
4.3.4.2 At the time of selection of projects from priority lists, Chief Secretary or Principal
Secretary (Planning) of the State concerned is requested to make a presentation before the NLCPR
Committee explaining requirement of projects proposed in the Priority list. This arrangement
appears to be satisfactory.
4.3.5 SETTING UP OF E-GOM
Comments of the Cabinet Secretariat
4.3.5.1   An e-GoM has already been constituted to look into the major pending projecs and issues
of the North Eastern States. These issues will be first considered by the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS). Issues that remain unresolved at the level of the CoS or that require a decision at a higher
level could then be referred to the e-GoM with the following composition:–
(i) Finance Minister
(ii) Home Minister
(iii) Minister of Road Transport & Highways
(iv) Minister of Railways
(v) Minister of Water Resources
(vi) Minster of Petroleum & Natural Gas
(vii) Minister of Communication & Information Technology
(viii) MoS (I/C) of Power
(ix) MoS (I/C) of DoNER
4.3.5.2 The Ministry of DoNER has been entrusted to service this e-GoM. The mechanisms of
CoS and e-GoM are expected to accelerate the socio-economic development of the NE region
through the line Central Ministries/Departments.
4.4 Views of Planning Commission
4.4.1 According to the Secretary, Planning Commission, the 90:10 funding issue had been raised
by Chief Ministers of all the eight States on several occasions, but the Commission was of the
view that if some ownership had to be brought into the system, then, at least, some contribution
must come from within the States.  If the entire amount came from the Central Government, then
there would be very little difference between the State’s own development plans and that of the
Central Government.
4.4.2 Commenting on the issue raised by the States regarding delay in DPR approvals, she said
that in the context of the Special Plan Assistance, Budget cycles were such that State Governments
finalise their budget between April to June, and by the time they send the DPR, their working
season starts. She informed the Committee that the Commission was trying to streamline the
process, and the review of the same would be done in August 2013 in a committee-mode to ensure
full working season. She informed that Annual DPRs were only for the Special Plan Assistance,
which were given to the States and were actually done by the States. She further clarified that in
the case of State DPRs which were considered by the Secretary, DoNER and the line Ministries
were asked to give their technical inputs, the process could be expedited by putting more
administrative pressure.

37
4.4.3 Regarding Maintenance of completed projects, She was of the opinion that States would had
to take the responsibility for the completed projects, though she acknowledged that hand-holding
and capacity-building for doing so needed to be improved and the Commission would be looking
at this issue in the course of the Twelfth Plan.
4.4.4 Explaining the Committee about the NLCPR scheme, she informed that there were two sets
of projects under it. One, there were projects through NLCPR, and, two, since 2012 a new
window of NLCPR-Central had been created where unspent balances of Central Ministries would
accrue and, as required, demands would be placed before the Ministry of Finance for releases on
case-to-case basis. NLCPR-Central was yet to be completely put on the ground and the
Commission expected that Ministry of DoNER would start implementing this window to its full
effectiveness in the course of year 2013.
4.4.5 Regarding State-specific guidelines as most of the centrally-sponsored schemes do not meet
the requirements of the North-Eastern and other States, she informed that recently the Cabinet had
taken a decision that State-specific guidelines within the overall core guidelines of every centrally-
sponsored scheme would be received from the States, in the first instance, and would be looked
into by a committee comprising of Secretary, Planning Commission, the Expenditure Secretary and
the Chief Secretary or any other representative of the State so that the schemes could be better
tailored to the requirements of the States. In addition, She informed, there had also been a decision
that there would be a Flexi fund of ten per cent in each centrally-sponsored scheme which would
be available to the States to try innovations and tailor these schemes to their own requirements.
4.4.6 Regarding delays, she explained that though there had been problems about completing the
projects on time as well as cost and time overruns, but in the last couple of years, a number of
festering issues of law and order had been resolved. A large number of issues relating to project
implementation had also been resolved and the Commission expected that these projects would
move closer to completion. She was also of the opinion that the only way to stop cost escalation
was to complete the project. Therefore, she suggested that efforts should be stepped up to press
upon the Ministries to expedite projects.
4.4.7 Commenting on the suggestion that the non-lapsable pool should be kept in a Revolving
Fund to be operated by Ministry of DoNER and the funds should be made available to the States
based on their demand and capacity and not constrained by yearly budgetary ceilings, the Planning
Commission in a written submission to the Committee responded as follows:
“Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) created in 1997-98
(operationalzed in 1998-99) is the accrual of unspent balance of the mandatory 10%
budgetary allocation of the Ministries/Department. The subject of NLCPR is being dealt by
DoNER after its creation in 2001 and a “budget head” is created in the name of the
scheme. The broad objective of the NLCPR Scheme is to ensure speedy development of
infrastructure by the way of filing the existing infrastructural gaps (economic and social)
in the region by making funds available from the pool.
The budgetary provision is based on the proposal received from Ministry of DoNER
for allocation of funds in each financial year. Ministry of DoNER’ s proposal is in fact
based on their experience with regard to absorption capacity of the States, completion of
formalities before sanction of projects (like preparation of DPR, getting clarifications from
the State Governments on the technical aspects of the projects), Utilisation Certificates
before release of subsequent installments against the sanctioned projects, etc. So far,
Planning Commission allocated funds for NLCPR scheme as per the demands of the
Ministry of DoNER. In the current year i.e. 2013-14, the allocation for NLCPR scheme was
Rs. 950.00 crore. This provision is categorized as “Central Assistance to the States” (ACA
under the State Plan).

38
10% of all Central plans schemes of around 54 Central Ministries to be spent in
North Eastern Region. During the Eleventh Plan (2007-12) the Central Plan outlay of
Ministries for NER was about Rs. 87,366 crore and about 92% of this was actually spent
by Central Ministries. As compared to this, the total expenditure by these Ministries from
1998-99 till the end of Tenth Plan (9 years) was only about Rs. 44,909 crore. Further, the
utilization rate has improved from 80% prior to Eleventh Plan to 92% during the Eleventh
Plan. Unspent funds are also provided under NLCPR scheme of Ministry of DoNER every
year.
It is pertinent to point out that the main purpose of minimum 10% outlay of various
ministries for the North East is to ensure widespread involvement of Ministries in the NER.
The purpose has been largely fulfilled as the GBS for Central Plan has sharply increased
over time and spending by Ministries has also correspondingly increased. If it were not so,
the accruals to NLCPR would had been much higher. As a proportion of GBS the accruals
have come down indicating increased spending of Ministries in the NER.
The NLCPR is a notional fund and the amount spent from this fund is allocated from
the Consolidated Fund of India every financial year. It is not in the nature of a public
account. The accounts for NLCPR is being maintained wherein the unutilized funds out of
the earmarked 10% NER provision under individual grants of various Central Ministries/
Departments are taken as accruals to the NLCPR at the close of the financial year. The
maintenance of the accounts relating to accruals/utilization/balances in the NLCPR is being
finalized on an annual basis by the Ministry of DoNER and verified by the Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. Funds from the Central Pool can be released for
State Sector (operative from the beginning of the NLCPR concept) as well as Central Sector
projects/ schemes (NLCPR-Central operative from 2012-13). The Ministry of DoNER spells
out guidelines for formulation, submission, consideration and sanction of various projects
for the development of NER, to be funded from NLCPR.  The opening balance in NLCPR
as on 1
st April, 2012 is Rs. 11611.30 crore.
Ministry of DoNER has launched a new Central sector scheme in the 12 th Plan known
as NLCPR (Central), through which the accrued unspent balance is to be provided against
the important infrastructure projects in the NE region, as required by the line ministries
concerned. The scheme will ensure effective utilization of the unutilized fund in the Central
Pool. At present, only a small provision has been made in the budget. The required
budgetary support will be provided under the scheme as and when such proposals are
cleared after detailed examination. Some of the important projects identified by Ministry of
DoNER for support are in the power sector (transmission lines in Arunachal Pradesh and
Sikkim for evacuation of power), railway projects (e.g. Agartala-Akhaura) and inland water
transport.”
4.4.8 On the suggestion of the State Governments of the North East Region regarding separation
of the allocation for NLCPR and NEC schemes, which had been included in the Annual Plan
allocations during 2013-14, from the State Plan, the Commission responded as follows:
“The inclusion of NEC and NLCPR in the States’ Annual Plan was required. In the
Union Budget, NCE and NLCPR have been always a part of Central Assistance to State
Plans (both in Demand for Grants of DoNER in Expenditure Budget Volume II and in
Statement 16 on Central Assistance to State Plan of Expenditure Budget volume I). The
release of funds by DoNER and NCE to NE States has also been under the budget head
meant for Central assistance to State Plans. However, there has been omission to mention
as such in the Scheme of Financing of Annual Plans of NE States. When this omission has
been pointed out in the reconciliation process, the Central assistance on this account has

39
been correctly reflected in States’ Annual Plans for 2013-14 fully in line with Union budget
approved by Parliament. This was a misclassification in the accounts of the State
government which had been rectified in the Twelfth Plan. This fact has also been explained
to States during Annual Plan discussions.”
4.5 Views of Finance Ministry
4.5.1 The Expenditure Secretary in his evidence before the Committee stated that the Finance
Ministry was committed that the expenditure on national projects should be provided by the Finance
Ministry. With regard to issue of the lack of availability of funds for national projects in the North
Eastern Region, as flagged by the Ministry of Railways, the Expenditure Secretary stated that in
the earlier system, Railways was being reimbursed the money spent by it during the year, towards
the end of the year. However, the system had been changed two years back and upfront money
based on the level of expenditure in the previous year, on an ad-hoc basis,  had been started to
be provided.
4.5.2 According to the Expenditure Secretary it was not the funding constraint which was holding
up or delaying the execution of the national projects in the North-Eastern Region, but the lack of
execution capacity.
4.5.3 Regarding holding of the funds provided by the Central Government by State Governments,
he explained that though the Centre Government prescribed that the money should go through the
State Government for particular project and the State Governments must release the funds within
15 days’ time for that particular project. Non-compliance in this matter would attract interest on
the amount not released, which would be utilized for the project for which it was intended.
Regarding undue delay in the release of funds by the State Government to the Bodo Tribal
Autonomous Council, he assured the Committee that he would look into the matter.
4.5.4 Regarding the demand from the State Governments to provide 100 per cent funding instead
of 90:10, he opined that there had to be some commitment from the State Governments, if projects
were to be completed in a qualitative and timely manner.
4.5.5 Regarding maintenance of completed projects, he informed the Committee that earlier the
maintenance portion was not being provided for in the contract, but recently a provision for
maintenance had been included in the contract. Initially, a minimum three years’ mandatory
maintenance was provided by the contractor after completion of the project. Now, for the EPC
projects, efforts were being made to raise it to five years’ maintenance which will be factored into
the cost of the project. After that, in any case, it would be responsibility of the State Governments
to maintain the project.
4.5.6 Regarding land being provided by the State Governments, the Expenditure Secretary stated
that it was a general principle that for all central sector and centrally-sponsored schemes, land
should be provided by the State Governments as this was essential to make the State Governments
committed.
4.5.7 On the issue of 10 per cent expenditure not being made by the different Ministries for the
North East and that goes into the NLCPR, he informed the Committee that it was a fact that as
on 31
st March, 2012, about Rs.11,611 crores was the closing balance in the NLCPR. However if
any Ministry was spending more than 10 per cent, the Ministry does not offset it against NLCPR.
There were many Ministries which, in fact, spend more. But as a point of principle, if for any
projects an additional amount was required and if additional money in NLCPR was available, it
could be provided in the budget.

40
4.5.8 On the suggestion by State Governments that the non-lapsable pool should be kept in the
Revolving Fund to be operated by Ministry of DoNER and the funds should be made available to
the States based on their demand and capacity and not constrained by yearly ceiling, Ministry of
Finance had responded as follows:
“Presently, the NLCPR is being maintained on proforma basis wherein the unutilized
funds out of the earmarked 10% NER provision under individual grant of various
Ministries/Departments are taken as accruals to the NLCPR at the close of the financial
year. The maintenance of the accounts relating to accruals/utilization/balances in the
NLCPR is being finalized on an annual basis by the Ministry of DoNER, and vetted by the
Ministry of Finance based on inputs provided to it. This system has been working smoothly
for the past several years since inception. Creating a Revolving Fund for NLCPR would
practically be not feasible as: (i) opening of separate Revolving Fund to make the funds
physically non-lapsable would require a presumption on the unspent amounts under each
scheme of Ministries /Departments right at the commencement of a financial year since
transfer to such a fund would need to be budgeted, and this would not be practicable as
the earmarked funds for NER out of the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) allocated by the
Planning Commission being spread across the Demands for Grants of various Ministries/
Departments, it would prima facie be difficult for each Ministry/Department to estimate the
quantum of funds likely to remain unutilized at the close of the financial year for transfer
to the pool; (ii) such funds being made available based on demand and capacity of States
without constraint of yearly budgetary ceilings would have implications on Government of
India finances, adversely affecting fiscal deficit, etc., and (iii) drawls from such funds, in
Public Account, would also require Parliamentary approval.”

41
41
CHAPTER-V
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE
5.1 After hearing the views of various stake holders viz. Ministry of DoNER, line Ministries,
representatives of North Eastern State Governments, Secretary, Department of Expenditure,
Secretary, Planning Commission and Cabinet Secretary on the subject, the Committee has arrived
at the following conclusions observations/recommendations.
5.2 Avoidance of Procedural Delay
5.2.1 From the evidence available, the Committee takes note of the fact that the major
drawback in the timely implementation and completion of the projects lies in the
procedural delay. The Committee is of the view that in order to give fillip to the
development process in the region, the whole Government machinery involving both the
Central Government and State Governments need to pull up their socks right from the
stage of conceptualisation of schemes, allocation of funds, formulation of DPRs, technical
vetting of DPRs, obtaining environment/forest clearances to actual take-off of projects on
ground involving land acquisition, capacity building, conducive law and order situation, etc.
This requires a well balanced planning, good coordination between various agencies and
time bound clearances/rejections of projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
a robust monitoring mechanism should be put in place so that procedural delays at every
stage of the projects are brought down to minimum level, though ideal situation would be
to remove all delays.
5.3 Detailed Project Report (DPRs)
5.3.1 The Committee observes that the State Governments do not have sufficient
wherewithal to make proper analysis and investigations. This has been agreed by all sides.
Because of this, most of the DPRs submitted by the State Governments entail a lot of short
comings. The Ministry of DoNER has to send them to the States back again and again for
clarifications and sometimes advise the States that they should outsource this work so that
State Governments can have inputs of experts in DPRs. The State Governments on the
other hand suggested for the preparation of DPRs only after the projects are retained by
the Ministry as it involves huge expenditure to prepare DPRs. The State Governments
suggested that the Ministry of DoNER should accept the idea of concept papers for proposing
projects under NLCPR and only after retention, the specific details in the form of DPRs
may be called for. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of DoNER and Planning
Commission should look into the feasibility of the suggestion of the State Governments or
else the State Governments should outsource their DPRs to improve the quality. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER in consultation with
Planning Commission and the State Governments should workout the best course in this
regard so that unnecessary delays do not take place at the DPR stage itself.
5.3.2 The Committee takes note of the complaint of the line Ministries that while
preparing DPRs, the State Governments/agencies do not make proper survey and study of

42
the local situation. This leads to cost escalation many a time. This calls for development of
efficient agencies for preparing DPRs and outsourcing DPRs to them. Ministry of DoNER
should prepare a plan and for this purpose and get it implemented by States. The Committee
feels that if the above recommendation is implemented, this can be taken care of.
5.3.3 The Committee also takes note of the complaints of the State Governments that
the comments/queries/clarifications of the Line Ministries are not sought in one go rather
they are sought in 2-3 installments which are then replied to by the State Governments
to the Line Ministries through the Ministry of DoNER. The entire process takes about
1-2 years and sometimes more, for sanction of projects after submission of the DPRs,
thus resulting in time/cost escalation of the projects. The Committee also notes the
complaint of the States that except for prioritization of projects, the States have no role
in the process of selection of projects to be funded under NLCPR. The sanction of the
projects would be expedited if the representatives of the State Government are invited to
attend the meetings held for sanctioning of the projects, to give clarifications on the spot.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to address the problem of delays by
the Line Ministries/Departments, a strict time-frame should be given for clearing DPRs.
The Committee also recommends that required administrative mechanism, including
inviting representative of the concerned State Governments in the meetings for on the
spot clarifications, may be put in place. The line Ministries should not take long time in
approval and sanctioning of DPRs. The time lines as are to be fixed, should be strictly
adhered to. 
5.3.4 The Com mittee agrees with the demand of the North Eastern State Governments that
there should be a representative of the State, possibly the Chief Secretary or the
Commissioner/Secretary, in charge Planning Department of the State in the NLCPR
Committee for retention and sanctioning of projects and recommends that necessary steps
be taken to ensure representation of the concerned State Governments in the NLCPR
Committee.
5.3.5 The Committee notes that in some cases final approved cost of projects based on
techno vetting from Line Ministries differ from the projected estimated cost in the DPR,
and the deleted components are not informed to the State Governments, thus creating
problems in implementation. The State Governments have strongly objected to this. The
Committee, in this connection, recommends that the State Governments should be kept well
informed about the whole process so that they get enough time to adjust for better
implementation of the projects. The Planning Commission and Ministry of DoNER should
address this issue appropriately.
5.3.6 Several State Governments brought to the notice of the Committee that there were
many cases where the retention and sanctioning of projects by the Ministry of DoNER were
found to be arbitrary. The Committee is anguished to note an instance, where a road project
of 62 kms was retained in two phases (31 km each for Rs 31 crore each), whereas, sanction
was approved for only the Phase II of 31 kms after reduction of almost Rs 10 crore from
the detailed estimate of the DPR. The Committee also notes another instance where only
a small length out of the proposed road projects was retained, which was totally illogical.
The Committee feels that such arbitrary retention of projects and unreasonable sanctioning
of projects with much lower cost as compared to the proposed amount in the DPR would be
detrimental to the creation of infrastructure. The Committee feels that completion of many
projects had been stalled due to this reason. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministries should avoid adopting such irrational and arbitrary
approach and also to be more realistic in allocating funds considering the topography of the
region.

43
5.4 Capacity Constraints
5.4.1 The Committee finds that the State Governments have to do a lot of catching up as
far as capacity building is concerned. The Committee takes note of the complaints regarding
inadequate investigations and project formulation which led to changes in scope and revision
of drawings at later stage. It also notes problems related to inappropriate and inadequate
procurement and faulty contractual management system. Poor selection of contractors due
to low bids with no technical capability to handle the project led to cost overruns, schedule
delays, poor quality etc. The Committee also finds that in some cases the project lengths
are very large and there is lack of technical expertise in State PWDs in implementing the
projects. The Committee further observes that there is dearth of local contractors with
sound financial and technical capabilities and low participation of contractors from other
parts of the country in the tenders also. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered
view that concerted effort is required on the part of the Ministry of DoNER and Planning
Commission to improve State Governments’ capabilities for project preparation and
execution. The Ministry of DoNER in consultation with Finance Ministry and Planning
Commission should chalk out a long-term plan for capacity building of State Governments
of NER keeping in mind huge infrastructure needs of the region. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should extend technical and other related help to
the State PWDs to improve their technical capacities and execution capabilities. The State
Governments and Ministry of DoNER should also take necessary steps for assisting local
contractors to upgrade their skills.
5.5 Problems Related to Law and Order Situation
5.5.1 The Committee finds that the law and order situation is one of the biggest problems
in NER which is posing a threat to the projects by preventing them from taking off. The
Committee has on record the suggestion of line Ministries that the local problems and law
and order issues should be addressed by State and local administrations to ensure smooth
completion of projection. Agreeing with the view of line Ministries, the Committee suggests
that all local issues including problems of law and order should be addressed by the local
administration and State Authorities.
5.6 Issues Related to Environment/Forest Clearances
5.6.1 Regarding forest clearance at the State level and the Central level, the Committee
finds that time limits are generally not adhered to and they do not even have sub-limits.
It appears that there is no time limit for any particular agency to give the clearance. The
Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the clearances should be given within the
prescribed time limits and there should be sub-limits for different stages. The time limit for
the Central and State Governments and their concerned agencies should be fixed and
strictly adhered to.
5.6.2 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forest
should apply different standards in the cases of strategically important projects such as the
ones located on international borders or near to it, as these locations are of strategic
importance for the safety and security of the country. The absence of such infrastructure
will severely hamper the movement of artillery and logistics in times of border tension.
5.6.3 The Commit tee also desires that the Cabinet Secretary may hold review meetings
particularly on the projects pending for environmental clearances and issue instructions to
Ministry of Environment and Forests to give clearances within specific time limits. The
State Governments also need to be instructed in this regard as all the projects, after all,

44
are going to create assets in the respective States. Ministry of DoNER may take initiative
in this regard and take up with the State Governments.
5.7 Lacunae on the Part of the State Governments
5.7.1 The Committee is of the view that the onus of development in NER lies as much on
the State Governments as on the agencies of the Central Government. The Committee is
constrained to express its displeasure to find that the line Ministries and State Governments
pass the buck to each other while facing bottlenecks during the course of implementation
of projects for development. But, the need is to exercise introspection. State Governments
cannot get away just by pointing fingers towards the Centre and vice-versa. The case in point
is the 3,000 MW Debang Power Project to be executed by NHPC, where even holding of
public hearings, which was one of the first things to happen, could not be conducted because
of law and order situation and had to be postponed 12 times. After a lot of intervention by
the Ministry of Power and the personal intervention of the Minister of Power, the public
hearing was conducted. Similar is the case with many projects which certainly hampered the
process of development in NER.
5.7.2 The Ministry of Surface Transport and Highways cited a case under Arunachal
package for road construction of 740 kms, in two packages—one of 300 plus kms. and the
other of 440 kms. But land acquisition for these stretches could not be completed for a long
period of two years. Since the Ministry had decided to award projects only when 90% of the
land was available, the programmes could not be executed for want of land acquisition.
5.7.3 Another case that has come to the notice of the Committee is that of a scheme of
providing 100 per cent central assistance to the North-Eastern States for taking up river
development works. Apart from the National Waterway-2, that is, the Brahmaputra River,
there are other river stretches also which could be developed for cargo transportation. The
Committee is disappointed to note that response or the initiative from the States of the
North-Eastern Region is lacking. The Central Government, on its own, engaged M/s. RITES
to identify river stretches which could be developed for such cargo transportation and RITES
had identified 22 river stretches in all the States of North-Eastern Region for development.
Those identified river stretches had been shared with the concerned State Governments and
they had been requested to send proposals for assistance. However, so far, only three
proposals have been received, one of which had been sanctioned. The Committee is of the
opinion that the North-Eastern States need to be more proactive in sending the proposals
for development of these river stretches for cargo transportation.
5.7.4 One more example that has come to the notice of the Committee is the case of fixed
terminal at Pandu which is supposed to be completed by June, 2014. Dedicated road
connectivity has been sanctioned at a cost of Rs.11 crore to connect National Highway-31
and for this, land was required from the Railways. The requisite amount had been paid but
the land had not been transferred owing to 2,150 encroachments which are to be cleared by
the State Government. The Committee was informed that either the encroachment had to
be removed or an alternative piece of land for an alternative alignment has to be given.
This dedicated connectivity from the Waterway Terminal to the National Highway would be
an essential requirement for smooth flow of cargo. The Committee observes that the
removal of encroachments by the concerned State Government at the earliest is the only
option as there is no other alignment possible. In view of the above illustrations, the
Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry of DoNER should play a pro-active role in
resolving issues amongst line Ministries and State Governments for timely execution of
projects and State Governments should also come forward with their cooperation. Unless

45
States take initiative and cooperate, projects cannot take off and development will continue
to be hampered.
5.8 Power Sector
5.8.1 The Committee takes note of the suggestion of the Ministry of Power that in order
to improve the power situation in the North-Easter Region, there is a need for a
comprehensive plan for laying adequate road network in a time-bound manner to expedite
the development of projects in the North-East as these projects are located in very remote
places. The Committee feels that roads are required for not only power sector but for
overall development of North East. Various agencies like the Border Roads Organisation,
Ministry of Roads and Highways, State PWDs, etc need to work in a coordinated manner
for this purpose.
5.8.2 The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Power gave two reasons for the
delayed concurrence to schemes by CEA i) multi-disciplinary discussion process and ii)
inadequate man power in CEA. In view of the Committee, while due diligence and
discussion can not be compromised and Power Ministry has not much role nor should it try
to curtail it, but ‘inadequate man power’ is well within its domain, which should not have
been allowed to take toll on the clearance of the power projects. The Committee is not at
all convinced with the second reason and therefore recommends that all necessary steps be
taken to address the problem of inadequate manpower in CEA at the earliest so that power
projects are cleared in an expeditious manner to meet the country’s growing demand of the
power, particularly North East.
5.8.3 The Committee was also given to understand that the Aggregate Technical &
Commercial (AT&C) losses were among the highest in NER in Distribution Sector and for
implementation of Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programmes
(R-APDRP) in NER, three States were yet to submit Part-B DPRs. The Committee is of the
firm view that the losses for longer period can affect the viability of the power projects and
the remaining three States should come forward with their DPRs so that reform
programmes can be initiated to tackle the issue of distribution losses at the earliest.
5.8.4 The Committee recommends that Ministry of DONER should tie up with NE States
for quick decision making for finalisation of MOUs for Power Transmission projects and for
resolving issues like Right of Way and forest clearance by the States.
5.9 Telecom Sector
5.9.1 The Committee takes note of the poor telecom connectivity in North-east. The
telecom system is linear which if broken at a point disturbs the whole segment. The
Committee agreeing with the suggestion of the Department of Telecommunications,
recommends that provision of having ducts alongside the roads is a good suggestion and it
should be made mandatory for road works not only in NER but also in the whole country
so that no OFC is damaged on account of road works. The Committee recommends that the
existing infrastructure available with organizations like Power Grid Corporation, Railtel etc.
as well as State Governments should provide Right of Way at a reasonable cost for better
connectivity in the Region. The Committee also notes that the Department of
Telecommunications had suggested an alternative connection from Tripura to Akhora in
Bangladesh to provide an alternative path and the matter is being negotiated through the
Ministry of External Affair Ministry. The Committee desires that the negotiations in this
regard may be concluded at the earliest to ensure communication connectivity to the North
East Region with the country.

46
5.9.2 The Committee also notes that the Power Grid Corporation is not ready to lend a
pair of fibre in the cable going on the transmission lines on cost sharing basis as it is rather
interested in giving the bandwidth on lease commercially to earn more money. The matter
had been brought to the notice of the PMO and Cabinet Secretary, but with no avail. The
Committee in this connection would like to impress upon the Government that connectivity
to the North East Region should not be viewed solely on commercial lines to make profit
as it is for the national cause. The Committee therefore recommends that the PMO and
Cabinet Secretary should intervene in the matter to sort out the issue at the earliest.
5.9.3 As mentioned earlier, losses can make any activity unsustainable for long period and
keeping in mind that the viability gap funding is needed to ensure commercial feasibility
for regular provision of telecommunication services in North East, the Committee
recommends that the issue of viability gap funding may be examined and may be provided
for regular provision of telecommunication services in North East.
5.10 Air Connectivity
5.10.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that airports in the region have certain problems
with regard to the night landing facilities. The region has got all the ground base facilities
and visual facilities. However, some instrument landing facilities are required to be provided
in some States. The Committee has been assured that by end of the financial year 2013-14,
all these North-Eastern airports will be equipped with instrument-related night-landing
facility. The Committee desires that there may not be any delay in this regard.
5.10.2 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the drawback in the Route
Disbursal Guidelines, under which airlines are obliged to deploy 10 per cent of their
capacity, which they are operating on the metro routes, to the North-East and however, by
taking advantage of the drawback, they are operating a lot of services to Guwahati and
Bagdogra and the main problem of the connectivity within the North-East is still very much
there, thus defeating the very purpose of the Guidelines in letter and spirit. It has been
suggested that there may be Airport Connectivity Guidelines (ACG) and Code Sharing with
national and regional airlines to overcome this problem. The Committee recommends that
the matter of having Airport Connectivity Guidelines (ACG) and Code Sharing with national
and regional airlines may be examined earnestly to ensure air connectivity to all parts of
the North East, and not just Guwahati and Bagdogra in the name of obligation under Route
Disbursal Guidelines. The Committee also received a suggestion that Ministry of DoNER/
NEC should give 100% financial support as all the airports are making losses. The
Committee recommends that this suggestion of Ministry of Civil Aviation may be examined.
5.11 Enhancing Operational Efficiency of Border Road Organisation
5.11.1 The Committee came across the fact that for construction work the concerned
Ministry is overly dependent on BRO for substantial stretches, particularly closer to the
border areas. The Committee has been apprised that BRO had been organized in a manner
where they are able to take up only departmental activities and the problem is that a single
unit of BRO at best can take up 10 kms. in a year and at this pace of road construction,
the set objectives of undertaken project can never be achieved. The Committee recommends
that suitable steps be taken for enhancing operational efficiency of BRO.
5.12 Constitution of Empowered Group of Ministers To Review Key Infrastructure Programmes
5.12.1 The Committee notes the suggestion made by Ministry of DoNER that suitable and
adequate institutional arrangements are the need of the hour for monitoring of

47
infrastructure projects of key line Ministries viz. Road Transport & Highways, Railways,
Power, Civil Aviation, Telecommunications, Communications Information Technology,
Shipping, etc. The Committee is of the considered view that NER being strategically
significant considering its long international borders it is but natural that the targets in the
key infrastructural projects as planned by line Ministries are achieved to improve
connectivity, power generation and ward off security threat. The Committee, therefore,
agrees that there must be some institutional arrangements/mechanism in the form of
Empowered Group of Ministers to review key infrastructural projects. The Committee notes
that the Government is already seized of the matter and the Prime Minister has directed
the Cabinet Secretary for setting up of EGoM for the review of NE projects etc. The
Committee, subsequent to the discussions it had with Cabinet Secretary, has been informed
that the EGoM has since been constituted to look into the major projects and issues of NE
Region. The Committee notes that this step will accelerate implementation of projects and
programmes in NE Region.
5.13 EPC Mode of Delivery
5.13.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Transport Secretary that in the
case of a project consisting of four stretches in the State of Nagaland at a total cost of Rs.
1,300 crore, it was enhanced to Rs. 2,900 crore in the revised estimate and the local
requirement for these four stretches was completely at variance with the project report.
Dealing with the same issue of cost escalation though citing another example, the State
Government also mentioned that sanction of projects under Power sector for Nagaland was
stalled on the ground that the cost of power projects appeared to be ‘two times’ the normal
cost of projects compared to the process prevailing in the rest of India. The State
Government felt that the Ministry should take the ground reality of cost in hilly/terrain
region such as difficult terrain, lack of vendors’ response, etc.
5.13.2 The Committee takes note of the views of Secretary, RT& HW that for reducing
escalation of project cost, they are going towards EPC mode. Cabinet Secretary also
emphasized the EPC mode. The Committee also notes that there is some resistance in
accepting EPC mode. The Committee, however, strongly recommends that the Ministries
should shift from ‘item rate’ mode-of-delivery to the ‘Engineering Procurement Contract’
mode-of-delivery so as to avoid the escalation of project costs and delay. The Committee is
also of the view that where EPC model is not being followed, the contractors/consultants
should be penalized for faulty projections at the stage of project formulation itself by State
PWDs when they receive exaggerated or faulty project reports.
5.14 T ailoring of Schemes
5.14.1 The Committee notes that the guidelines issued under various schemes in the way
of implementation in the NE States due to topographical and other disadvantages. The
Committee was informed that for strengthening Trauma Centre, the conditions prescribing
minimum number of beds and doctors are difficult to be fulfilled, likewise, HRD Ministry
has provided ten computers in a school, but power connection under the scheme RGGVY
does not permit this. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that Ministries should frame
broad based schemes or a component within existing scheme to suit NER and the guidelines
of programmes with all-India nature may be tailored/modified and relaxed. The Committee
desires that Central Ministries should conduct analysis of their on-going schemes from the
view point of their suitability to the special needs of NER. The Ministries should prepare
alternate/sub scheme for NER or have a broad based “umbrella scheme” within which
individual projects suitable for North East States could be implemented. The Line Ministries

48
should, as far as possible, formulate the schemes in consultation with the State
Governments. The Committee is of the opinion that it would be better if, under the broader
guidelines, the State Governments are allowed to frame their own schemes and States
should have liberty in deciding the modus operandi for planning and implementation of the
programmes in the best interest of area specific requirements. In this regard, the
Committee welcomes the recent decision of the Government that State-specific guidelines
within the overall core guidelines of every centrally sponsored scheme would be received
from the States, in the first instance, and would be looked into by a Committee comprising
of Secretary, Planning Commission, the Expenditure Secretary and the Chief Secretary or
any other representative of the State so that the schemes could be better tailored to the
requirements of the States. Another decision that there would be a Flexi fund of ten per
cent in each centrally-sponsored scheme which would be available to the State to try
innovations and tailor these schemes to their own requirements is a step in right direction.
The Committee recommends that concerted steps be taken to implement the above
decisions of the Government at the earliest so that the grievances of State Governments in
this regard are addressed appropriately.
5.15 Observance of NLCPR Guidelines
5.15.1 The Committee has came across the fact that delay in vetting of DPRs by line
Ministries leads to consequential delay in sanctioning of project thereby making cost
unworkable due to change in Schedule of Rates (SoR). In fact, the Ministry of DoNER is
dependent on line Ministries for vetting of DPRs under NLCPR Scheme. The representatives
of various State Governments also deliberated before the Committee in detail that delay
caused in vetting of DPRs due to repeated observations or otherwise results into further
delayed sanctioning of projects which at time causes time and cost overruns. It has come
to the notice of the Committee that retained NLCPR projects are cleared after 3 or 4 years
which creates lots of difficulty as there are no takers for the projects due to escalation of
costs. The Committee also notes the complaint of State Governments regarding the nature
of the observations conveyed to the States by the line Ministries which are at times
arbitrary, irrelevant, and not concerned to civil works matters (especially those from the
CPWD). The State Governments observes that DPRs for NLCPR projects are prepared based
on the Guidelines for Administration of NLCPR. However, DPRs are being revised umpteen
times due to the fact that the reports were subjected to scrutiny against arbitrary standards
which were not specified in the Ministry’s Guidelines. The State Governments are of the
view that the role of the technical vetting authority for DPRs of NLCPR projects is to
examine the broad outline feasibility and correctness of the DPR instead of raising
observations on a particular drawing/estimate being countersigned or not, or raising
arbitrary observations. The Committee views that undue delay in vetting of DPRs
necessitates revision in Administrative and Financial approval which finally delays
completion of projects abnormally. The Committee recommends that the Ministries should
stick to Guidelines for Administration of NLCPR and avoid arbitrariness in their
observations for timely clearances of projects.
5.16 T echnical Wing in Ministry of DoNER
5.16.1 The Committee received the suggestion for establishment of a full fledged Technical
Wing in the Ministry of DoNER for timely vetting of DPRs, which was in fact taken up by
Ministry of DoNER with Committee of Secretaries (CoS). The CoS considered the issue and
observed that, “it would not be practical to establish an elaborate technical wing in Ministry
of DoNER, possessing all the skills to examine the various types of projects, as it would

49
invariably lead to under employment as well as unnecessary duplication of the available
manpower resources in the Government”. The CoS desired that the Ministry of DoNER
would initiate measures to have its own small complement of technical manpower for
preliminary checking of the projects and the cost estimates. Accordingly, Ministry of DoNER
established a Technical Wing in the Ministry in January, 2010 headed by Superintending
Engineer with an Executive Engineer and 2 Assistant Engineers. The Committee, however,
wonders to find that as per CPWD norms SE is competent to issue technical sanctions of
projects upto 2.5 crore only, whereas, minimum cost of projects to be considered for funding
under NLCPR Scheme is Rs.3.00 crore, therefore, services of Technical Wing remains
underutilized.
5.16.2 The Committee feels that Technical Wing in the Ministry of DoNER needs to be
strengthened to obviate the present circumstances and to ensure expeditious vetting of
DPRs under NLCPR Scheme. Technical Wing may be vested with full powers for issue of
technical sanctions of projects under NLCPR Scheme along with appropriate number of
Executive Engineers and Assistant Engineers of mixed discipline. Such arrangements would
curb unnecessary delays in vetting of DPRs and streamline timely sanction of projects. The
Committee also feels that Line Ministries be assigned time bound targets for techno
economic vetting of DPRs. The issue of doing away with the current practice of obtaining
Techno-Economic feasibility from the line Ministries at least for smaller projects may be
examined. The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry of DoNER that
routine observations of repetitive nature must be avoided and DPRs may be corrected at
Ministry’s level to achieve time line of two months.
5.17 Keeping NLCPR Funds In A Revolving Fund
5.17.1 Regarding the suggestion that NLCPR funds should be kept in a Revolving Fund to
be operated by DoNER, and it should be made available to the States based on their demand
and capacity without being constrained by yearly budgetary ceilings, the Committee agrees
with the view of the Finance Ministry that creating a Revolving Fund for NLCPR would
practically be not feasible. It also agrees with the view that such funds being made available
based on demand and capacity of States without constraint of yearly budgetary ceilings
would have implications on Government of India finances, adversely affecting fiscal deficit,
etc., besides, withdrawals from such funds , in Public Account, would also require
Parliamentary approval. Keeping in mind such practical difficulties, the Committee
recommends that a better course of action is required to make line Ministries spend the
mandatory allocation for the North East, which will automatically result in lesser accruals
to the NLCPR funds, through administrative oversight mechanism having sufficient teeth to
pressurize the line Ministries to spend their share of money. The Committee is of the view
that the Government should vigorously sensitize Ministries to spend 10 % GBS meant for
NE States more quickly and effectively.
5.18 Financing Pattern of Schemes Under NLCPR
5.18.1 Most of the representatives of the State Governments expressed before the
Committee their inability to finance State share of 10 percent under NLCPR Schemes. Their
grievance is that NLCPR financing pattern of 90% grant and 10% loan implied borrowing
of huge amounts of funds from open markets to finance projects, thus proving a burden for
the States’ finances. The State Governments felt that the requirement of 10% loan
component should be done away with so that the heavy financial burden of the State can
be eased. Various Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) administered by various Central
Ministries have varied funding patterns of 50:50, 75:25, 80:20, 90:10, and 100:00 etc. The

50
State Governments were of the view that since the requirement of the State share is met
out of the limited untied Plan Fund, the States are left with less funds for implementation
of their own prioritised schemes and projects. The State Governments, therefore, requested
for full funding of the schemes/projects. The Committee, however, is not in agreement with
the views of the State Governments and is of the considered view that the State
Governments should also show their involvement/interest/ownership/commitment/
participation in the implementation and execution of the projects which could only be
ensured with their being financial stakeholder in the projects. However, wherever the cost
escalation increases the share of the State, the Ministry of DoNER and Planning
Commission may consider the component of cost escalation to reduce the financial burden
on the States.
5.19 Separation of Allocations for NLCPR and NEC Schemes From Annual Plans of States
5.19.1 The Committee notes the overwhelming demand of the North Eastern States that the
allocation of NLCPR and NEC schemes, which have been included in the Annual Plan
allocations during 2013-14, should be separated from State Plan. According to the State
Governments the present dispensation of including NLCPR/NEC within the State Annual
Plan would give rise to undue procedural delay as any additionality over and above the
projection made in the Plan would call for revision of State Plan and thus obtaining of again
a second approval from the Planning Commission. In their view resources of Ministry of
DoNER are distinct from and additional to what the States were entitled to get as part of
their normal planning process and devolution from the Planning Commission. By making
them part of the Plan outlays, the States have not only been denied their legitimate share
in the plan resources meant for the States, it had also affected their flexibility in use of
these resources. The State Governments were of the opinion that the Central Government
should either revert to the earlier practice wherein NEC and NLCPR outlays were kept
beyond the ambit of State Plan or agree to this regime only if the Ministry of DoNER was
given a larger political role in deciding the developmental priorities of the region and
financial outlays under the Plan for the Region as a whole, as determined by the State
Governments through a democratic interaction with the Ministry of DoNER.
5.19.2 The Committee also notes the Comments of the Planning Commission that the
inclusion of NEC and NLCPR in the States’ Annual Plan is required. In the Union Budget,
NEC and NLCPR have been always a part of Central Assistance to State Plans and there
has been omission to mention as such in the Scheme of Financing of Annual Plans of NE
States. When this omission was pointed out in the reconciliation process, the Central
assistance on this account has been correctly reflected in States’ Annual Plans for 2013-14
fully in line with Union Budget approved by Parliament. This was a misclassification in the
accounts of the State Governments which had been rectified in the 12
th Plan.
5.19.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given by the Planning
Commission as the funds in the NLCPR are the unspent funds of the 10% allocations
earmarked by different Ministries each year, that too not surrendered at the end of the
financial year, but treated as an amaanat for all practical purposes to finish the incomplete
works. The Committee also notes the protest of the Ministry of DoNER in this regard and
is of the considered view that the principle and objective behind NEC and NLCPR schemes
are to fill critical gaps in normal developmental schemes and, consequently, NEC and
NLCPR have been treated as complement to normal Plan programmes, as stated in the
NLCPR guidelines....”Funds available under the Central Pool are not meant to supplement
the normal Plan Programmes either of the State Governments or Union Ministries/
Departments/Agencies”. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the funds released

51
under NLCPR and NEC schemes should be over and above the allocations made to State
Governments of the North-Eastern Region in their Annual Plans and the practice of
including allocations for NLCPR and NEC schemes in the Annual Plans of States should be
discontinued henceforth.
5.20 Withholding of Funds
5.20.1 The Committee took note of the issue of holding of funds by State Governments. The
Committee takes into account the views of the Finance Secretary that the Government
normally prescribe that the money should go through the State Government and for any
particular project, State Government must release the fund within fifteen days time for that
particular project and if the State Government fails to do so, it has to pay penal interest
on that amount. The Committee came across the specific case where funds were transferred
to Assam for the Bodoland Territorial Council under a package on the basis of a peace
accord signed by the Government and the funds were withheld for a considerable time.
However, some State Governments are averse to the idea of direct funding to the
implementing agencies and feel that the system of direct funding will have repercussions on
the federal structure of the Constitution and is fraught with chances of impropriety and will
also reduce the oversight of the State administration on the implementation of the directly
funded projects/programmes. In view of the Committee, this is a peculiar situation where
the Central Government can’t do anything except appealing the State Governments to
release the funds. The Committee is therefore, of the view that the State Governments
must follow the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance for releasing the fund within fifteen
days time for any particular project. The Committee recommends that a system may be
developed under which all the State Governments must rationalize the existing process of
repetitive clearance so that money can be transferred to the implementing agencies as soon
as it is received from Government of India.
5.21 Delay in Land Acquisition and Inclusion of Land Cost in Projects.
5.21.1 The Committee notes that most projects have a precondition that the land should be
made available by the State Governments. However, North Eastern State Governments are
reluctant on this part on the ground that with increasing pressure on land and loss of land
due to erosion, it is becoming increasingly difficult for the States to fulfill this criterion.
At times, the land is available at unviable locations. The State Governments viewed that
Ministry of DoNER should incorporate the land cost in the projects. It should also help NER
States to procure land for pr ojects given by other line Ministries. The Committee came
across the issue related to land acquisition, in Arunachal Pradesh, where public hearing, the
first and foremost procedure for land acquisition, had to be postponed twelve times and
finally was held after a lot of persuasions. The Committee agrees with the Cabinet
Secretary that only States ought to address the issue since the major projects are
essentially executed through the State PWDs.
5.21.2  The Committee is in agreement to general principle that for all the Central Sector
and the Centrally-Sponsored Schemes, land should be provided by the State Governments
as this is essential to make the State Governments committed. The Committee therefore
recommends that the State Governments should provide land for the projects as the projects
are meant for the overall economic development of the North East Region.
5.22 Committed Funding For North Eastern Region
5.22.1 The Committee notes the appraisal of Chairman, Railway Board that the main
problem the Ministry was facing was of the ‘funds’. With committed funding for the North-

52
East Region, the Ministry can complete the undertaken projects within a designated time-
frame, because there was absolutely no problem except some in Meghalaya, as far as the
work was concerned. The Chairman, Railway Board further informed that the Ministry was
dependent on the Gross Budgetary Support for allocation of funds for all the projects. The
Gross Budgetary Support has however not been adequate and whatever promised by the
Planning Commission, the Ministry was not able to get even that amount resulting in the
time and cost overruns. However, according to the Expenditure Secretary it was not funding
constraint which was holding up or delaying the execution of the national projects in the
North-Eastern Region, but, the lack of execution capacity. In view of the Committee, there
appears to be communication gap between Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Finance.
The Committee observes that there is complete discord amongst the Ministry of Railways
and Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission so far as the issue of committed
funding is concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Planning
Commission, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Railways must have meeting to resolve
the issue and apprise the Committee of the exact position in this regard.
5.23 Merger of NEC with Ministry of DoNER and shifting its headquarters to Shillong
5.23.1 The Committee considered in detail the issue of merger of NEC with Ministry of
DoNER and shifting of its headquarters to Shillong on the anology of the Space Department
and Department of Atomic energy and designating the Secretary to the Ministry of DoNER
as ex-officio Secretary of NEC. The argument put forth was that Ministry of DoNER has to
play coordinating role with the State Governments and oversee/monitor the execution of
projects which can better be done from Shillong rather than Delhi. The Committee
considered the views of the Cabinet Secretary on the role of the Ministry of DoNER as
coordinating Ministry and according to him the coordination can be best done from Delhi
where other Ministries are located and shifting of the headquarters on the analogy of the
Space Department and Atomic Energy, would not really be an overall great advantage
because State Governments are doing a lot of execution. The Cabinet Secretary felt that the
Ministry of DoNER should continue to remain in the national capital. The Committee also
takes note of the views of the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER that only problem in shifting
the Ministry of DoNER would be that the Secretary in the Ministry of DoNER has to attend
meetings in the Committee of Secretaries, Cabinet meetings and it would be difficult for
the Sectary to shuffle from Shillong to Delhi. The Committee would also like to underline
the submission of the DoNER Secretary that ‘otherwise there would be better synergy’.
5.23.2 The Committee is of the strong view that if the headquarters of Ministry of DoNER
is shifted to Shillong, it would be in a better position to monitor the effective
implementation of projects due to on-the-spot supervision. Therefore, the Committee is not
in agreement with the views of Cabinet Secretary. The Committee is of the considered view
that on-the-spot supervision and monitoring would inject better synergy in the overall
execution of the projects. With the Headquarters at Shillong, the Officers of the Ministry
would be more accountable and more focussed to their duties. Headquarters of the Ministry
at Shillong would also provide opportunity to the Officers of the Ministry to have frequent
interaction with the officers of the State Governments and implementing agencies. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may consider shifting the
headquarters of Ministry of DoNER to Shillong and have a camp office in Delhi to facilitate
meeting with other Ministries or organizations in Delhi.
5.24 Roles of Ministry of DoNER and NEC and Synergy Between Them
5.24.1 It was admitted before the Committee by the Secretary, DoNER that the Ministry of

53
DoNER and the North-Eastern Council (NEC) combined together contributed less than four
per cent of the total fund flow to the North-Eastern Region in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Thus the impact of NEC and the Ministry of DoNER in financial terms is very marginal. The
North Eastern States also have a feeling that the Ministry of DoNER is still acting as a
distant arm of the central line Ministries. It merely represents them in choosing and
implementing projects and it has not been able to play a proactive role in planning and
implementing the central projects/ schemes/policies implemented in the NE States. The State
Governments also feel that the existence of Ministry of DoNER, has, also led the line
Ministries to neglect their responsibilities for the development of the region, leaving it all
to Ministry of DoNER with its meager NLCPR resources. The Committee also notes that the
Cabinet Secretariat has denied this and stated that the percentage utilization of 10%
earmarked allocation has been increasing steadily over the past ten years.
5.24.2 The Committee, however, agrees that the Ministry of DoNER has not been able to
play the role assigned to it very effectively because of various factors discussed in the
proceeding paragraphs. However, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry of DoNER
can play a bigger and effective role in shaping the regional developmental priorities and
implementing the regional or State-specific programmes and projects. Active involvement of
the Ministry of DoNER is a precondition in deciding the policies, programmes, schemes, and
projects by the Planning Commission and line Ministries meant for NE region. The
Committee, therefore, is of the strong view that there is urgent need to review and redefine
the role of the Ministry of DONER in coordinating and liaising with the line Ministries.
There should be a clear cut defined relationship between the Planning Commission, the
Ministry of DoNER, and the NEC for dovetailing and synergizing of developmental plans,
projects, and schemes and a mechanism for such coordination should be evolved. The
Committee is of the considered view that the Secretary, DoNER should be equipped with
more administrative and sanctioning powers to facilitate the smooth implementation of
developmental projects. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of DoNER
should expand its project portfolio to include projects other than infrastructure sector,
including projects in tourism, agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry etc., besides loan
linkages for these sectors.
5.24.3 The Committee is surprised to find that although according to the present system,
the plenary session of the North-Eastern Council, which is supposed to happen twice in a
year, is being held only once in a year and there is no time for review, and, only when the
Secretary, DoNER or the Secretary, NEC visits the States, they review it. The Committee
feels that institutional mechanism may be created under NEC for review of projects more
frequently and regularly.
5.24.4 The Committee observes that the NEC has the Governors and the Chief Ministers of
the NE States as its members. The State Governments made a complaint that it should not
be reduced to the level of a Directorate under a Ministry of the Government of India rather
it should have an appropriate status and power to make decisions and provide the required
funds for the development of the Region. The Committee further notes that the NEC has
the technical manpower for most of the sectors, however main constraint with the NEC lies
in its limited budgetary outlays and the inflexible sectoral approach followed by the NEC in
allocation to States. A State Government suggested that this can easily be overcome if
synergy is generated between the two bodies and united and integrated approach is adopted.
While the outlays of the NEC can be a part of the overall outlays of the Ministry of DoNER,
the decision making process in respect of allocations and schematic or sectoral priorities
could be democratised through the NEC which should continue to play its active role as
regional Planning Body. Another suggestion was also made that the NEC may act as the

54
Standing Council or Consultative Body for the Ministry of DoNER and the Ministry itself
could be located in Shillong with its headquarters in the present NEC. This will help a
strong organisational structure grow within a democratic set up with proper financial
outlays, competent technical manpower and delivery mechanisms. The Committee desires
that the suggestions may be examined thoroughly by the Government and steps may be
taken early to bring synergy.
5.25 General recommendations
5.25.1 Besides the above mentioned issue specific recommendations, the Committee would
also like to make the following recommendations:
· There should be a separate fund of strategically national important projects in
the region.
· Use of video-conferencing in various Ministries/Departments may be adopted
with the State Governments of the North Eastern Region as it takes officers one
day to reach Delhi and one day to come back for a meeting, apart from financial
burden on the cash-deficient States.
· It is relevant to point out that non-availability of construction materials is
creating further hurdle in the development drive. Non-availability of
construction materials like cement, steel etc and long procurement time makes
many projects especially the hydro projects costly and unviable. The Committee
feels the need for setting up industries for construction material in NER to meet
the infrastructural requirement. The Committee desires that Ministry of DoNER
should consult Ministry of Heavy Industry and Planning Commission and draw
a plan for setting up industries in NE Region.
· The Committee observes that Ministry of DoNER is still to come up with a
regional perspective plan to implement Vision-2020. The Committee therefore
desired that a comprehensive plan for NER development should be mooted by
the Ministry of DoNER with flexibility for State-specific modification.
· Provision for third party monitoring for quality and quantity of works of the
projects sanctioned by the Ministry of DoNER should be done by the States
through their own Consultants/Experts appointed by them.
· The Committee also takes note of the issues raised and suggestions made by
various other line Ministries/Departments. The general issues raised by those
Ministries have been dealt under the various categories. In regard to the
specific suggestions made by those Ministries and the issues raised therein (the
list is at Annexure-IV) the Committee desires that the Ministry of DoNER may
examine all the issues and take appropriate action in consultation with the State
Governments to address the issues.

55
MINUTES

56

57
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 30 th May, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
10. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of DoNER
1. Shri U.K. Sangma, Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Madhav Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Vijay Bhushan Pathak, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Naresh Salecha, Joint Secretary & FA
5. Ms. Kirti Saxena, Economic Adviser
57

58
6. Shri P.R. Meshram, Director
7. Shri Umakant, Director
8. Shir Rajesh Kumar, Director
Representatives of North Eastern Council
1. Shri Ameising Luikham, Secretary
2. Shri G .K. Chin, Financial Adviser
3. Shri 1. Lhungdim, Planning Adviser
4. Dr. Bamin Pada, Adviser (Health)
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of the agenda for
the day, i.e. to hear presentation of the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER and views of the Secretary,
NEC on strengthening the working of the Ministry for effective implementation of policies,
programmes, schemes and projects meant for North Eastern Region.
[At this stage witnesses were called in]
3.0 Thereafter, the Chairman asked the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER to make presentation on
the subject.
3.1 The Chairperson, in view of the Committee’s observation about Ministry’s weakness in
advocacy and coordination role, inadequate technical support, inadequate over all staff support,
inadequate space and absence of field offices etc., asked the Secretary to focus on problems being
faced by the Ministry in implementing policies, programmes pertaining to North Eastern Region in
the backdrop of the recommendations of the Seventh Report of the Second Administrative Reforms
Commission regarding the abolition of the Ministry of DoNER and restoration of responsibility for
the development of the Region to the concerned line Department/Ministry.
3.2 Thereafter, the Secretary, DoNER made a Powerpoint presentation on the subject. The
highlights of the presentation are as under:–
· The North East States are categorized as Special Category States with liberal Central
Assistance;
· The Department of DoNER was upgraded to Ministry in 2004;
· NEC was established in 1971;
· Earmarking (since 1989-99) of atleast 10% of Plan Budgets of non-exempted Central
Ministries/Departments for expenditure in NER;
· At present 53 non-exempted Ministries/Departments earmark funds for NER;
· Creation of Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) in 1997-98 from
accrual of unutilized 10% earmarked funds of non-exempted Ministries/Departments;
· Average growth of NE States is more than National Average in the Eleventh Plan as
average GSDP growth of these States improved to 9.95 per cent against 7.9 per cent
at the national level; however, the region continues to be deficit in physical
infrastructure viz. road, rail and air connectivity; biggest constraint in NER is the slow
pace of implementation of infrastructure projects; and
· Apart from infrastructure sector, NER requires significant interventions in development
of agriculture, education and Health Sector; and
· Slippages in targets in terms of time lines and cost overruns.

59
3.3 The Secretary, DoNER, thereafter, enumerated major causes of slow implementation of
projects in the region which inter-alia included inadequate investigations and project formulation;
frequent changes in scope of project; delay in clearances from various regulatory agencies; delay
in land acquisition; delay in awarding the contracts; delay in release of funds; unforeseeable reasons
such as adverse geo-mining conditions, natural calamities, etc.; and geographical constraints of
terrain.
3.4 The Secretary also elaborated constraints being faced by the Ministry and suggestions of
the Ministry to deal with these constraints. He also apprised the Committee about the need for
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) and High Level Monitoring Committee of States (HLMC).
4.0 The Chairman and Members then sought clarifications on the following issues:–
· Non spending of funds or diverting of funds meant for specific projects for other
purposes by States;
· Non-submission of Utilizations Certificate by States;
· Reaction of the State Governments or the Central Government line Ministries on the
strengthening of the North-Eastern Council or the Ministry;
· Suggestions for completing road projects and irrigation projects pending for 10-12
years;
· Whether the delay in the release of funds was at the Central Government level or at
the level of the Ministry of DoNER?
5.0 The queries/issues raised were replied/clarified by the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry. The Chairman then asked the Secretary to send further suggestions of the Ministry and
detailed note/replies to the queries which were not replied in the meeting. The Committee then
decided to hear Chief Secretaries of concerned State Governments, Secretaries of line Ministries
and Cabinet Secretaries in next sittings.
6.0 The Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 
A.M.

60
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 10 th June, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Datta Meghe
12. Shri Lalu Prasad
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
15. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri K.N. Srivastava, Secretary
2. Shri M. Kannan, Economic Advisor
3. Shri Sudhir Raheja, Member (PIg.), Airport Authority of India
4. Shri Sanjiv Bahl, Executive Director, Pawan Hans Ltd.
60

61
5. Shri Sanjay Kumar, GM (Marketing), Pawan Hans Ltd.
6. Shri Lalit Gupta, DDG, DGCA
7. Shri Anil Mehta, GM, Air India
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri P.K. Sinha, Secretary
2. Shri C.B. Singh, Adviser
3. Ms. Jayashree Mukherjee, Vice Chariperson (IWAI)
4. Shri R.P. Khare, Chief Engineer (lWAI)
Representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri Vijay Chhibber, Secretary
2. Shri V . L. Patankar, Additional Director General
3. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Alkesh Sharma, Joint Secretary
6. Shri S.K. Verma, Chief Engineer
Representatives of Ministry of Railways
1. Shri Vinay Mittal, Chairman, Railway Board and Ex-officio Principal Secretary to the
Government of India
2. Shrimati Vijaya Kanth, Financial Commissioner, Railways and Ex-officio Secretary to
the Government of India
3. Shri S.K. Jain, Member Engineering, Railway Board and Ex-Officio Secretary to the
Government of India
4. Shri D.K. Saraf, Additional Member (Planning)
5. Shrimati S. Rajware, Advisor Finance
6. Shri H. V . Sharma, Advisor
7. Shri Jagmohan Gupta, ED/Budget
8. Shri Anjum Pervez. ED/PM
9. Shri Devender Singh, ED/PLG.
10. Shri A.S. Garud, CEO, North Frontier Railway
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Mangotra, Secretary (BM)
2. Shri Sambhu Singh, Joint Secretary (North East)
3. Shri Deepak Kumar, Joint Secretary (BM)
4. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
Representatives of Ministry of Power
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar, Secretary (Power)
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhry, Additional Secretary
4. Shri I.C.P. Keshari, Joint Secretary
5. Shri G . Sai Prasad, Joint Secretary
6. Shri A.S. Bakshi Chairperson, CEA

62
7. Ms. Neerja Mathur, Member (GO & D), CEA
8. Shri Manjit Singh, Member (TH), CEA
9. Shri I.S. Jha, Director, PowerGrid
10. Shri Arup Roy Choudhury, CMD, NTPC
11. Shri A.K. Ahuja, ED, NTPC
12. Shri P.C. Pankaj, CMD, NEEPCO
13. Shri P.J. Thakkar, Director Technical, REC
Representatives of Department of Telecommunications
1. Shri M.F. Farooqui, Secretary
2. Shri N. Ravi Shankar, Administrator
3. Ms. Rita Teotia, Additional Secretary (T)
4. Shri V . Umashankar, Joint Secretary
5. Shri G.P. Srivastava, Deputy Director General
6. Shri R.K. Upadhyay, CMD, BSNL
7. Shri Rakesh Kapoor, Ececutive Director, BSNL Board
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear Secretaries of Ministries of Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road
Transport & Highways, Power, Home Affairs, Department of Telecommunications and Chairman,
Railway Board on the subject of strengthening the working of the Ministry of DoNER for effective
implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and projects meant for North Eastern Region.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3. The Chairman, welcomed the witnesses and thereafter, brought to their notice the problems
being faced in implementation of the projects/Programmes/Schemes in the North Eastern States
which inter-alia  included non-utilisation of Non-Lapsable Fund for development in time and slow
pace of implementation thereof and sought to know the bottlenecks and problems being faced by
line Ministries as well as their suggestions for better and timely utilization of funds keeping in view
the steps taken by the Ministries in proper formulation of the projects; timely approval of the
projects; avoiding delay in vetting of DPRs etc.
Ministry of Shipping
3.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping submitted that the North-Eastern Region was
richly endowed in terms of rivers and therefore, the effort has been to transport as much cargo
through the waterways mode in the North-East. He further submitted that fixed terminal at Pandu
was going to be completed by June, 2014. Land for dedicated road connectivity with National
Highway-31 was required from the Railways. The total amount had been paid but that land had
not been transferred due to some encroachment. Ro-Ro terminal was sanctioned and the work had
been awarded to the CPWD in January 2013. The work was being taken up on the Dhubri side
but on the other side of the river there was problem of soil erosion. The matter had been taken
up recently with the Brahmaputra Board and the Irrigation Department of the Government of Assam
to stop soil erosion. For day and night navigation, various steps like installation of DGPS system
and other measures had been taken.
3.3 The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping further informed the Committee that there was a
scheme for providing 100 per cent Central assistance to the North-Eastern States for taking up river
development works. Apart from the Brahmaputra River, there were other river stretches also which

63
could be developed for cargo transportation. However, the response or the initiative from the
North-Eastern States was lacking. The Central Government, therefore on its own, engaged
M/s. RITES to identify river stretches which could be developed for such cargo transportation and,
RITES has identified 22 river stretches in the Region which could be developed. These potential
had been shared with the State Governments who were requested to send the proposals for
assistance. So far, only three proposals had been received and one of which had been sanctioned.
The Secretary desired that the North-Eastern States needed to be more proactive in sending
proposals for development of these river stretches for cargo transportation.
3.4 The Committee was also informed that a Bill for declaring Barak River, as National
Waterway had been introduced in the Parliament and referred to the Standing Committee on
Transport and Tourism. Declaration of Barak River as National Waterway would improve transport
services in between Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura. After a lot of discussion, the Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion has issued the notification for inland waterway transportation to
be eligible for transportation subsidy in the North-East. This will go a long way in promoting cargo
transportation through the river waterway system. The Secretary, Shipping, thereafter, sought
guidance of the Committee on the issues pertaining to the transfer of land for the Pandu terminal
from the Railways, resolution of the soil erosion problem for the construction of the Ro-Ro
terminal and more response from the North-Eastern States for seeking Central assistance for
development of other river stretches in the North-Eastern Region.
Railway Board
3.5 The Chairman, Railway Board made the following submissions:
(i) There is 6,000 sq. metres of railway land to be given for fixed Terminal but, there are
2,150 encroachments which are to be cleared by the State Government and the
Ministry was in touch with the State Government. Options like other alignment,
avoiding encroachments were also being explored.
(ii) Projects with a provision of around Rs.48,000 crore have been allocated for the region,
of which Rs.16,000 crore has already been spent. The Ministry needed about Rs.7,000
crores every year to complete these projects in a designated time-frame, but the
Ministry was only able to allocate about Rs.3,000 crores, less than half of what it
actually needed.
(iii) If the projects were to be completed within the next few years, they would change
the real transportation network in the North-Eastern Region. Once these projects are
completed, they would give broad gauge connectivity to a very large part of the
North-East Region and it would also connect several sister States.
(iv) However, because of the resource crunch, the Ministry is concentrating on completion
of the projects within Twelfth Plan period.
(v) The main problem is availability of funds and whatever promised by the Planning
Commission was not provided. For fast progress of the projects, more than the double
to the amount sanctioned was required.
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
3.6 The Secretary, Road Transport and Highways submitted as below:
(i) The most glaring infrastructure deficit in the region was in the road sector and to
address this, the Government came up with an ambitious programme called the Special
Accelerated Road Development Programme (SARDP) for the North-East in 2005. The

64
SARDP programme had been broken up into two phases. The first phase for a length
of 4,099 kilo metres is under implementation and out of this, 2,800 kilometres has been
sanctioned. Out of this, work for 2,530 kms. has been awarded.
(ii) A special package for a total length of 2,319 kms. in Arunachal had been announced
and about 1,342 kms. had already been awarded. Under the package, 847 km. of
strategic roads is mainly being executed through BRO. The Ministry is focussing on
the SARDP Phase-A and Arunachal package. For SARDP Phase-B for another length
of 3,723 kms., DPRs are being prepared, but there is no resource allocation during the
12
th Plan and it would be taken up in the next Five Year Plan period. Money is not
a constraint and adequate funds have been kept aside for the SARDP as well as the
Arunachal package. The main concerns are regarding the implementation of the plans.
So far, only 1,000 kms. were completed under SARDP Phase-A and only 68 kms.
completed under Arunachal package.
(iii) The local contractors did not have the capacity to take up large projects. A conscious
decision to attract the contractors from outside the North-East region also had not paid
the dividends. To encourage local contractors, the Ministry was taking project lengths
in a manner which would permit local contractors to participate in the bid process. It
was observed that outside contractors were sub-contracting the project to local
contractors.
(iv) There was a fast-track mechanism for sanctioning the North-East projects and it was
working well. The Ministry was shifting to the ‘Engineering Procurement Contract’
mode-of-delivery to avoid escalation of project. Any contract beyond Rs. 5 crores is
implemented through the EPC mode to bring pressure on the State PWDs as also the
contractors to complete the project. The Ministry is willing to accept a higher bid price
but not any escalation thereafter, once the bid has been accepted.
(v) Weak consultancy is the biggest bottleneck as the project reports did not reflect the
reality on the ground and in some cases the project reports are made without even a
single visit to the local situation. Another problem encountered by the Ministry was
overtly dependency on BRO for substantial stretches, particularly closer to the border
areas. A single unit of BRO at best could take up 10 kms. in a year. At this pace of
road construction, the Ministry would never be able to achieve objectives of this
programme.
(vi) The Ministry has decided to award projects only when 90% of the land is available to
avoid delays for want of land acquisition.
Ministry of Power
3.7 The Secretary, Ministry of Power then made the following submissions:
(i) The North-Eastern Region had very high hydro potential. The current mix of capacity
available in the North-East is 1390 MW of thermal capacity and 1242 MW of hydro
capacity. There is also 252 MW of Renewable Energy-based.
(ii) There is poor road and communication network in the North-East and there is a need
to have a comprehensive plan for adequate road network in a time-bound manner in
the North-Eastern Region as all the projects are located in very remote places.
(iii) Clearances from different organizations, particularly the environment and forest
clearances had to be obtained at the State level as well as at the Central level. Public
hearing had been postponed several times. There is a limit prescribed within which the

65
clearances should be given, however these limits are generally not adhered to and these
limits do not even have sub-limits.
(iv) A large number of projects in the North-East have been awarded to private sector
developers to ensure fairly good experts and consultants for the survey and investigation.
(v) Availability of construction material is an issue as it has to come from outside. Most
of the turbines, boilers come from outside the North-East and transportation thereof is
an issue.
(vi) Working continuously 365 days is not possible. Delay is also be due to geological
surprise when on digging a tunnel into the mountain side, the nature of the rock could
be of different nature, thus resulting some reformulation.
(vii) Finance is not an issue as a number of projects in the North-East are being executed by
NHPC or NEEPCO, which had been set up especially for doing projects in the North-East.
Department of Telecommunication
3.8 The Secretary, Department of Telecommunication submitted that the approach of the
Department was to make use of conventional technologies and take advantage of existing
infrastructure by way of seeking cooperation of all other players and to look at the new and
innovative technologies to cover the remote areas. The system in North-east was linear which if
broken at a point, disturbs the whole segment. This happens particularly during construction/
expansion of roads in which inadvertently the optic fibre cables are cut. Proposal of constructing a
duct alongside the road was being taken up. The Department has suggested an alternative connection
from Tripura to Akhor a in Bangladesh which will provide an alternative path. The Department is using
the offices of External Affair Ministry to negotiate with Bangladesh for the purpose.
3.9 The Secretary, Telecommunication further submitted the Department was trying to use the
existing infrastructure available with organizations like Power grid Corporation, Reltel etc. along with
State Governments to provide right of way on a reasonable cost, as this is a national cause. Power
Grid Corporation was requested to give one pair of fibre from the cable going on the transmission
lines on cost sharing basis, but it was not agreed to by them and ready to give the bandwidth so
as to earn more money commercially. The matter had been brought to the notice of the PMO and
Cabinet Secretary, but with no avail. The matter will again be brought to the notice of the PMO. State
Governments are also being requested to give right of way on the similar lines. 10,883 villages are
not having mobile coverage and a scheme has been chalked out in consultation with C-DOT, USOF.
Ministry of Civil Aviation
3.10 The Civil Aviation Secretary apprised the Committee that in the last one decade, more
buoyancy in the traffic growth in North East in comparison to the rest of the country had been
noticed. He made the following submissions:
(i) there were 11 operating airports in all the NE States except two, that is, Sikkim and
Arunachal Pradesh. In case of Sikkim, a new airport is under construction and is
expected to be commissioned by June, 2014. In Arunachal Pradesh an airport has been
sanctioned for Itanagar, and the land acquisition is going on. Funds have been allocated
for the purpose. With the completion of this project all the North-Eastern States will
be having operating airports.
(ii) Airports in the region are having certain problems with regard to the night landing
facilities. The Ministry has already drawn out a programme, according to which, by
end of the financial year 2013-14, all these North-Eastern airports would be equipped
with instrument-related night-landing facility.

66
(iii) All the airports in the North-East are making losses. Airlines are also operating under
loss in the North-Eastern States.
(iv) There is a policy based on Route Disbursal Guidelines, according to which the airlines
are obliged to deploy 10 per cent of their capacity to the North-East. This policy has
a drawback that they are operating a lot of services to Guwahati and Bagdogra.
Therefore, the main problem is the connectivity within the North-East.
(v) Subsidy claim of Alliance Air, a subsidiary of Air India, has not been cleared by the
North-Eastern Council. The NEC decided to drop services of Air India on grounds of
expensive cost and decided to explore services of private airlines. Since they did not
pay the subsidy, the Air India stopped services bringing to halt the three airports of
Shillong, Lilabari and Tezpur. However on intervention of PMO, the services are being
resumed. It would be better that for the civil aVIation purposes, a Cell is created in
the PMO or in the Cabinet Secretariat to take quick decisions.
(vi) Imphal Airport is being developed in a big way and will be declared as an International
Airport. The Airport Authority would take over Airport at Aizawal, Mizoram from the
State Government.
(vii) S tate Government of Tripura has requested for declaring the Agartala airport as an
international airport so as to have services between Agartala and Dhaka as well as
Chittagong. State Government has been asked to make available the requisite land to
create the necessary infrastructure like a new terminal building.
Ministry of Home Affairs
The Secretary (BM), Ministry of Home Affairs informed that a number of projects were
pending in the Ministry of Environment and these matter had been brought to the notice of the
Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure. He further informed that a Committee under
environment Secretary having representation of the agencies operating in Borders had set up a
working group to expedite pending cases in a time bond manner. The infrastructure on Indian
borders did not match with the infrastructure made by Chine across the border and this is a very
serious matter and it will be reviewed by the Cabinet Secretary after two-three months.
4.0 Verbatim recored of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.17 
P.M.

67
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 21 st June, 2013 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anandrao Adsul
5. Shri L.K. Advani
6. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
12. Shri Rathod Ramesh
13. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
16. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of DoNER
1. Shri U.K. Sangma, Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Madhav Singh, Joint Secretary
67

68
3. Shri Vijay Bhushan Pathak, Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati K. Damyanthi, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Naresh Salecha, Joint Secretary and FA
6. Ms. Kirti Saxena, Economic Adviser
Representatives of North Eastern Council
1. Shri Ameising Luikham, Secretary
2. Shri H.L. Meena, Consultant
Representative of Government of Arunachal Pradesh
Dr. Satbir Bedi, Principal Secretary, Labour and Employment
Representatives of Government of Assam
1. Shri P.P. Varma, Additional Chief Secretary
2. Shri Shantanu P. Gotmare, Additional Secretary, Planning and Development Department
Representative of Government of Manipur
Shri D.S. Poonia, Chief Secretary
Representatives of Government of Meghalaya
1. Shri W.M.S. Pariat, Chief Secretary
2. Shri R.M. Mishra, Principal Secretary, Planning Department
Representatives of Government of Nagaland
1. Shri H.K. Khulu, Additional Chief Secretary and Development Commissioner
2. Shri Jyoti Kalash, Resident Commissioner
Representative of Government of Sikkim
Shrimati N. Yethenpa, Development Commissioner cum Secretary, DPER and NECA
Department
Representatives of Government of Tripura
1. Shri K.V . Satyanarain, Additional Chief Secretary
2. Shri J.K. Sinha, Resident Commissioner
Representative of Government of Mizoram
Shri P.L. Thanga, Member Secretary, State Planning Board
I. Reference to victims of Uttarakhand floods and Himachal Pradesh Landslides
2.0 At the outset the Chairman of the Committee made a reference to the unprecedented natural
havoc caused in Uttarakhand and, to a lesser extent, Himachal Pradesh due to cloudburst and flash
floods and mentioned that there were thousands of people stranded and battling for life and trying
to return. Members then observed a minute’s of silence as a mark of respect to the departed souls.
The Chairman mentioned that he would urge upon the Government to declare this disaster as a
national calamity. Members also expressed their views on the steps to be taken for safe return of
the pilgrims and tourists and for rescue and rehabilitation measures. The Committee felt that the
following steps were required to be taken by the Government for rescue and rehabilitation of the
people affected:
(i) The families affected by the loss of lives and destruction of houses should be provided
immediate relief.

69
(ii) Immediate necessary steps should be taken to rescue the people including pilgrims and
tourists who have gone there from various parts of the country.
(iii) Arrangements should be made to provide free transportation of the rescued people to
their home state/district. If necessary, special trains may be arranged for the purpose
and free transportation may be provided by railways to all the rescued people up to
the nearest station to their home town.
(iv) As part of the rehabilitation operations, the families affected by damage to the houses
may be provided temporary shelters and adequate compensation for rebuilding of their
homes.
(v) Families affected by the loss of lives may be provided adequate compensation.
2.1 The Chairman also mentioned that he would request Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and the
Speaker, Lok Sabha to relax the norms of MPLADS to enable the Members of Parliament to
contribute to the cause. The Committee also decided to hear the Home Secretary on the rescue and
rehabilitation measures being taken.
II. Strengthening the Working of the Ministry of DoNER etc.
3.0 The Committee then took up the agenda for discussion i.e. strengthening the working of
the Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and projects
meant for the North-Eastern Region. The Chairman informed the Members that the Committee
would hear the Chief Secretaries of all the eight States of the North-Eastern Region. Some of the
Chief Secretaries had come and some of them had deputed their Additional Chief Secretaries and
other senior officials because of their preoccupations. Representatives of the Ministry of DoNER
and the North-Eastern Council had also been invited to the meeting.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3.1 The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER, Chief Secretaries and senior
officers of the various other State Governments of the North-Eastern Region and gave a brief of
the problems faced by the Ministry of DoNER in implementation of its schemes/projects. He
observed that the Region lacked in physical infrastructure mainly road, rail and air connectivity, etc.
and there was undue delay in implementing the projects leading to time and cost overruns. He
asked the representatives of North-Eastern State Governments to present their views on the
problems being faced by their respective State Governments as well as their suggestions for
improvement.
State Government of Nagaland
3.2 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Nagaland submitted that V etting of Detailed
project Reports usually took considerable time and by the time the projects were sanctioned, the
DPR costs became outdated due to increase in prices. Since there was no provision for cost
revision, the projects got stalled. To expedite sanction of projects, the Ministry of DoNER may
consider having a cell in the Ministry itself for vetting of DPRs. NEC, which comprises of Chief
Ministers and Governors of all eight North-Eastern States as members of NEC, needs to be
appropriately empowered. The Ratio of funding at 90:10 basis for all Centrally Sponsored Schemes/
programmes becomes difficult and the ten per cent reservation of the Budget of the Line Ministries
could also be dovetailed and treated as State’s share for purpose of CSS.
State Government of Manipur
3.3 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Manipur stated that the small Cell in the Ministry
had its own limitations and most of the DPRs got referred to the various line Ministries and CPWD

70
for vetting and appraisal resulting in cost escalation, which was not permitted under the NLCPR
guidelines. The State Government had to contribute much beyond their 10% State share. Besides,
the Vat, the statutory levy which every State has to deduct and the agency charges were not
permitted, though these were permitted as per the CPWD manual. To synergise the strengths of
the M/o DoNER and the NEC, the NEC could be merged with the M/o DoNER and headquartered
at Shillong for improved co-ordination with the N.E. States and better supervision of the projects
funded by the merged entity. NLCPR and NEC funds in the State Plans should not be factored in,
as there was actually a reduction in the State Plan outlay.
State Government of Meghalaya
3.4 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Meghalaya submitted that a full-fledged technical
wing in the DoNER may be setup so that the DPRs did not go to the line Ministries for detailed
views. There was no support for the maintenance of schemes. The State Governments depend on
their meagre resources. The role of the DoNER in coordinating and liaising with the line Ministries
needed to be redefined. Normal time to complete the work given by the DoNER should be at least,
three years instead of two years due to climatic conditions and difficult topography.
State Government of Tripura
3.5 The Additional Chief Secretary, State Government of Tripura stated that delay in DPRs should
be addressed by having an empowered committee within the DoNER with senior officers of the line
Ministries. Observations on the DPR from the line Ministry should come in one go instead of in a
piecemeal manner. The DPR should be put to the empowered committee drawn from various
Ministries including the Finance. If there is still any objection, the representatives of the State
Government could be invited to such a meeting to give reply to the query on the spot and the
sanction of the project could be expedited. There should be some fixed timeline to clear the DPRs.
The Ministry of DoNER may set up an On-Line Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) similar
to MGNREGA and after approval, next installment of money should be released without any further
delay. State Governments were not in a position to meet land acquisition cast therefore it should also
be a part of the project cost. There should be delineation of responsibilities of the NEC and the
DoNER. NEC can sanction a project up to Rs.15 crores. Beyond that they have to send it to the
Ministry of DoNER. Their capacity to sanction could be enhanced up to Rs.50 crores.
State Government of Sikkim
3.6 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Sikkim submitted before the committee as under:–
(i) The allocation for the NLCPR and the NEC Schemes should be separated from the
Annual Plan allocations.
(ii) Projects framed under Schedule of 2006 Rates may be considered for revision, as it
is not possible to complete and implement the project at the rates of 2006.
(iii) Cost escalation at 7 per cent per annum at 2012 SOR should be allowed and
contingency at 3 per cent should also be considered for the projects that are being
sanctioned by the Ministry of DoNER.
(iv) Better performing States, like Sikkim, should also be given additional allocation as
incentive to encourage other States in the North-Eastern Region to be more competitive.
(v) Maintenance grant at 10 per cent of the project cost should be allocated after five
years of completion of the projects sanctioned under the NLCPR and the NEC funds.
(vi) The completion time for projects sanctioned under the NLCPR and the NEC must also
be enhanced from 2 to 3 years in view of difficult terrain and topography of the State.

71
(vii) The Ministry should have the required Technical Cell and manpower for vetting of
projects.
(viii) Construction and maintenance of all the border roads being implemented by the BRO
should be funded by the DoNER.
(ix) The DoNER should be equipped with more administrative and sanctioning powers to
facilitate the smooth implementation of developmental projects. There should also be
better coordination between the Ministry of DoNER and the Planning Commission for
smoother implementation of the developmental schemes.
(x) The NLCPR and the NEC should be funded 100 per cent instead of in the ratio of
90:10 per cent.
State Government of Arunachal Pradesh
3.7 The Representative of the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh submitted as follows:
(i) There should be separate kind of guidelines for the North-East.
(ii) There should be a nodal officer for the North-Eastern Region to expedite clearances,
considering the ground realities of the North-East.
(iii) V ideo conferencing, instead of actually coming and pursuing problems, should be
preferred for reducing the cost and time overrun.
(iv) third-party monitoring for quality and quantity of works should be done by the
consultants and experts of the sanctioning Ministry.
State Government of Mizoram
3.8 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Mizoram made following submissions:
(i) There should be presence of the State Governments in the screening process and the
priority of the States should be respected.
(ii) T echnical manpower should be strengthened in the Ministry.
(iii) There could be online submission of documents.
(iv) There should a change in the perception and role of the Ministry of DoNER in supporting
various North-Eastern States. The Ministry of DoNER should be entrusted to facilitate and
support the States in having better access to the 10 per cent GBS fund.
(v) Many of the North-Eastern States cannot avail many Central schemes because of the
guidelines. Those guidelines should be relaxed.
3.9 The Chief Secretary, State Government of Assam submitted that delays in sanctions need
to be curtailed. Time-frame of two years for completion of the scheme needs to be reviewed and
enlarged. There should be an in-house team with the DoNER Ministry to see these proposals and
clear them at a much faster rate. Land acquisition part can become a part parcel of the scheme.
4.0 The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some issues pertaining to non release
of funds by the State Governments, transfer of land for projects, postponement of holding of
public hearings several times for land acquisition, environmental clearance, law and order situation,
etc. On the issue of shifting of the Ministry to Shillong, the DoNER Secretary stated that it would
be very difficult to shuffle from Shillong to Delhi; otherwise, the synergy would be better. The
Chairman asked the witnesses to furnish replies in writing within one week on the queries which
could not be replied orally.
5.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.

72
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 4 th July, 2013 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Shri L.K. Advani
4. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
5. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
6. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
7. Shri Rathod Ramesh
8. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Cabinet Secretariat
1. Shri Ajit Kumar Seth, Cabinet Secretary
2. Shri L.C. Goyal, Special Secretary
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Garg, Additional Secretary
4. Shri K.L. Sharma, Joint Secretary
72

73
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Gauri Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri G.V .V . Sarma, JS (Disaster Management)
4. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
5. Shri Sanjay Agarwal, Director (Disaster Management)
6. Shri Ajay Chaddha, DG, ITBP
7. Shri M.S. Bhurji, IG (Ops), ITBP
8. Shri Sandip Rai, IG, NDRF
Representatives of NDMA
1. Dr. S. S. Agarwal, Secretary
2. Brig. S. Visvanathan, Advisor
Representative of Ministry of Power
Shri Ghansyam Prasad, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
1. Shri S. Sahu, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. Dinesh Chand, Additional Advisor
Representative of Ministry of Petroleum
Ms. Sushma Rath, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Lt. General Vinod Bhatia, A VSM, SM, DGMO, AHQ
2. Shri K.S. Babu, Air Vice Marshal
3. Shri S. Ravi Vrindhachalem, Air Commodore
4. Shri S.B. Deo, Air Marshal
Representative of Border Roads
Brig. V .S. Kattarya, DDG, O/o DGBR
Representatives of Indian Meteorological Department
1. Dr. K.J. Ramesh, Advisor, IMD
2. Shri B.K. Bandyopadhyay, Deputy DGM, IMD
Representative of Department of Food and Public Distribution
Shri Deepak Kumar, Joint Secretary
Representatives of ISRO
1. Shri G. Srinivasa Rao, Head, Disaster Management Support Division
2. Shri J.R Sharma, ISRO
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri R.K. Jain, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Niloy Roy, CMO
Representative of Department of Telecommunication
Ms. Rita Teaotia, Additional Secetary

74
Representatives of Government of Uttarakhand
1. Shri S.K. Mattoo, Chief Resident Commissioner
2. Shri Bhaskaranand, Secretary (DM)
3. Shri Manoj Chandran, Additional Secretary
4. Shri S. Ramaswamy, Principal Secretary
5. Shri S.D. Sharma, Inv. Commissioner
Representatives of Planning Commission
1. Ms. Sindhushree Khullar, Secretary
2. Shri S.N. Brohmo Choudhury, Advisor, NE
3. Shri T.K. Pandey, Joint Secretary (Financial Resources)
4. Shri S. Lakshmanan, Consultant (Financial Resources)
Representatives of Department of Expenditure
1. Shri RS. Gujral, Secretary (Expenditure)
2. Ms. Anjuly Chib Duggal, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. Rajat Bhargava, Joint Secretary (Budget)
I. OPENING REMARKS OF CHAIRMAN
2.0 At the outset, the chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting and apprised them of the
agenda i.e. (i) to hear the Home Secretary on the relief and rehabilitation and rescue measures being
undertaken in Uttarkhand after cloud burst and flash floods and to (ii) hear the Cabinet Secretary,
Finance and Planning Commission Secretaries on ‘Strengthening the working of the Ministry of
DoNER for effective implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and projects meant for
North-Eastern Region’.
2.1 The Chairman, thereafter, read out a letter received from the Home Minister with regard
to rehabilitation and rescue measures in Uttarakhand after flash floods and cloud burst there
stating that there was no provision laid down in the Disaster Management Act or the guidelines
issued thereunder for declaring a disaster as a National Calamity. He added that as per the
information received from the State Government of Uttarakhand, 580 human lives had lost, 4,200
villages had been affected, and over 2,300 houses had been reported damaged and about 3,100
persons have been injured. The State Government was in the process of making damage
assessment and the number of lives lost may go up after debris is cleared. Essential commodities
including food packets were being air dropped. Food packets, water and medicines are being sent
to all the affected areas. Relief camps are being organised in different parts of the State. Medical
teams with sufficient medicines and equipments were being sent. Free transport was being
arranged for all the people till their respective destinations. Special train bogies were being
arranged in different trains to help the pilgrims to reach their destination. Stranded tourists had
been allowed free access to all State guest houses as well as tourist guest houses of the State
Governments. As on 1
st July, 2013, over one lakh people had been evacuated by all agencies to
safer places.
2.2 The Chairman also mentioned that he had also written a letter to the Hon’ble Chairman of
the Rajya Sabha as well as to the Hon’ble Speaker of the Lok Sabha requesting them to allow
Members of Parliament to donate money from their MPLAD fund for relief measures in
Uttarakhand. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had written back that the Members of Parliament
were allowed to donate up to rupees fifty lakh from their MPLAD funds towards relief and
rehabilitation in the State of Uttarakhand.

75
2.3 The Chairman mentioned that the Committee would hear the Home Secretary in brief
and at a later stage, it would study the situation in depth because it would be diverting the
attention of Government officials engaged in relief and rescue operations by way of attending
the meetings.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
II. REHABILITATION AND RESCUE MEASURES IN UTTARAKHAND
3.0 The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Home
Affairs and State Government of Uttarkhand and placed on record the appreciation of the
commendable job by personnel of NDRF, ITBP and Armed Forces under a joint command, in
rescuing the stranded pilgrims and locals. He then asked the Home Secretary to make his
presentation on the matter.
4.0 The Home Secretary submitted that the first responder in the disaster was the State
Government of Uttarakhand and immediately after that, the Government of India moved into action.
All the Ministries of the Government of India were mobilized. The National Crisis Management
Committee, under the chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary, thereafter met every day to review
the situation and coordinate all the assistance that was required to be rendered to the State
Government to ensure that everything was done as quickly as was humanly possible. He added that
the Government of India directed the Armed Forces, ITBP, the National Disaster Response Force
to start salvage, rescue, relief and succor operations and consequentially a very large number of
people were rescued. A member of the National Disaster Management Authority was stationed at
Dehradoon to coordinate the efforts. The National Executive Committee, under the Home Secretary
was meeting every day to review and take stock of the situation. Connectivity of telephone had
been established with many towns and the basic telephony was in operation but it may not
necessarily be possible for every mobile telephone to be working there. The State Government
authorities needed to continue the relief operations. Systematic efforts would be required to ensure
immediate restoration of basic road connectivity. The State Government needed to prepare a
Memorandum for Assistance from the National Disaster Response Fund. The State Government
also had to plan for long-term reconstruction and rehabilitation, which could be looked into by the
Planning Commission separately.
4.1 The Secretary, Disaster Management, State Government of Uttarakhand, thereafter gave a
brief of the sequence of the event of disaster that took place and the steps taken by the State
Government and Central Government. He stated that the focus was on Kedar Valley though the
State Government had information from other valleys like Badrinath, Ghangaria, Hemkund Sahib,
Gangotri and Yamunotri as the people there were safe with no problem of food and other civil
supplies. More than 300 persons were evacuated from Rambara, which was almost non-existent
and totally inaccessible for the rest of the world. The entire road connectivity was totally cut off
at different places and the emphasis was on restoration of road connectivity. Mule tracks and
kutcha roads were made to evacuate the people. Many local people in Badrinath, Gangotri and
Yamunotri will remain safe and there will be all kind of relief materials till the closure of ‘holy
kapaats’ of the ‘Char Dhams’ in third week of November, 2013. He expressed thanks and gratitude
for the assistance given by the Government of India, Indian Army, Indian Air Force, NDRF and
all other Government agencies.
4.2 With regard to Chairman’s query about delay to reach Garud Chatti, the Secretary
submitted that it was totally isolated and cut off from the rest of the world. There was no
helipad at all. It was amidst the jungle. Hence there was delay in reaching Garud Chatti but the
operation in Garud Chatti was completed within 48 hours and about three hundred persons were
evacuated.

76
4.3 Regarding reports in certain sections of media of looting the tourists and pilgrims at certain
places, the Secretary submitted that one case of this kind had come to the notice of the State
Government and police personnel were enquiring into it. Regarding exact number of dead persons,
the Secretary submitted that there was debris in Kedarnath and Ram Bada which was very high
upto 30 feet and the 560 count had come from visually counting the dead. The death toll may rise
in future after extraction. With regard to missing persons, the State Government had requested the
Chief Secretaries of all the State Governments and Union Territories to identify people from their
States who had been there in the chardham yatra, during this particular period of disaster, and then
revert back to us along with their detailed list. The State Government would then consider them
as missing. The State Government was also taking regular help from all service providers to locate
the position of different people in the Kedar Hills during this period of time. The number has been
estimated at 3,078. All care and caution has been taken to reach at this figure.
4.4 The Chairman and Members of the Committee, thereafter, raised the following querries:–
(i) Conflicting news about the forewarning given by the Meteorological Department and
by the ISRO;
(ii) No meeting of National Executive Committee. since September, 2008 till December,
2012;
(iii) Possibility of earthquake in Uttarakhand and adequate warning to the State
Governments;
(iv) Pooling of help form other State Governments;
(v) Status of prevention of diseases and epidemic in that area;
(vi) Position of drinking water; and
(vii) Neglect of environmental concerns by construction of dams and roads by blowing up
Himalayan ranges.
4.5 Concluding the discussion, the Chairman asked the Home Secretary to send written replies
on the queries raised and stated that the Committee would discuss NDMA, the relief and
rehabilitation programme in detail later on.
III. STRENGTHENING THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF DONER ETC.
5.0 The Committee thereafter heard the Cabinet Secretary, Finance Secretary and Secretary,
Planning Commission.
(i) The subject of development and growth of the North-East is an extremely important
issue that engaged the Government and it is trying its best to ensure that the
development of the North-Eastern Region goes ahead apace. Though the funds, in per
capita terms, are definitely higher than the national average, but it requires a lot of
investment, particularly in agriculture and horticulture. The Government is conscious
of the need to strengthen the infrastructure in the States and under ‘Look East
Policy’;
(ii) There are a lot of problems and the major problem is of connectivity and
infrastructure. More intra-regional connectivity and airports’ infrastructure is required.
There are other issues in health or social sector schemes;
(iii) Problem in roads construction under the SARDP-NE or the Arunachal Package is not
with regard to the money but the implementation;

77
(iv) The DoNER is a co-ordinating Ministry and the co-ordination is best done from Delhi
where the other Ministries are located. Shifting of the Ministry to the North east on
the analogy of the Space Department and Atomic Energy would not be an overall
great advantage. Therefore the Ministry of DoNER should continue to remain in the
national capital;
(v) Effectiveness of the advocacy role of DoNER is not unique. Those are structural
issues, which can arise in other Ministries also where they are similarly placed and
the actual work is supposed to be done or executed or monitored by other different
line Ministries;
(vi) Ministries are more conscious of the need to spend and there has been a dip in
accumulated balances and accruals in the Non-Lapsable Pool for Central Resources.
Ministries are being sensitized to spend the funds more quickly and more effectively;
(vii) There are generic problems. The capacities of local PWDs are poor in terms of
funds. There are also issues relating to DPR preparation. It would be better if States
rely more on the EPC model to freeze the cost and that would have a positive effect
on time over-runs. The Government is pushing all the projects in that direction;
(viii) Lack of manpower and machinery is improving because big contractors have started
to come to the North-East and many of them after completing the projects, are
leaving the machinery behind because it is not economical for them to transport the
machinery back. Over the time, gradually there will be greater corpus of big
machinery there. The Government is trying to synchronise the construction in line
with the dry season at a quicker pace;
(ix) The State Governments, particularly Arunachal Pradesh, have to do something for
land acquisition since the major projects are essentially executed through the State
PWDs;
(x) Huge hydro power potential has to be tapped and developed. There are environmental
and forest clearances issues. 8-9 projects are in the pipeline. Problems relating to
evacuation of power and construction of roads and transmission lines have to be
simultaneously looked at;
(xi) The Government is trying its best to see that on the one hand the security concerns
and administrative issues are addressed, and at the same time, the funds and
governance issues relating to the actual execution of the development projects go ahead;
(xii) Ministry of DoNER has engaged W APCOS, a consultancy organization under the
Ministry of Water Resources for vetting of DPRs of projects up to Rs.50 crores
under the NLCPR scheme. On the issue of appointing Chief Engineer in the Ministry
of DoNER to strengthen capability to vet projects, opinion is divided because in
practical terms, it is unlikely that he would be able to prevail upon the engineering
wing in the line ministries;
(xiii) Retired engineers are being appointed as the National Quality Managers for third-party
monitoring;
(xiv) About appointing a senior officer in each Ministry as a Nodal Officer to look after
the projects, in many line Ministries, different projects might be handled by different
Divisions, headed by a Joint Secretary or some other officer. So, instead of
appointing one officer to deal just with all these projects, it would be better that the
Secretary himself reviews these projects more frequently from time to time;

78
(xv) The Prime Minister has directed to set up an E-GoM and the same would be set up
after report of the Committee of Secretaries. The DoNER will service the GoM;
5.2 Thereafer, the Secretary, Planning Commission made the following submissions:
(i) The issue of 100% funding instead of 90:10 has been an ongoing issue raised by
Chief Ministers of all the eight States for a long time. The overall view has been that
if some ownership has to be brought into the system, then, at least, some
contribution will come from within the States. If the entire amount came from the
Central Government, then there would be very little difference between the State’s
own development plans and that of the Central Government;
(ii) The issue of delay in DPR approvals has probably been raised by the States in the
context of the Special Plan Assistance. Budget cycles are such that States finalise
their budget between April to June and then, by the time they send the DPR, their
working season starts. The Central Government is trying to streamline the process
and it would review in a committee-mode in August itself and try to see that they
get the full working season. Annual DPRs are only for the Special Plan Assistance,
which are given to the States and are actually done by the States. However, for State
DPRs which are considered by the Secretary, DoNER and the line Ministries are
asked to give their technical inputs, it is a matter of pressing administratively a little
harder on them;
(iii) States will have to take the responsibility for the Maintenance of the completed
projects. Hand-holding and capacity-building for doing so need to be improved. The
Government would look at this issue in the course of the Twelfth Plan;
(iv) Since last year, a new window of NLCPR-Central has been created, where unspent
balances of Central Ministries would accrue into this fund and, as required, demands
would be placed before the Ministry of Finance for releases on case-to-case basis.
This is yet to be completely put on the ground;
(v) Regarding State-specific guidelines, most of the Centrally-sponsored schemes do not
meet the requirements of the North-Eastern States and there are many other States
also. Recently, the Cabinet has taken a decision that State-specific guidelines within
the overall core guidelines of every Centrally-sponsored scheme would be received
from the States, in the first instance, and would be looked into by a Committee
comprising of Secretary, Planning Commission, the Expenditure Secretary, the Chief
Secretary or any other representative of the State to tailor the schemes better to the
requirements of the States;
(vi) In addition, there has also been a decision that there would be a Flexi fund of ten
per cent in each Centrally-sponsored scheme which would be available to the State
to try innovations and tailor these schemes to their own requirements;
(vii) The only way to stop cost escalation is to complete the project. There are no two
ways of doing it. So, the effort has to be stepped up. We do need to press upon
the Ministries.
5.3 The Chairman, then invited the Finance Secretary to present his views on the select
subject. The Finance Secretary made the following submissions:–
(i) Till two years back, for the national projects of Railways, the Railways used to spend
the amount and the actual expenditure during the year was used to be provided by
the Finance Ministry towards the end of the year. Now upfront money on an ad-hoc

79
basis, based on the level of expenditure in the previous year is provided. The
expenditure on national projects shall be provided by the Finance Ministry. It is not
an issue of funds. It is an issue of their execution capability. There is no constraint.
They were not told that they had to spend less or spend within this amount;
(ii) Regarding holding of the funds by State Governments, normally the money must be
released within 15 days’ time for that particular project. If it was not done, then, the
State Government should pay interest on that amount, which would be utilized for
that project. But specific aspect regarding the Bodo Tribal Autonomous Council not
receiving the funds needed to be checked in detail;
(iii) Earlier the maintenance of completed projects was not being provided for in the
contract. Now a provision is being made in this regard. Initially, it was made that a
minimum three years’ mandatory maintenance would be provided by the contractor
after completion of the project. Now, for the EPC projects they are trying to raise
it to a level of five years and that five years’ maintenance will be built into the cost
of the project. Thereafter, in any case, it is the responsibility of the State
Government;
(iv) There has been a general principle that for all Central sector and Centrally-sponsored
schemes, land should be provided by the State Government. There is again a the
viewpoint that if the commitment of State Government is not there even to provide
the land, then your project gets delayed much more;
(v) On the issue of 10 per cent expenditure not being made by the different Ministries
for the North East and its accumulation in the NLCPR, if any Ministry is spending
more than 10 per cent, it is not offset against NLCPR. There are many Ministries
which, in. fact, spend more than 10%. If for any projects an additional amount is
required and if it is there, the additional money can be provided from NLCPR.
6.0 The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised certain queries which were replied by
the Cabinet Secretary; Secretary, Planning Commission and Secretary, Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.

80
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18 th July, 2013 in Committee Room-E,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
13. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
14. Shri Lalu Prasad
15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. to (i) consider and adopt draft 172
nd Report on Action
Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 163 rd Report of the
Committee on the Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad; and
(ii) finalise views on the subject ‘Strengthening the working of the Ministry of Development of
80

81
North Eastern Region (DoNER) for effective implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and
projects meant for North Eastern Region’.
2.1 The Chairman mentioned that on his behalf the Secretariat had requested all the Members
of the Committee to give their written suggestions/views on the subject so as to enable the
Committee to formulate and finalise its views on the issues concerning the subject. He informed
that the Secretariat received suggestions from only Shri Naveen Jindal, MP, Lok Sabha who took
pains in going through the papers and sent suggestions. The Chairman hoped that in future other
Members also would follow this.
I. Adoption of 172
nd Report
3.0 The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft 172 nd report for consideration. The Chairman
stated that he had gone through the report and recommendations are based on deliberations in the
Committee. The Chairman, then, read out the recommendations/observations made in the Report.
3.1 After a brief discussion, the draft report was adopted by the Committee with some changes.
The Committee thereafter authorized its Chairman to cause presentation of the Report during the
ensuing session of the Parliament.
II. Formulation and finalization of views on the subject ‘Strengthening the working of
the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER)
4.0 The Chairman then invited Committee Members to finalise views on various issues on the
subject so that report could be drafted.
4.1 He recapitulated that the Committee had heard the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER, Chief
Secretaries/Representatives of all the eight North-Eastern States and the Secretaries/representatives
of seven line Ministries namely Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Power,
Home Affairs, Department of Telecommunications and Chairman, Railway Board engaged in the
implementation of infrastructure related policies, programmes, schemes and projects pertaining to
the concerned Ministries meant for North-Eastern Region. The Committee also heard the Cabinet
Secretary, Secretary, Planning Commission and Secretary, Department of Expenditure (Ministry of
Finance) on the subject.
4.2 He requested that the Members may put forward their views so that the Committee could
finalise views on various issues and report could be drafted. He then read out suggestions/views
made by Ministry of DoNER, concerned Ministries, Cabinet Secretary and State Governments of
North Eastern region and asked Members to give their views on them. During the meeting,
following views emerged on the subject:–
· There should be a separate wing in the Ministry of DoNER for approval of the projects.
· Secretary, Ministry of DoNER should be equipped with more administrative and
sanctioning powers.
· The Empowered Group of Ministers to review key infrastructure programmes in the
region may be setup at the earliest.
· The Government may think of shifting of the headquarters of Ministry of DoNER from
Delhi to Shillong on the analogy of the Space Department and Atomic Energy which
are headquartered at Bangaluru and Mumbai respectively as the Ministry of DoNER can
do better job in terms of coordination with State Governments there and monitoring
projects. For Coordination with other Ministries and Cabinet Secretariat, a camp office
at Delhi may be created.

82
· The guidelines of programmes with all-India nature may be tailored/modified and
relaxed. States should have liberty in deciding the modus operandi for planning and
implementation of the programmes in the best interest of area specific requirements.
· The Government should sensitize Ministries to spend 10% GBS meant for NE States
more quickly and effectively.
· The Line Ministries should have a Nodal Officer specifically responsible for the
North-Eastern Region. It would be better that the Secretary himself reviews these
projects more frequently from time to time.
· The State Governments should not hold funds meant for specific project/programme/
scheme.
4.3 The Chairman of the Committee noted that there were many issues on which replies have
not been given by the Government. The Committee was of the view that while drafting report, the
Secretariat should put following recommendations therein:
· There should be a special cell in the Prime Minister’s Office to look after the progress
of works of various Central Government departments and other issues referred by the
North Eastern States.
· The forest and environmental clearances should not hold the projects in the North-East
indefinitely and should be cleared on a priority basis within a definite timeframe.
· There should be a separate fund of strategically national important projects in the
region. For example, national highway projects, telecom projects, Railway projects etc.
· There should be a representative of the State, possibly the Chief Secretary or the
Commissioner/Secretary, in charge Planning Department of the State in the NLCPR
Committee for retention and sanctioning of projects.
4.4 The Committee also decided that other issues that came up for discussion with all stake
holders may also be included in the report. The Chairman then asked the Secretariat to finalise the
Draft Report on the basis of the discussion held and also the inputs received from the Cabinet
Secretary, Finance Secretary, Planning Commission and DoNER Ministry.
Other Issues
5.0 On the subjects of Coastal Security Management, security of airports and other Vital
establishments under internal security, disaster Management, the Chairman mentioned that the
Committee should undertake visits after the ensuing Parliament session.
6.0 One Member proposed for study visit to States affected by Left Wing extremism which has
emerged as the gravest threat to internal security. The Chairman then opined that the Committee
has a number of issues to deal with such as Left Wing extremism, Coastal Security, rehabilitation
of the Kashmiri migrants etc.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.

83
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27 th August, 2013 in Committee Room-
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Santiuse Kujur
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda i.e., consideration and adoption of draft 173
rd Report on Strengthening
of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of policies, programmes,
schemes and projects meant for North Eastern Region.
3. The Committee thereafter, took up the consideration of the draft 173 rd Report. The
Chairman recapitulated that the Committee considered the subject in six sittings. The Committee
heard presentation of Secretary, Ministry of DoNER on the subject. In order to have a holistic view
of problems being faced and status of implementation of projects, the Committee heard the views
of Secretaries of major infrastructure line Ministries viz., Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road Transport
83

84
and Highways, Home Affairs, Power, Department of Telecommunications and  Chairman, Railway
Board on the subject. Besides, the Committee also heard views of the North Eastern State
Governments as well as Cabinet Secretary, Secretary, Planning Commission and Expenditure
Secretary.
3.1 After a brief discussion, the draft report was adopted by the Committee without any
modification. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical mistakes and
make necessary corrections in the report. The Committee also decided to present/lay the Report
on 29
th August 2013 and authorized its Chairman to nominate Members from Rajya Sabha and Lok
Sabha for the purpose.
4.0 The Chairman thereafter, apprised the Members that the tenure of the Committee was going
to expire on 30 th August 2013 and the fresh Committee would be re-constituted soon. Since it was
the last meeting of the Committee, the Chairman expressed his thanks to the Members for their
active participation and valuable contribution to the work done by the Committee during its tenure.
He further hoped that all the members would be re-nominated to the Committee and the Committee
would continue the good work after its re-constitution.
5.0 A summary of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.

85
ANNEXURES

87
ANNEXURE-I
List of Major infrastructure line Ministries/Departments
which were heard by the Committee
1. Ministry of Civil Aviation
2. Ministry of Home Affairs
3. Department of Telecommunications
4. Ministry of Power
5. Railway Board, Ministry of Railways
6. Department of Road Transport and Highway
7. Department  of Shipping

88
88
ANNEXURE-II
List of Other line Ministries/Departments which were requested to
furnish their  written comments on the subject
1. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
2. Department of Agricultural Research and Education
3. Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying
4. Department of AYUSH
5. Department of Bio-Technology
6. Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals
7. Department of Pharmaceuticals
8. Ministry of Coal
9. Department of Commerce
10. Department of Consumer Affairs
11. Ministry of Culture
12. Department of Drinking Water Supply
13. Ministry of Environment and Forests
14. Department of Fertilizers
15. Ministry of Food Processing Industries
16. Department of Food and Public Distribution
17. Department of Heavy Industry
18. Department of Higher Education
19. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
20. Department of Aids Control
21. Department of Health Research
22. Ministry of Housing and Poverty Alleviation
23. Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
24. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
25. Department of Information Technology
26. Ministry of Labour and Employment

89
27. Department of Land Resources
28. Ministry of Law and Justice
29. Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
30. Ministry of Mines
31. Ministry of Minority Affairs
32. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
33. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
34. Department of Posts
35. Department of Public Enterprises
36. Department of Rural Development
37. Department of School Education and Literacy
38. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
39. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
40. Ministry of Textiles
41. Ministry of Tourism
42. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
43. Ministry of Urban Development
44. Ministry of Women and Child Development
45. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
46. Ministry of Water Resources

90
90
ANNEXURE-III
List of the other line Ministries/Departments which furnished their written comments
1. Department of Agricultural Research and Education
2. Department of AYUSH
3. Department of Bio-Technology
4. Department of Pharmaceuticals
5. Department of Commerce
6. M/o Food Processing Industries,
7. Department of Heavy Industry
8. Department of Aids Control
9. Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
10. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
11. Department of Information Technology
12. Department of Land Resources
13. Ministry of Mines
14. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
15. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
16. Department of Public Enterprises
17. Department of School Education and Literacy
18. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
19. Department of Rural Development
20. Ministry of Statics and Programme Implementation
21. Department of Animal Husbandry
22. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
23. Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
24. Ministry of Minority Affairs
25. Ministry of Drinking Water
26. Ministry of Culture
27. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.

91
91
ANNEXURE-IV
ISSUES RAISED/SUGGESTIONS MADE BY OTHER
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENT
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Timely release of matching Share by States for Integrated Wasteland Management
Programmme (IWMP) in the State plan.
2. Lack of availability of Technical Experts- The Guidelines provides for relaxation in
qualification by Wasteland Cell cum Data Centres (WCDCs) with the approval of SLNA
in deserving cases keeping in view the practical field experience of the candidate.
3. Internet connectivity -The States have been advised to make use of NIC offices at
district and State level
(Department of Rural Development)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA) .
The number of Registered Households in the N.E. States is 6427021. The number of Bank
Accounts is 2101983 and the number of Post Office accounts is  2020491. Percentage of payment
through Bank and PO is only 62.2% in NE S tates. In Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura
and Sikkim connectivity is available at Block Head Quarters. However, in Nagaland, Mizoram,
Meghalaya, large number of Block Head Quarters upload data offline on NREGA-soft. Social audit
and appointment of Ombudsmen is lagging behind in the NE States.
Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
The rate of completion of IAY houses in the North Eastern States is very low. Use of
AawaasSoft for uploading data and monitoring financial and physical outcomes are yet to be taken
full advantage-of Low IT connectivity is posing major problem.
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)/National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)
Since the overall budget provision for NRLM in individual N.E. States is small, the States
are not in a position to hire professional manpower for the States and district positions, as the
outlay on this is restricted to 5%. Ministry has a separate scheme for promoting Agricultural and
Non-Timber Forest Produce based livelihoods, called the ‘Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyijana’
(MKSP). Ministry has not received adequate response in the North East, except Assam. Lack of
Community Participation in Counseling, Mobilization and Post Placement Tracking of candidates
undertaking training are some of the Concurrent Evaluation mechanisms at State level yet to
develop.
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
Special Dispensations to NE States:  With an aim to provide connectivity to a larger

92
number of habitations in the blocks bordering international boundary in 7 North Eastern States
namely Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura a special
dispensation has been made that all habitations within a path distance of 10 km in the blocks
bordering international boundary in the hill States (as identified by the MHA) may be treated as a
cluster for consideration under PMGSY. This cluster approach would enable provision of
connectivity to a large number of habitations. A special dispensation has been allowed to Arunachal
Pradesh under PMGSY by extending Cluster approach to all International border districts in the
State by clubbing population within the path distance of 10 km. and treating them as cluster, which
would make about 126 more unconnected habitations (tentative) eligible for connectivity. The
pattern of assistance is 90% as Central Share and 10% as State Share for the NE States.
Problems faced in implementation of the PMGSY scheme in the N.E. States are due to
difficult terrains, low contracting/absorption capability and also that environment and forest
clearance takes time. There is also lack of Quality Control systems.
MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(Department of Biotechnology)
1. Less number of research scientists in implementing hard core biotechnology
programmes specific to NER.
2. Grant writing for financial support from funding agencies is the problem from NER.
3. Lack of exposure in advanced techniques in biotechnology for the NER researchers.
4. Frequent transfer of researchers from one institute to another creates problems for
implementation of sponsored projects.
Suggestions :
The problem of transfers of researchers from one institute to another may also require to
be addressed through well defined policies. The DoNER Ministry may be helpful to resolve this
particular problem in North East Region.
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
Physical and financial Progress in some of the N-E States is not in accordance with the
timelines laid down for the purpose. The problems faced by the NE States are distinctive and many
policy decisions are rendered futile due to the lack of a sound database to help formulate and
monitor the schemes. Therefore, it would be desirable to have a strong statistical unit in the
Ministry of DoNER, which can liaise with the Central Ministries and the North Eastern States, to
help develop a database ideally suited to both the local needs and the requirements of the policy
makers at the Centre. Further, this unit can also act as a nodal agency in providing the guidance
at the local level on the methodological aspects, thereby ensuring timeliness and reliability of the
estimates compiled by these States.
MINISTRY OF HEA VY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(Department of Public Enterprises)
Since the capacity to spend the entire amount earmarked for NE Region under the
Counselling, Retraining and redeployment (CRR) Scheme is limited, it is now felt that components
covered under the other two schemes viz. Schemes of Research, Development and Consultancies
(RDC) and Scheme of Skill Development (SDP) may also be taken up in the NE Region.

93
(Department of Heavy Industry)
(i) Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL)
o Bandhs/strikes/local disturbances
o Poor response/participation by vendors/suppliers for undertaking work in the
region including transportation of equipment
o Frequent dislocation of labour due to threats
o Inadequate security provisions/arrangements
o Inadequate infrastructure including roads conditions, constraints in transportation
of material/equipment to the project sites located in the North-East Region,
o Shortage of skilled manpower locally in the region due to which people from
other parts/regions of the Country have to be deputed/sourced even for small
works
o Delay in timely availability of required inputs/fronts from project developers.
(ii) Hindustan Paper Corporation of India Limited (HPC)
Infrastructural inadequacies and worsening law and order situation owing to insurgency
and other aberrations have eroded the competitive advantage of HPC in sourcing of
bamboo. The advantages which were envisaged at the time when the Mills were set
up i.e.  proximity to sources of the principal raw materials for complete self-
sufficiency- have dwindled considerably over the last decade. All other vital chemical
inputs like industrial Grade Salt, Hydrogen Peroxide, Soap Stone powder, Sodium
Sulphate, Alum, Rosin, etc. have to come from far away places like Gujarat, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, etc., besides virtually all equipment spares sourced
from far away places. It is also still difficult to attract professionally qualified and
skilled personnel to insurgency-infested NER in managing enterprises. Ministry of
DoNER should give importance to the PSUs located in North Eastern Region. Ministry
of DoNER and the administrative Ministry of the undertakings located in the NER
should meet regularly to solve the problems.
(iii) Andrew Yule and Company Limited
There is need to increase tea production in which Ministry of  DoNER can help the
company in taking up Management Control/ takeover of sick plantations of Assam Tea
Corporation. Ministry of DoNER will be required to improve and revive the
properties.
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
Live stock Health and Disease Control
The States are not utilizing funds being released under various components of Livestock
Health and Disease Control Scheme.
The States are also not sending the physical and financial progress on regular basis.

94
Poultry Development Scheme
State Government concerned should ensure adequate health coverage in a bio-secure manner
for the birds that are being reared while effectively implementing the Scheme.
The backyard poultry pockets should be ensured to be separate and far away from any
commercial poultry production pockets.
Breeding stock maintained by State Poultry farms be reared and distributed to BPL
beneficiaries under ‘Rural backyard Poultry Development’, should be of low input
technology, which will survive in rural areas.
16.2%, 8% and 30% of funds are targeted for SC, ST beneficiaries and women
beneficiaries respectively as per directives of Planning Commission, wherever applicable.
Central Fodder Development Organisation
In case of centrally Sponsored fodder development Scheme, the proposals are not submitted
timely and as per guidelines of the scheme. The fund utilization is very slow. Due to
shortage of staff at Head Quarter, at regional station and even in the State, the monitoring
of the scheme is not, as required.
Schemes relating to Small Ruminants and Meat Products in NER
Implementation of schemes is very low. Hence active participation of States is required in
respect to submission of eligible proposals for the projects and faster implementation of
programmes.
There is lack of awareness about the schemes and extension programme with respect to
schemes of Animal Husbandry Department. Massive extension programmes at the State level
are required.
More training programmes for farmers and staff may be organized by the States for
improving animal husbandry practices.
National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding
Dairy animal population is limited in North Eastern States as at present milk consumption
is very low. Demand for the milk and milk products will further increase with the rapid
economic development of this region.
Productivity of dairy animals is lowest in the region than the other regions in the country.
Management of dairy animals is not remunerative to the farmers of the State.  Incentives
are not made available to the farmers for rearing dairy animals.
There is poor breeding infrastructure and very low Artificial Insemination (AI) coverage.
Quality breeding inputs are not available in these States. For breeding inputs these States
are dependent on other States.
Poor quality of bulls used in natural service and some of the NER States have no provisions
for natural service due to which inbreeding is going on in these States.
Deficiency of cattle feed and fodder in some of the States is major constraints to
development of dairy activities in these States. Most of the NER States are dependent on
the feed supply from other States. There is need to formulate cattle feed locally available
feed ingredients.

95
No programmes have been initiated by these States for development and conservation of
indigenous strains and breeds.
There is urgent need to put complete ban on slaughter of female dairy animals as a large
number of female calves are slaughtered to fulfil demand of meat in the State. Establishment
of feed lot farms for scientific rearing of male calves for use in meat industry are required
by most of the States.
Heifer rearing programme may be taken up on a massive scale in order to promote dairying
in NER region.
Crossing of swamp buffalo with recognized buffalo breeds may be taken up in NER region
to increase milk production as suggested by FAO in Philippines.
Disease outbreak and non availability of quality vaccines in these States is also a major
constraint in development of dairy sector in these States.
Dairy Development Schemes
Dairy cooperatives in States of NER are at nascent State. Dairy professional/technical
experts available in the region are at shortage. Implementation of dairy development projects
and utilization of fund under approved projects is therefore slow. Physical achievement does
not commensurate with financial release made under the projects.
Due to inordinate delay in implementation of projects together with problems relating to
remoteness and difficult terrain conditions of the region, often projected cost become
inadequate. Unspent balance under approved projects remains unutilized.
Under these circumstances, mid-course re-correction in terms of component cost and
activity consumes more time and results in further delay in project completion.
The North Eastern States may be advised on the following aspects
(i) To closely monitor and review the progress in implementation of approved/ongoing
projects.
(ii) To arrange submission of pending Utilization Certificate.
(iii) To sensitize fishermen organizations/associations and other implementing agencies to
avail benefit of the scheme.
(iv) To verify carefully the bonafides of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), before
their proposals are forwarded to the Department.
Fisheries
1. NER States have a sizeable fish eating population and with the growing demand for
consumption, there is always shortage of fish supply to meet this growing demand.
Shortage of quality seed is a big constraint for enhancing fish production in these
States. At present these States depend upon States like Andhra Pradesh and West
Bengal for supply of fish and fish seeds. These States therefore need to develop
hatcheries and brood banks in big way by taking advantage of existing schemes of the
Centre.
2. As against the average national productivity level of 2900 kg/ha/year for freshwater
ponds, the productivity levels in NER are very low. Except for Sikkim (3500 kg/ha/
year) all other States have a productivity level of less than national average.

96
3. The NER States have vast aquatic resources. However very little is being harnessed
for fish production. There is a need for expansion of fisheries in untapped areas like
beel development, paddy-cum-fish farming and for cold water fisheries in the State.
4. There is shortage of post harvest infrastructure like cold chain and marketing networks
in these States. Besides, there is a need for strengthening of fishery cooperatives.
5. The North Eastern States may be advised to create dedicated institutions such as
Fisheries Corporations and Federation for development and management of post harvest
infrastructure facilities. Besides, the North Eastern States may be advised to sensitize
fishermen organizations, associations and other implementing agencies to avail benefit
of the scheme in creation of such infrastructure facilities. The NE States may also be
advised to set up monitoring mechanism to have a close monitoring on creation and
management of post harvest infrastructure facilities through private entrepreneurs.
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
(Indian Council of Agricultural Research)
1. Remoteness and inaccessibility of the region as a whole especially in Arunachal and
Nagaland affect.
2. Security problems and frequent bandhs
3. After sale services of equipment and facilities are the concern in the region.
4. Inadequate and insufficient number of technical manpower especially considering the
increased workload.
5. Unavailability of adequate experimental land/field for the field demonstration.
Suggestions for improvement
1. Provision for monetary incentives to the staff for effective contribution and attracting
talents.
2. Provision for special rates to service providers (Mechanics, taxi etc) to facilitate
effective implementation of programme.
3. Improving security measures at various centres.
4. Recruiting more technical manpower for improving research and extension activities.
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
· Inaccessible terrain and resultant poor road.
· Lack of infrastructure and comprehensive plan for infrastructure development in most
of NE States.
· Slow pace of construction work results in escalation of prices as well as depriving the
people from utilizing the services.
· Maintenance of infrastructure is a concern in most of the NE States.
· There is no single agency for executing and maintaining the construction works and
there is poor monitoring system for supervising ongoing construction work.

97
· Residential accommodation of critical staff in place of posting is inadequate to provide
round the clock assured service delivery.
· Poor air, road and telecom connectivity that has resulted in lack of diagnostic labs in
many areas of the region and affected monitoring and supervision.
· Duplication of funding from different sources - NRHM, CLCPR, NEC, Finance
Commission.
Human Resources for Health
· The major concern relating to HR is the non-availability of qualified manpower. Also
there are less numbers of training institutes for production of Human Resources.
Therefore, having required number of Specialist Doctors, paramedics and Radiologists
etc. at the health facilities is affected. The region is also yet to have a policy for
creation of new sanctioned posts for the new hospitals that are being created under
NRHM.
· Retention of trained professionals is another area of concern.
· Irrational deployment of manpower including poor recruitment policy of passed out
graduates from the State (both from the state’s own medical colleges and from outside
state from the state’s quota) hampers the service delivery.
· Another major concern in HR is that there is no separate Public Health Cadre in the
NE States except Sikkim, leading to compromised leadership at state, district and sub
district level.
· The States of NE region are yet to have a specialist cadre in their states especially for
rendering full component of assured services at the District hospitals.
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(Department of Fertilizers)
(i) Brahmaputra Valley fertilizers Corporation Limited (BVFCL)
The enterprise is located at Namrup village in the Dibrugarh district of Assam, in the North
eastern region of the country. Namrup-I plant of BVFCL is not in operation. Allocation of Plan fund
in respect of BVFCL is treated as contribution towards North Eastern Region. There is no other
proposed scheme being implemented in NE Region by Department of Fertilizers. The Company has
two operating Units-Namrup-II and Namrup-III. Both of the Plants are underperforming due to
obsolete technology, frequent machines breakdowns and non availability of original spares. To
enhance the domestic production of fertilizers in NE Region, Government/company is making all out
efforts to improve performance of its plants. The existing plants of BVFCL are old and based on
vintage technology leading to high incidence of equipments breakdowns. Renewal and replacement of
critical parts of machineries are required regularly to operate the plants at full load.  The outside
expert assistance required for critical maintenance jobs are difficult to get due to remoteness of
location as plants of BVFCL are located at Namrup in North Eastern (NE) part of India.
MINISTRY OF MINES
(i) Geological Survey of India
· The North Eastern States are densely forested, which causes immense problems
in carrying out the field work and other geological investigations.

98
· Law and Order problem
· Infrastructure, rail, road, air connectivity.
Suggestions
· Relaxation on the rules for NER for procurement of vehicle as at present the fleet
inner is very old and frequently goes under break down due to prevailing rugged
terrain condition of NER. Moreover outsourced vehicles are not readily available.
· Induction of sufficient fresh manpower suitable for carrying out field activities in
difficult terrain condition like NER.
· Augmenting infrastructure, including rail, road, inland water and air transportation
to facilitate a two-way movement of people and goods within the region and
outside, communication networks including broadband and wireless connectivity,
and harnessing of the vast power generation potential, all of which will open up
markets for produce from the region, attract private investment, create greater
employment opportunities and expand choices for people of the region. In
addition, opening up the land route through Bangladesh could enormously benefit
both the countries and diplomatic efforts should focus on improving relations with
the neighbours.
· Empowered Committee on Mineral development in North Eastern Region (NER)
with a view to facilitate fast decision making process and to ensure time-bound
action for sustainable development in NER.
(ii) Indian Bureau of Mines
Supply of machinery and Equipments:
· Response to Tenders is not satisfactory. Parties are not willing to supply the
material to the NE States.
· As per Audit observations, NER States are placing demands without feasibility
study.
· Certificate of installation and status of utilization in respect of Equipments are not
received from some of the parties and audit para is pending in the Kolkata
Regional Office.
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(Department of Industrial Policy and  Promotion)
(i) A considerable period of time lapses before the subsidy is disbursed.
(ii) Time taken for processing of claims at various level  in the concerned States is too
long and the State Governments do not have effective ways and means of monitoring
claims processing at various level.
(iii) Claims are being received mainly from the States of  Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura.
Other States are hardly claiming any subsidy.
(iv) Instances of fake/inflated claims and inability of States to undertake effective scrutiny.
(v) Meeting of State Level Committee are not held timely.

99
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS
National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)
(a) Weak infrastructure of the State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) and consequently a
very weak delivery system.
(b) Limitation of resources.
(c) Unwillingness of good NGOs to work at the existing interest margin.
Multi-sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) for Minority Concentration Districts (MCD)
(a) Project proposals are not received in time.
(b) Project proposals are recommended to the Ministry without ascertaining the availability
of land.
(c) Many States/UTs have not standardized the design and cost for the works taken up.
This leads to delay in approval.
(d) Delay in transfer of Central share of funds by the States/UTs to the districts/
implementing agencies.
(e) State share not released to the districts/implementing agencies in many projects.
(f) Slow utilization of funds and late submission of Utilization Certificate.
(g) Quarterly Progress Report (QPRs) is not sent in time.
(h) Review meetings and meetings of Empowered Committee not attended at appropriate
level.
Scheme for Leadership Development of Minority Women
During 2012-13, the scheme could be implemented in Manipur only amongst the North
Eastern States due to non-receipt of proposals from other states. However, during 2013-14, in
order to generate awareness about the schemes and programmes of the Ministry, awareness
generation camps have been organized in Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya. Further,
awareness is also generated through publicity campaigns in various States including North-East
through Print Media and Electronic Media.
Computerization of records of State Waqf Boards
The complete data of waqf properties are not available with the State/UT Waqf Boards.
(i) Paucity/shortage of staff in the State/UT Waqf Boards.
Strengthening of State Waqf Boards
The scheme could not be implemented as the in principle approval of Planning Commission
is still awaited.
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION
There is paradox of prevalence of water scarcity, even drought in many parts of NER,
some rivers dry up during non rainy season due to run off rainwater from hillsides, This problem
can be tackled by rejuvenation and conservation of forest.

100
Habitations in NER are located in hilltops away from the rivers and rely on the meager
water sources and direct rainfall. Roof top rainwater harvesting needs to be promoted in a big way.
More community rainwater collection tanks and reservoirs also need to be built.
Fragmentation and proliferation of villages on acoount of dispute with chieftains cause the
number of households in those villages too small to be viable for water supply schemes due to high
per capita cost. Setting up of new villages needs to be put to a halt so that planning and
implementation of not only water  supply schemes but also other government programmes are not
affected by mushrooming of new villages.
The capacity of water supply and distribution system needs to be augmented.
Water meters needed to be installed in all water connections in order to induce water
conservation.
To avoid pollution in surface water sources like rivers and lakes, States Flood Zone Area
Act should be invoked to remove encroachments.
Phumdi (floating islands) dwellers are being rehabilitated but further encroachments need to
be stopped.
Landfills into the rivers and lakes should be stopped.
Regulation and restrictions need to be put in place for managing industrial effluents and
discharge of waste products in the rivers and lakes.
All water supply schemes proposed to the Ministry of DoNER for funding should be
examined by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation for techno-economic aspects and all the
schemes funded by the Ministry of DoNER should be approved in SLSSC. Similarly combined
convergence within the States is also required between the Public Health Engineering Department
which is implementing water supply schemes, Irrigation and Flood Control Department, State
Disaster Management Authority in terms of finance, dovetailing of schemes and manpower to
address various issues.
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Department of AYUSH)
CONSTRAINTS/PROBLEMS
There are very few AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries in the entire NE Region. The existing
facilities have poor availability of AYUSH medical and para-medical manpower.
SUGGESTIONS
(i) A separate Directorate of AYUSH could be established for NE Region. This matter has
already been taken up with the NE States during various meetings of Health Secretaries
held in the Department.
(ii) To overcome the shortage of Doctors, maximum number of AYUSH Doctors may be
engaged at PHCs/CHCs/DHs.
2. National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
CONSTRAINTS/PROBLEMS
(i) Although, the NE Region abounds in medicinal plants resources, yet these resources
have not been properly tapped. Medicinal plants are collected and exported to other
parts of the country or abroad. However due to lack of facilities, more than 30%
medicinal plants material is wasted in the region.

101
(ii) There is no co-ordination between State Medicinal Plants Boards and State Missions
on Medicinal Plants.
(iii) Pendency of UCs for minor amounts often results in non-release of major grants to
the NE Region.
SUGGESTIONS
(i) Developing of medicinal plants zones/clusters will give a major boost to the Sector and
create sustainable livelihood systems for the people in the region.
(ii) There are many medicinal plants, which can be cultivated in the region aimed at
diversification of agriculture, particularly in areas under shifting cultivation. Medicinal
plants could be cultivated in the region as intercrop, main crop and during the
intervening cycle of shifting cultivation with proper buy-back arrangements. This
would lead to their conservation in wild habitats.
(iii) There are many medicinal plants, which are unsustainably and destructively harvested.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to conserve medicinal plants by establishing chain
of Medicinal Plants Conservation Areas (MPCAs), taking into account the biological
(taxonomic identity, distribution and population), social (awareness, ownership and
alternatives) and legal (tenure and benefit sharing) aspects in all Forest Types/Sub
Types/Agro Climatic Zones, so that there is sufficient and viable gene base.
(iv) For co-ordination purposes, NE Council and Ministry of DoNER should co-ordinate
medicinal plants related activities, particularly for establishing medicinal plants
processing zones/clusters and the issues common to different States in the Sector.
(v) For liquidating the pendency of UCs, a Corpus Fund for the purpose could be created
under the North Eastern Council (NEC) for refund to the NMPB of small amounts.
Thus, pendency of UCs would reduce and fresh funds could be released.
(vi) NEC should help the NMPB in establishing Medicinal Plants Facilitation Centres in
different parts and districts and designate a Nodal Officer to handle and co-ordinate
operational/management issues. NEC should also take up with all the Forest
Departments for following a uniform transit policy for transportation of the medicinal
plants produced in the region and from the region to other parts of the country.
3. Development of AYUSH Institutions
CONSTRAINTS/PROBLEMS
Due to incomplete proposals from the State Governments in NE region and pendency of
UCs against the grants released to State Governments in respect of the Institutions, it has not been
possible to provide the funds to the State Governments in NE region to the budgeted amount.
SUGGESTIONS
State Governments in NE region should be sensitized to send complete proposals and
liquidate pendency of UCs.
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) is implementing the e-Panchayat Mission Mode
Project (MMP), under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) for e-enablement of all Panchayats
which will make their functioning more efficient and transparent.

102
1. PRIASoft- Except Assam, Sikkim and Tripura none of the PRIs in other NE States and
UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands are maintain their accounts through PRIASoft.
The States of Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya and Nagaland have not yet issued
Government Orders for adopting Model Accounting System (MAS).
2. PlanPlus- Except Assam, Sikkim and Tripura, none of the PRIs in other NE States
have uploaded their Annual Action Plans in PlanPlus.
3. The National Panchayat Portal (NPP)- Dynamic websites have been created for most
of the State departments (except Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland). But except
Tripura no other NE State has registered or uploaded content in these websites.
4. Local Governance Directory (LGD)- Except Assam, Manipur, Sikkim and Tripura, none
of the NE States and have started mapping their villages with their Gram Panchayats/
equivalent units.
5. Training of the Trainers (ToT)- So far none of the functionaries in the States of
Meghalaya and Nagaland have utilized trainings imparted by the Ministry on PES
applications.
6. None of the functionaries and elected members in the States like Nagaland, Mizoram,
Meghalaya have been imparted training on basic IT literary through DOEACC/NIELIT.
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
There is immense potential for Horticulture crops and also for Non-Horticulture products as
well as resultant processing requirements for various fruits and vegetables grown in North-East
Region including exotic fruit. There is an urgent necessity to develop food processing related
infrastructure like cold chains, enhancing processing capacities; to ensure better marketing not only
in India but also in South East Asia markets due to its proximity geograbhically and also culturally,
which will earn foreign exchange also. Hence more allocation of funds may be required for North-
East Region areas to develop Agrucultural/Horticultural/food processing sectors in the region.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.