111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
         PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
                STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT
ON
                    CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
      
   (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON    02, March 2005)
         (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON   04, March 2005)
      
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2005/PHALGUN, 1926 (SAKA)
         
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-2005)                                                                 
 
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                        
                                    
3.         REPORT                                                                                                                        
4              ·RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                
 
5.          ·ANNEXURES                                                                                                         
 
I           Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
II          Press Communique dated 25 September, 2004
III        List of individuals/bodies from whom memoranda received       
            IV        List of witnesses who gave oral evidence before the Committee                  
V         Views/Suggestions of Members/individuals/organizations on the
             Bill, and response of Ministry of Home Affairs thereon
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 5 August 2004)
 
1.         Smt. Sushma Swaraj                 -           Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri V. Narayanasamy

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
3.         Shri Rishang Keishing
4.         Shri R.K. Dhawan
5.         Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6.         Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
7.         Shri N. Jothi
8.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9.         Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10.      *Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
           
           
LOK SABHA
11.       Shri L.K. Advani
12.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
13.       Shri C.K. Chandrappan
14.       Shri Biren Singh Engti
15.       Shri Rahul Gandhi
16.       Shri Tapir Gao
17.       Shri T.K. Hamza
18.       Shri Naveen Jindal
19.       Shri Ajit Jogi
20.       Shri Tek Lal Mahato
21.       Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
22.       Shri Sachin Pilot
23.       Shri Ashok Pradhan
24.       Prof. M. Ramadass
25.       Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
26.       Shri Bajuban Riyan
27.       Dr. H.T. Sangliana
28.       Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30.       Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
__________________________________
* Nominated w.e.f.  5
th September 2004 vice Shri Manoj Bhattacharya.   Expired on 14th February 2005.
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Eleventh
Report of the Committee on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003. * 
2.         In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha referred** the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 (Annexure I), as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 22
August 2003 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report.
3.0       The Committee held nine sittings in all spreading over 14 hrs on the Bill. In its meeting held on the 9 September
2004, the Committee heard the presentation of the Home Secretary, Government of India on the Bill and held
preliminary discussion thereon.  The Committee, then, decided that a Press Communique, inviting the views/suggestions

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
of the individuals, organisations, experts, institutions, etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bill, be issued. 
Accordingly, a Press Communique dated 25 September 2004 was issued.   The Committee also decided to hear the
views of some of the legal luminaries, representatives of statutory bodies and eminent experts on the subject and also to
request them to submit their views on the Bill.  
 
3.1       In response to the Press Communique, 116 written memoranda were received, out of which thirty-nine
memoranda (List at Annexure-III) were found to be relevant to the subject matter of the Bill. 
3.2       In its sittings held on 6,7,18,19 & 20 January 2005, the Committee heard eight witnesses (Annexure-IV) on the
various provisions of the Bill.
3.3       In its sitting held on 2 February 2005, the Committee held a discussion on the Bill in the light of submissions of
its Members, memoranda received, evidence tendered by witnesses and responses of Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on 3 February, 2005.
___________________________________________________________________
*          Bill    published        in    the       Gazette     of    India   Extraordinary,    Part II,   Section-2,    dated     22
August,    2003.
**               Rajya     Sabha     Parliamentary     Bulletin     Part II       No. 41563       dated  17     August,   2004   (The  
Bill   was    also 
                  referred       to     erstwhile     Committee      on     Home      Affairs,   vide     Rajya    Sabha    
Parliamentary     Bulletin
                  Part   II    No. 40919     dated    18     September     2003.)
 
 
3.4       The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 18 February 2005 and adopted the same. It also
decided that the evidence tendered before the Committee may be laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament.
 
4.         In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on the Bill received from
the Ministry of Home Affairs, 142
nd, 154th and 178th Reports of the Law Commission, Malimath Committee Report on
Reforms of Criminal Justice System, Twenty-Eighth Report (1996) of the Committee on Home Affairs on the Criminal
Law (Amendment) Bill, 1994, memoranda received from organizations/experts mentioned at Annexure-III, replies of
the Ministry to the queries raised by the Members on the Bill in the meetings and comments of the Ministry (Annexure-
V) on the suggestions/observations made by organizations/experts.
 
5.         For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
                                                                       
6.         On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable contributions made by the
witnesses who deposed before it and the senior officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Departments of Legislative
and Legal Affairs which facilitated the Committee in formulating its views on the various provisions of the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI;
February 18, 2005.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
Chairperson
Committee on Home Affairs
 
 REPORT
 
            The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860 (IPC), the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.PC) and the Indian Evidence Act, 1892 to improve upon the existing criminal justice
system in the country, which is besieged by huge pendency of criminal cases and inordinate delay in their disposal on

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
the one hand and very low rate of conviction in cases involving serious crimes on the other, by introducing the
following measures :- 
 
(i)                  prevention  of the evil of witnesses turning hostile in criminal cases;
 
(ii)
                introduction of the concept of plea-bargaining; and
 
(iii)
               compounding the offence under Section 498A, IPC (Husband or relative of husband of a woman
subjecting her to cruelty).
 
The Bill also proposes for inclusion of more scientific experts to give evidence in cases relating to fake currency notes,
in addition to officers of the Mint or India Security Press, Nasik.
 
2.0       The IPC is proposed to be amended by way of insertion of a new Section 195A after Section 195 for protection
of witness against threat and inducement by prescribing punishment with imprisonment which may extend to seven
years or with fine or both (Clause2). It is also proposed to amend Sections 161, 162 and 344 and First Schedule and to
insert new Sections 164A and 344A in Cr.PC to prevent the evil of witness turning hostile (clauses 3, 4, 5, 11, 12 and
13). The proposed amendments in Cr.PC and the consequential amendments to Section 154 of Indian Evidence Act,
1872 (Clause 14) inter alia provide for the following measures to achieve the aforesaid objective:-
 
(i)         statement of witness to be recorded by Police in the case where punishment is less than seven years, at
the very inception of investigation  if reduced to writing, is to be signed, acknowledged and quickly
transmitted to the Magistrate;
 
(ii)        recording of evidence of material witness by Magistrate in all offences punishable with death or
imprisonment for seven  years or more during investigation; and
 
(iii)       summary trial for perjury and enhancement of punishment therefor.
 
The measures delineated at sl. Nos. (i) and (ii) are covered by clauses 3, 4 and 5 and the measure mentioned at sl. No.
(iii) is covered by clauses 11 and 12 of the Bill.
 
2.1       A new Chapter (Chapter XXI-A) is proposed to be inserted in Cr.PC for making  the concept of plea bargaining
as an essential component of criminal justice system in order to liquidate mounting arrears of criminal cases in various
Courts and alleviate the plights of undertrials and easing congestions in jails (Clause-7).
 
2.2       Section 320 of Cr.PC is proposed to be amended for making punishment to the husband or the relatives of
husband of a woman compoundable in case of cruelty meted out to her under Section 498A of   IPC (Clause -9).
 
2.3       Section 292 of Cr.PC is proposed to be amended to enlarge the list of Offices whose expert opinion on
counterfeit currency can be considered as evidence.  The Officers of Bank Note Press, Dewas (BNP), National Institute
of Criminology and Forensic Science Laboratories (NICFS), Kolkata and Hyderabad, in addition to India Security
Press, Nasik and Government of India’s Mints would be considered for giving expert opinion under Cr. PC. (Clause 8).
 
2.4       Amendment to First Schedule to Cr.PC as envisaged under clause 13 is consequential to amendment to IPC
under clause 2 of the Bill.
 
3.0       The three Acts which are proposed to be amended are considered to be the bulwark of criminal justice system of
the country. The proposed amendments are based on the recommendations contained in various Reports (142
nd, 154th
and 178th Reports) of Law Commission and Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice System (March 2003) headed
by Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath, Former Chief Justice of Karnataka and Kerala High Courts. 
 
4.0       As already stated, the Bill focuses upon following key issues of criminal justice system:

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
 
(i)         Witnesses turning hostile;
(ii)                 Plea bargaining;
(iii)               Compounding the offence under section 498A IPC (Husband or relative of husband of a woman
subjecting her to cruelty); and
 
(iv)
              Evidence of scientific experts in cases relating to fake currency notes.
 
WITNESS TURNING HOSTILE
 
4.1.0    The criminal justice system is evidence based. False and fabricated evidence in the court leads to poor rate
of conviction in criminal cases resulting in large scale acquittal. The Committee is made to understand that
conviction rate in criminal cases is as low as ten percent due to perjury. Perjury is committed by the witness on
his/her own volition or under     threat/ allurement/inducement of third party.      
 
4.1.1    A witness may give false statement at the initial stage of investigation or may make false statement at
subsequent hearing under threat/inducement.  Punishment exists for the witness who makes false statement,
under    Sections 193 to 196 IPC, but punishment for the person who threatens/induces the witness is not
provided in the IPC. Punishment to the witness making false statement is imprisonment of seven years or more
with/without fine
 
4.1.2    The Bill proposes to introduce imprisonment for a term up to seven years with fine or both for the person who
threats/induces the witness to make false evidence (proposed Section 195A).
 
 
(i)         Summary Trial for Perjury
 
4.2.0    The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that the existing general provisions under section 344 of Cr.PC
prescribing summary trial for perjury have been found to be grossly inadequate.  Thus, to check the witness turning
hostile either out of his own volition/consideration or inducement/threat, summary procedure for trial of such witness
has been provided and the maximum punishment for imprisonment has been extended from the existing three months to
not less than three months but which may extend to two years with fine, under proposed Section 344A.
 
4.2.1    The Malimath Committee has also recommended the provision.
 
4.3.0    To check the witness turning hostile, host of measures have been proposed through the amendments to the
Cr.PC.
           
(ii)        Forwarding of statement made to Police Officer to the  
          Magistrate
 
4.3.1    Under Section 161 (3) of Cr.PC a police officer can reduce into writing summary of  statement made to him/her
during the course of investigation which has no evidentiary value[1]
 in the court of law and which is also not required to
be signed by the witness. However, under Section 164, a person can make statement before the Magistrate for any
offence which has evidentiary value. Thus, the existing procedure leaves scope for the witness to change his/her
statement made to the police officer in the court of law.
 
4.3.2    As per the amendments proposed to Sections 161, 162 of Cr.PC and insertion of Section 164A  into the Code,
the following provisions would be put in place in the criminal justice system:-
 
(a)        Police Officer has to acknowledge  statement made to him/her by the witness and signed by the latter for
the offence for which punishment is less than seven years and quickly transmit the same  to the
Magistrate; and

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
 
(b)        recording of evidence of material witnesses by Magistrate for all offences punishable with death or
imprisonment for seven years or more during investigation.
 
4.3.3    It is pertinent to note that the signed statement made to police officer would not have evidential value in the
court of law which may help check perjury.  Therefore, punishment for perjury is intended to be enhanced under
proposed Section 344A of Cr.PC. Further, for cognizable offence punishable with seven years imprisonment, the
Magistrates are empowered to record statement of the material witnesses instead of police officer.
 
4.3.4    These amendments to the Cr.PC are suggested on the recommendations of the Law Commission as contained in
their               154
th and 178 th Reports. The Law Commission (under the Chairmanship of Justice K. Jayachandra
Reddy) had recommended in its 154 th Report[2] reference of all cases to the Magistrate which was further mellowed
down by the Commission (under the Chairmanship of Justice B.P Jeevan Reddy) in their subsequent Report
(178Report[3]) taking into account the physical and economic difficulties in appointing more Magistrates, by confining
the procedure to cases where punishment was more than ten years.  However, the Bill has proposed a mid course
between two recommendations by confining offences punishable to seven years.
 
PLEA BARGAINING
           
4.4.0    “Plea Bargaining” or “mutually satisfactory disposition” in criminal cases in its general sense refers to pre-trial
negotiations between the defendant (accused) through his/her Counsel and the prosecution (complainant), during which
the accused agrees to plead guilty in exchange for certain concessions by the prosecutor. Thus, plea-bargaining can be
described as an agreement by an accused to plead guilty in return for the promise of some benefit.
 
4.4.1    The concept is in vogue in several western countries for a long period and in the United States of America for a
century, where over ninety five percent [4]
 of criminal cases never go to trial because of the bargaining struck between
the prosecution and the accused’s attorney well before the trial commences.  So much so in American Criminal Justice,
plea-bargaining is the norm rather than an exception. This helps in getting rid of weak prosecution cases and lesser
number of trials, thus making available more time to the courts for other cases.
 
4.4.2    The Law Commission (under the Chairmanship of Justice M.P. Thakkar) in its 142 Report[5]
, considered the
concept of plea-bargaining to overcome the problem of mounting arrears of criminal cases[6]. It adduced following five
reasons as expressed by a large section of public opinion in support of this provision:-
(i)          Most people arrested, are guilty anyway;   why bother with a trial;
           
            (ii)        Why waste public money;
 
(iii)         “Plea bargaining” is a compromise; both sides give a  little and gain a little;
 
(iv)       Trials consume time and cost; and
 
(v)        It is best (for both sides) to avail it since on the one hand there is always a chance that even if the
accused is guilty and the evidence is adequate there is a chance of a slip up. On the other, the accused
saves time and money and earns a concession in the form of a less serious offence or sentence.
 
4.4.3    After considering the previous report, the Law Commission in its 154
th Report[7]  was of the strong view that
plea-bargaining can be made an essential component of administration of Criminal Justice.
 
4.4.4    The previous Committee of Home Affairs had also discussed the issue of plea-bargaining in its Eighty fifth
Report[8]
.
 

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
4.4.5    The Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice System [9]            (March 2003) had also recommended
introduction of plea-bargaining in India
 
4.4.6    It is pertinent to note that the proposed plea-bargaining is not a replica of the system prevalent in USA. Under
the scheme available in USA, the settlement is out of court whereas in India it is proposed to involve the court as
adjudicator between the accused and the prosecutor by providing time and opportunity to them to decide quantum of
concession mutually and fix a date for hearing thereafter. Further, the Court has to judge whether the application for
plea-bargaining has been made voluntarily or not. The distinction between compounding of offence and plea-bargaining
of offence is that conviction is exempted in the former situation and lesser conviction/punishment is awarded in the
latter situation.     
 
4.4.7    It would not be available for habitual offenders, serious socio-economic offences, offences against women and
children and other offences punishable with imprisonment of seven years or more.
 
 
COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCE IN SECTION 498A OF IPC
 
4.5       Section 498A is intended to protect the women from cruelty of husband or his relative.  It has been widely
reported that this provision has been misused and is also harsh as it is non-bailable and non-compoundable.  It is
desirable to provide a chance to the estranged spouse to come together and therefore it is proposed to make the offence
under Section 498A IPC, a compoundable one by inserting this Section in the Table under sub section (2) of Section 320
of Cr.PC, wherein it can be compounded with permission of the Court. The provision has been recommended by the
Law Commission in its 154
th Report[10] and Malimath Committee Report.[11]       
 
 
 
EVIDENCE OF SCIENTIFIC EXPERTS IN CASES RELATING TO FAKE CURRENCY NOTES.
 
4.6       Presently only officers of the Mint or India Security Press, Nasik can give opinion on fake currency notes. 
Evidence from other scientific experts suffers from legal infirmity as they are not included in Section 292 of Cr. PC. 
The provision in the Bill is based on the recommendations of Ministry of Finance.
 
HOME SECRETARY’S DEPOSITION BEFORE COMMITTEE
 
5.0       The Home Secretary in his deposition before the Committee inter alia mentioned that prosecution of cases fall
through because of false evidence given by the witness either out of fear or allurement.  The witness often turns hostile,
where the accused person is influential  or a member of criminal gang.  The proposed legislation has been brought in to
check the propensity amongst influential people/criminals/gangsters to influence the witness to change his statement. 
 
Views of Members of the Committee
 
5.1       A section of      Members in the Committee wanted to know from the Home Secretary the methods used to arrive
at the conclusion that the witness has been influenced.   In that context, they mentioned that the witness can be misused
against influential people to settle political/caste rivalry and pointed out that no safeguard has available in the Bill to
protect such misuse.  Those Members instead emphasized on the enactment of a separate law on protection of witnesses
and better facilities to the witnesses in the court of law.
 
5.2.0    Amendment of Section 162 and insertion of Section 164A in Cr.PC was opposed by a majority of Members due
to the following reasons: -
 
(i)
                 Such power may be misused by Investigating Officer (I.O.) by forcing the witness to sign the statement
without knowing fully the implication of it.  Furthermore, police officer may force the witness to sign on
blank paper which can be manipulated by the former later on;

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
 
(ii)        In some cases the material witness may be the accused and in that circumstance it would violate
provisions of Article 20 (3) of Constitution (self-incrimination);
 
(iii)             I.O. has discretion to decide who would be material witness in a criminal case, where punishment is
more than seven years.  The professional/fictitious witnesses available in police station can be turned as
material witness by the police, which may increase corruption;
 
(iv)             Since the power available with the police officers is already being misused, it was apprehended   that
enhancement of power of the police may lead to more misuse and resultant     corruption; and
 
 
(v)               Since the Magistrates are already overburdened and by making the recording of statement mandatory
will increase their burden.
 
5.2.1.   A Member supported the proposed amendment to Section 162 and desired that statement signed by the police
officer should be forwarded within twenty-four hours & forty eight hours in urban & rural areas, respectively, to the
Magistrate. 
 
5.3.0    On the issue of plea-bargaining, a section of Members felt that the provision was absolutely unnecessary as there
were other provisions (Section 320 coupled with Sections 357, 358 and 359) in Cr.PC under which compromise and
compensation could be made/given in   criminal cases. Furthermore, it would give enormous power to public
prosecutor, who is considered to be the agent of the state, which can be misused by him and may lead to corruption. 
 
5.3.1    It was pointed out that if the quantum of concession was mutually accepted by both the parties, and was not
acceptable to the Magistrate, trials would commence. In that situation, the extra judicial confession made before the
public prosecutor can be used against the accused which may prejudice the delivery of justice.
 
5.3.2    Some Members welcomed the concept as it appeared to be advantageous and could be experimented after
removing technical difficulties. 
 
5.4       Under proposed Section 498A, the offence against the relatives of husband may also be made compoundable.
 
5.5       As to the proposed amendment to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 for providing opportunities to the parties to
examine, re-examination and cross-examine the witness who turn hostile, some Members felt it would further delay the
disposal of the case.   Furthermore, the provision was unnecessary as provision for re-examination of witnesses/ hostile
witnesses by the prosecutor was available after cross-examination   by the Chief Examiner.
 
Views of Witnesses
 
6.0       Witnesses who deposed before the Committee have expressed the following major viewpoints/suggestions on
the issue of witness turning hostile:-
 
(i)         Offences under proposed Section 195A have been made cognizable as the Magistrate would cause filing
of complaint with police straightaway.  In that context, it was suggested that the complaint against
threat/inducement to the witness for giving false evidence can be lodged with police by the witness
himself or by any third party who has the knowledge of such act instead of the Magistrate lodging
complaint with the police. It was apprehended that the fate of the proposed Section 195A may be the
same as the case with Chapter 11                 (Sections191-229) of IPC, which was rarely used in the
administration of justice because of increasing overburden of Magistrate. Further, making 195A
cognizable may result in incongruity in   criminal law since giving false evidence under Sections 193 to
195 is a non cognizable offence; 

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
 
(ii)        Attempt to threat/inducement to make false statement may be included in the proposed Section 195A; 
 
(iii)       Punishment may be provided to the person who facilitates threat/inducement to the witness for changing
statement;
 
(iv)       The Bill does not take care of those persons who threaten/induce the witness ‘not to give evidence’.
Therefore, provision may be made in the clause to include such situation;
 
(v)        Punishment for making false statement in the Court of Law is equal for both the witness as well as the
offender. Therefore, the punishment for the person who threatens/induces the witness should also be
equal with the offender under proposed Section 195A;
 
(vi)       If an innocent person is convicted and executed in consequence of false evidence given by the witness,
the person who threatens or induces the witness to give such false evidence should be punished either
with death or with some stringent punishment;
 
(vii)      Provisions under proposed Section 195A are bodily lifted from Section 503 of IPC without the element
of mens rea which should be reflected in the proposed Section;   
 
(viii)      Sub clause (b) of clause 2 is redundant, as those provisions are covered by Sections 107 and 109 of IPC;
 
(ix)       Enactment of law regarding witness protection was needed under which the witness can approach the
authorities for his protection, which would help fulfil the objectives behind proposed Section 195A;
 
(x)        As to signing of statement by the witness before the police officer, it is very difficult to understand
which part of the statement is voluntary. Thus, it was suggested that the witness may not be required to
sign his statement before police as there would be enough scope for convicting him for perjury; 
 
(xi)       A person in police custody has the fear of arrest and element of coercion which may not allow him to
understand the implication of the statement made and signed by him. The accused can be one amongst
the material witnesses. In that case, the requirement of signature on the statement made to the police
officer may lead to self–incrimination of the accused which is unconstitutional {(Article 20(3)};
 
(xii)   While recording the statement of witness, the witness may be allowed to sign the statement in the presence
of his counsel;         
 
(xiii)     If the witness is not satisfied with the recording of statement by the sub-Inspector, he may be given a
chance to approach the Inspector/SHO for review of the same;
 
(xiv)     If the witness feels that the statement has been got signed under duress, he can approach the Magistrate
within specified time frame for instituting an inquiry;
 
(xv)      Recording of statement by the Police in the case of serious offences, sometimes also requires secrecy but
by taking everybody to the Magistrate, secrecy of investigation will be lost;
 
(xvi)     Recording of statement under Section 164 Cr.PC by  an independent body or agency  consisting of
retired Judges, high ranking police officials will have more probative value than recording of statements
of witnesses by Magistrate and it will certainly save the time of the Magistrate;
 
(xvii)     The Magistrate may be required to remind the witness about oath to speak truth which would act as a
deterrent to him which is not within the ambit of the Bill;
 
(xviii)   Maximum punishment under proposed Section 344A of Cr.PC has been prescribed as seven years; there

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
should be mention of some minimum punishment (three months);  
 
(xix)     Apart from obtaining the signature of the witnesses on the statement, signature of two independent
witnesses authenticating the recording of statement should also be taken, which would  add weight to the
value of the statement; and
 
(xx)      There is over emphasis on confessional statement and under emphasis on various aspects of
investigation. Systematic changes in police administration and investigation procedure are the need of the
hour since the entire foundation of criminal justice system is based on investigation.   It was suggested to
develop forensic evidence in a big way for improvement of investigation.
 
6.1       Following important viewpoints/suggestions on the provisions of “Plea bargaining” were expressed by the
witnesses.
 
(i)         Welcoming the measure, changes were suggested for out of court settlement, which would save the time
of the Court. It was suggested that the public prosecutor, who is considered to be the agent of the State,
may be empowered to deal with the counsel of the accused directly without the intervention of the
Court; 
 
(ii)        Considering the fact that most of the victims being illiterate may not understand the process of plea-
bargaining and may go for plea-bargaining under pressure for which suitable safeguards may be provided
in the Bill; and
 
(iii)       Plea bargaining may not be introduced without putting in place the independent Directorate of
Prosecution as a prerequisite, as recommended by the Supreme Court in Vineet Narian’s case.
 
6.2       On the issue of compounding the offence under Section 498A IPC, following are the major views of the
witnesses:-
 
(i)         Most of the cases instituted under Section 498A are done in conjunction with Section 405 of IPC. The
latter Section makes the offence compoundable upto Rs. 250/- and Section 498A is proposed to be
compoundable. Therefore, reconciliation between these two Sections was urged;
 
(ii)        Since offences against women are not covered under plea-bargaining, making Section 498A
compoundable may contradict the provisions of plea-bargaining. Therefore, compounding offence under
Section 498A was opposed; and
 
(iii)       Representatives of the National Commission for Women (NCW) headed by its Chairperson were of the
view that three Sections viz 304B, 376 and 498A are provided in IPC specifically for the women. 
Dilution of Section 498A would defeat the purpose behind its incorporation.  Thus, they vehemently
opposed the compoundability of Section 498A.
 
6.3.0    Since science of identification of handwriting is imperfect [12]
, the right of cross examination of Examiner of
Questioned Documents by the accused should not be taken away. Therefore, inclusion of Examiners of Questioned
Documents under Section 292 of Cr.PC was opposed by a witness.
 
6.3.1    In the memorandum received from office of the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents, Directorate of
Forensic Sciences, Government of India, Shimla, it was suggested that the Officers (Dy. Govt. Examiner and Asst. Govt.
Examiner) of Questioned Documents may be included alongwith Government Examiner under proposed Section 293 of
Cr.PC
 
6.4       Certain witnesses and some Members of the Committee termed the Bill as half-baked, wholly unsatisfactory and
unworkable. They were of the view that the proposed Bill touches upon only the fringe areas of criminal justice system.

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
They were also of the view that piecemeal reforms have been sought to be introduced in the criminal justice system in
the face of a large number of recommendations made by several Commissions and Committees, which have not been
implemented.
 
Responses of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
7.0       The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that the view expressed at   sl. No (xviii) mentioned in para 6.0 may be
left to the discretion of the Magistrate
 
7.1       On the issue of witness protection, Home Secretary informed the Committee that the Government is fully aware
of the problem and the Law Commission is examining the issue to prepare a witness protection programme. 
 
7.2       The Ministry has agreed to redraft the proposed Section 195A in the light of suggestion mentioned at Sl. No. (vi)
of para 6.0
 
7.3       It was agreed by the Ministry to bring consequential amendment to proposed Section 195A in the light of
suggestion enlisted at Sl. No. (i) of para 6.0
 
7.4       The Ministry agreed to the suggestion mentioned at Sl. No. (xiii) of  para 6.0
 
7.5       In response to suggestion mentioned at Sl. No. (xii) of para 6.0, the Ministry has stated that witness may not
have his counsel but giving witness in presence of an advocate or provision of  legal aid could be considered 
 
7.6       The response of the Ministry to the suggestions mentioned at para. 6.3.1 is that such  details would be taken care
of under subordinate legislation  
           
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
 
8.0       Under the existing provisions of the IPC punishment is provided for the person giving false evidence. The
proposed Section 195A is a step in the direction of giving punishment to the person who threatens/induces the witness to
give false statement. The Committee observes that trial could not proceed without making investigation into the aspect
of inducement when it comes to the knowledge of the Court.   Therefore, the Committee is of the unanimous view that
the investigation in such case should be completed within a time frame as to expedite the trial.
 
8.1       The Committee recommends that if an innocent person gets convicted because of false evidence tendered under
threat/inducement by anyone then the same punishment which is awarded to the convicted person should be awarded to
the person who gives false evidence as also to the person who threatens/induces to do it.
 
 8.2      Regarding amendment of Section 162 the Committee is of the view that the evidential value of the recorded
statement before police officer does not change even after getting it signed by the witness.  In some situations, it may
violate the Fundamental Right of a person enshrined under Article 20 (3) as some of the potential witnesses can be
accused also. The Committee apprehends that the provision can be misused by the police thereby increase corruption.
Hence, the Committee entirely opposes the provision as it is not a workable proposition. 
 
8.3       The Committee while keeping in mind the views of the witnesses on plea bargaining feel that as a pragmatic
approach to management of crime and streamlining of the criminal justice administration under a system burdened with
three crore pending cases, some dispensations which are fair, just and reasonable can be considered.  However,  it is of
the strong view that this provision of plea bargaining should be introduced only after putting in place the Directorate of  
Prosecution as envisaged in the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994  and endorsed by the Committee. 
It feels that there is no rationale for introducing plea bargaining in the absence of the institution of the independent
Directorate of Prosecution and empowering the courts to settle the cases through ‘plea bargaining’ in the present set up.
 
8.4       To the query of the Committee whether the compromise between husband and wife under proposed Section
498A, would make the punishment compoundable for the relatives of husband, the Home Secretary clarified that the

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
intention of the legislation is to compound the punishment for relatives including the husband. The Committee,
however, wanted express provision in the proposed Section and recommends necessary amendment in Section 320 Cr.
PC.
                       
8.5.0    It is pertinent here to mention that the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 having forty nine
clauses was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 9 May 1994 which was referred to the Standing Committee on Home
Affairs on 13May 1994.
 
8.5.1    The Bill was introduced with a view to introducing some reforms in criminal justice system. The focus of the
Bill was on the following major issues:-
 
(i)
                  prohibition of arrest of women after sunset and before sunrise;
(ii)                time bound post mortem examination in the case of death;
(iii)               making provisions of bail/anticipatory bail more stringent; and
(iv)              establishment of Directorate of Prosecution. 
 
8.5.2    The Committee in its Twenty Eighth Report presented to Parliament on 28 February1996, had suggested
amendments to seventeen clauses of the Bill. The Bill is still pending for consideration of the House.
 
8.5.3    It has come to the notice of the Committee that the recommendations of the Committee was considered by the
Cabinet. Thereafter, Legislative Department drafted a list of official amendments. It has further come to the knowledge
of the Committee that due to change of Government, fresh approval is being taken to implement the recommendations
of the Committee.  
 
8.5.4    To the query of the Committee whether it would be possible for the Government to bring in a composite Bill by
clubbing provisions of the 1994 Bill with the present Bill, the Home Secretary replied in the affirmative and stated that
such a Bill would be introduced during the Budget Session itself or in the Monsoon Session of Parliament this year.
 
9.0       The Committee then undertook clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in the presence of Home Secretary,
Secretary, Legislative Department and representatives of Department of Legal Affairs.
 
Clause 2
9.1.0    The clause seeks to insert new Section 195A after Section 195 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to provide
punishment for any person who threatens or induces witnesses to give false evidence in court.
 
9.1.1    The Committee recommends insertion of appropriate provision in the clause in the light of its recommendations
made in para 8.1.
 
9.1.2    The Committee is of the view that Section 195 A (b) falls clearly within the ambit and scope of Section 109 of
the Indian Penal Code and that abetment is a separate and distinct offence.   Therefore, there is no need for Section
195A (b) in the proposed amendment.
 
9.1.3    Mens rea is an essential element for constituting offences under Indian Penal Code, its absence from proposed
Section 195A may lead to some unintentional/bonafide acts being covered under it. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that mens rea should be appropriately incorporated in the said Section.
 
9.1.4    Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 
 
Clause 3
 
9.2.0    The clause seeks to insert provisos in sub-section (3) of Section 161 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which
states that any person who is required to be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate for recording his statement under sub-
section (1) of Section 164 A, his statement shall not be reduced in writing under sub-section (3) of Section 161.

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
 
9.2.1    The Committee recommends deletion of the clause in view of its recommendations for omission of clause 5.
 
Clause 4
 
9.3.0    The clause seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of Section 162 of Code of Criminal Procedure making the
signature of the person mandatory, if his statement is reduced into writing during the investigation by Police and the
statement as recorded shall be given to the person who made that statement, under acknowledgement.
 
9.3.1    The Committee recommends deletion of this clause in view of its observation narrated at para 8.2 of the Report.
 
Clause 5
 
9.4.0    The clause seeks to insert a new Section 164A after Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to
make it mandatory for recording evidence of material witnesses by Magistrate in an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for seven years.
 
9.4.1    The Committee recommends deletion of the clause in view of the view points narrated at para 5.2.0 of the
Report.
Clause 6
 
9.5.0    The clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to widen the
condition requisite for initiation of proceedings.
 
9.5.1    The clause is adopted without any change.
 
Clause 7
 
9.6.0    The clause seeks to introduce the concept of “Plea Bargaining” by inserting Chapter XXIA having Sections
265A-K, after chapter XXI of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
 
9.6.1    The Committee while endorsing the introduction of this provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure is of the
view that constitution of the Directorate of Prosecution is a sine qua non  for the introduction of  plea bargaining, which
is envisaged in the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994 which was endorsed by the then Committee.  The
Committee recommends that this concept could only be introduced in the criminal justice system once the Directorate of
Prosecution is put in place. 
 
9.6.2    Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 
Clause 8
 
9.7.0    The clause seeks to include more scientific experts to give evidence in cases relating to fake currency notes.
 
9.7.1    The Committee recommends that in sub-clause (a) & (b) the words “forensic documents” should be replaced
with the words “forensic department”.
 
9.7.2    The clause is adopted as amended.
 
Clause 9
 
9.8.0    This clause seeks to provide an opportunity for reconciliation between the husband and the wife by making
Section 498A IPC compoundable.
 
9.8.1    The Committee is of the view that express provisions may be made in Section 320 of Cr.PC to reflect the

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
availability of compounding of offence to the relatives of the husband.
 
9.8.2    Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 
Clause 10
9.9.0    This clause seeks to substitute clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 340 of Code of Criminal Procedure to
enhance the power of court to authorize an officer on its behalf to sign a complaint.
9.9.1    The clause is adopted without any change.
 
Clause 11
 
9.10.0  The clause seeks to bring consequential amendments to              Section 344 Cr. PC.
 
9.10.1  The Committee recommends deletion of the clause in view of its recommendation for omission of clause 12.
 
Clause 12
 
9.11.0  The clause seeks to provide enhanced and quick punishment for perjury.
 
9.11.1 Subject to the recommendations of the Committee made in   clause 5, the Committee recommends omission of
this clause.
 
Clause 13
9.12.0  The clause seeks to insert new Section 195A Indian Penal Code in the First Schedule of the Code of Criminal
Procedure for classification of offences.
 
9.12.1  Subject to its observations made in this regard on clause 2, the clause is adopted.
 
 
Clause 14
 
9.13.0  The clause seeks to provide opportunities to the parties to examine/re-examine/cross-examine the witness who
turns hostile.
 
9.13.1  The clause is adopted without any change.
 
Clause 1
 
10.0     Clause 1, enacting Formula and Title are adopted with some changes which are of consequential or drafting
nature, namely, “2003” and ‘Fifty-fourth” to be substituted by “2005” and “Fifty-sixth”, respectively.
 
11.0     The Committee has suggested amendments to the Bill in the light of the deliberations held thereon.  The
Committee urges the Government to give due consideration to the observations made and amendments proposed by it.
The Committee is very keen for revamping of criminal justice system and feels that Government should attempt to bring
forward a comprehensive Bill particularly in the light of reports of the various Commissions, Committees and studies on
criminal justice system.   The Committee is of the view that if that takes long time, then at least the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 and the present Bill may be merged and a composite Bill be introduced in the
Parliament rather than introducing piecemeal legislation separately.
 
11.1     Deliberations took place in the Committee on the urgent need for introducing ‘Police Reforms’ in the light of the
widespread allegations of corruption, inaction and politicization of the police force.  The Committee urges the
Government for immediate initiation of measures for reforming the police system in the country.
 
 

111threport of home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/111threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:30:07]
 
*****************
· To be appended at printing stage
 
[1]  Statement made before police is admissible in the Court of Law in United Kingdom. In India it is admissible in exceptional cases (POTA, TADA & Custom cases).
[2] On Code of Criminal Procedure (1996),  Chapter-9, p.124
[3] On Recommendations for Amending various Enactments both Civil and Criminal (2001) p.21 of Annexure { The Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions Amendment)
Bill, 2002}  
[4] Menon, Prof. (Dr.) N.R. Madhava, ‘Plea bargaining’, The Hindu (New Delhi), dated 24.01.204
[5] on Concessional Treatment for Offenders who on their own initiative choose to plead guilty without any bargaining (  1991).
[6] As on 1 August 2003, whopping pendency of 1,56,70,788 criminal cases at various Courts
[7] On the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 1996), Chapter -13, p.p. 155-66
[8] On Law’s delays: Arrears in Courts (2001) p. 2
[9] p.289
[10] p. 146
[11] p.291
[12] Murari Lal Vs State of M.P, AIR, 1980, SC, 531