ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2014)
Rescue, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction in the aftermath of
the floods and landslides in Jammu and Kashmir
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
182
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


51
C.S.(H.A.)-356
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
Rescue, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction in the aftermath of
the floods and landslides in Jammu and Kashmir
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  22 nd December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  22 nd December, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)— (ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—17
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ..... 18—24
6. M INUTES ......................................................................................................... 25—32
7. A NNEXURE
List of  Reports of  the Commiteee on Home Affairs ............................................   35—50

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st September, 2014)
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
♦6. V acant
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
8. Shri Baishnab Parida
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Shri Selvakumara Chinayan S.
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri Harish Meena
23. Shri Nagarajan P.
24. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
25. Shri Dilip Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
(i)
♦Vacancy arise due to appointment of Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi as MOS w.e.f. 9 November 2014.

SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Second Report on the Rescue, Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction plan in the aftermath of the floods and landslides in Jammu and Kashmir.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, in its
meeting held on 10th October, 2014, taking note of the unprecedented devastation caused by
rains and floods in Jammu and Kashmir, heard the presentation of the Home Secretary and
representatives of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir on the subject.
3. The Committee while finalizing its report, relied on the following papers/documents:-
(i) Background note furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(ii) Replies to the queries of Members raised during its sittings.
4. The Committee in its sitting held on 4 th December, 2014 considered and adopted the
present report.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
P. BHATTACHARYA
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
4th December,  2014 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Agrahayana  13, 1936 (saka)                                                 Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
A TM : Automated Teller Machine
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
BRO : Border Road Organisation
DM : Disaster Management
FCI : Food Corporation of India
I&FCD : Irrigation and Flood Control Department
IMCT : Inter-Ministerial Central Team
IAF : Indian Air Force
LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LIC : Life Insurance Corporation of India
MARCOS : Marine Commando Force
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NEC : National Executive Council
ORS : Oral Rehydration Sachets
PDS : Public Distribution System
PPE : Personal Protective Equipment
RO : Reverse Osmosis
SDRF : State Disaster Response Force

REPORT
CHAPTER - I
SITUATION IN J&K IN THE  AFTERMATH OF FLOODS AND LANDSLIDES
1.1 According to background note as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs, the State
Government of Jammu and Kashmir stated that due to continuous rainfall in the region during
the week ending 03.09.2014, severe damage to life and property was caused in several
locations in different parts of State. Of the 22 districts of Jammu and Kashmir, 10 districts
reported higher than normal rainfall during the week ending 03.09.2014. In the following week
from 04.09.2014 to 10.09.2014 also, with the exception of Poonch and Samba districts, all the
remaining districts reported higher than normal rainfall. The excess of rainfall was 2,953% in
Shopian district and 1,410% in Srinagar district. Because of the very high rainfall, breach of
embankments and landslides occurred in different locations devastating different districts both
in Jammu region as well as in Kashmir valley and in particular, the State summer capital,
Srinagar which bore the burnt of the nature’s fury. According to Ministry of Home Affairs the
primary responsibility of the disaster management rests with the States and the Central
Government supplements it by providing logistics and financial support.
1.2 Apprising the Committee about the extent of the damage, the Ministry of Home Affairs
submitted that the following damages have been reported as per preliminary information
received from the State Government of J & K:
Districts affected 10 Districts -
Kashmir Div:- Anantnag, Kulgaom, Pulwama, Srinagar,
Budgam.
Jammu Div: Jammu, Rajouri, Poonch, Udhampur, Reasi.
No. of villages affected 5642 (2469 Kashmir + 3173  Jammu)
No. of Human lives lost 287 (91 Kashmir + 196  Jammu)
No. of Houses damaged 2.54 lakh
Cropped areas affected 6.51 lakh hectares
1.3 In addition, the infrastructure including road communication, telecommunications,
power, health, fuel distribution networks and drinking water supply system were also affected.
1.4 The background note as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs further gave details
of rescue and relief measures taken in the wake of floods and landslides in the State. Search
and rescue operations included deployment of Indian Army, IAF, Navy, NDRF Personnel,
Central Forces. More than 2.90 lakh persons were rescued to safer places and 2.92 lakh people

2
were evacuated by all agencies to safer places. About 2.14 lakh people were rescued by the
armed forces alone. 50,815 persons were rescued by NDRF teams, while 27,420 persons were
rescued by CRPF. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that Army deployed 329
columns (approx. 30,000 troops) along with 224 boats. 30 transport aircraft and 53 helicopters
were deployed by the Indian Air Force. Army also deployed 17 helicopters. Three teams of
MARCOS of Indian Navy were also deployed. 15 engineers of Indian Army were deployed with
necessary engineer stores and equipments.22 teams of NDRF consisting of 955 personnel along
with the necessary equipment were deployed for assisting State Government in search and
rescue operations. During the period 6.9.14 to 25.9.2014, more than 3000 air sorties were
done by Indian Air Force/ Army.
1.5 Under the Relief Operations, essential commodities including food packets were air
dropped. Food packets, baby food, water and medicines were sent to the affected areas. Relief
camps were organised at different places. 1,67,300 blankets and 4226 tents were sent. 4500.25
tons material including 1492.4 tons food/ ready food Packets etc., 605 tons water 1,31,500
food packets were dropped up to by IAF 24.09.2014.Army established 6 relief camps in
Kashmir Valley and 13 camps in Jammu division. Indian Red Cross Society supplied 1664 tents.
In addition, they sent 750 tarpaulins and 1000 Kitchen sets. 17 dewatering pumps were
dispatched to Srinagar for use by the State Government. All depots in J & K had sufficient
stock of food-grains. FCI released foodgrains to the State Government as per its requirement,
without advance payment, on top priority basis. During the month of September 2014, State
Government of J & K lifted 43,873 tons rice and 997 tons wheat for distribution under PDS/
floods relief in Kashmir Division. State Government has sanctioned six months free ration to
the affected families.
1.6 As regards the supply of drinking water, State Govt. informed that around 80% of
water supplies has been restored in Srinagar city. About 90% water supply had been restored
in Jammu city (i.e.  40 MGD out of 45 MGD). 28 water purification plants having a total
capacity of purifying around 6 lakh litres per day had been airlifted and handed over to the
State Government.
1.7 The background note further stated that for medical assistance, oxygen cylinders were
sent by Army. Mobile oxygen generation plant was also sent by Army. 23 types of medicines
including ORS, IV fluid, paracetamol syrup, anti-pyretics, anti-diarrhoeal, antibiotics and
antispasmodic, etc. were sent. A total of 170 metric tonnes of medicines were supplied. In
addition, 35 lakh chlorine tablets, 13.25 lakh doses of measles vaccine, 7.5 lakh doses of Oral
Polio Vaccine, 30000 bottles of Vitamin-A, 3000 doses of anti- rabies vaccine, 500 vials of Anti
Snake Venom and 25 MT of bleaching powder and one lakh Sanitary Napkins were also sent
to the State of J&K. Total 51 Specialist doctors (22 Physicians, 13 Pediatricians, 10
Gynecologists & 6 Anesthetists) were deployed in different hospitals of Kashmir. 500 kgs of
Malathion (decomposer) were sent to the State from Bhatinda by road. 100 PPE have been
supplied. State Government informed that all district hospitals were functioning and health
services were restored.
1.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs also stated that Telecommunications connectivity has
been partially restored in the State. However, the telecommunications continue to be unsteady
in patches. Free access was arranged for stranded people to enable them to call their home

3
places. The Committee was further informed that power supply in the State has been restored
by and large. Power supply was restored in all Hospitals (Govt. and Pvt.), water supply
stations, and relief camps. All 17 damaged 33/11 kV Substations in Jammu have been restored.
Out of 36 damaged 33/11 kV substations in Kashmir, 34 substations have also been restored.
1.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that adequate fuel stock
(ATF/MS/HSD/SKO) was kept at Srinagar . However, additional motor spirit/ high speed diesel/
LPG were sent by road into the valley. Over 3.2 lakh LPG cylinders, 9943 KL MS and 21472
KL HSD have reached Srinagar, as on 04-10-2014 (at 0900 hrs). Over 3.5 lakh LPG cylinders,
6838 KL MS and 16580 KL HSD was also dispatched to Srinagar. Of the total 45 ROs in
Srinagar, 42 ROs are operational. According to the Ministry, State Government informed that
there was no shortage of petrol, diesel, LPG and Kerosene Oil in the Valley.
1.10 The Committee was also informed that in order to restore road Communications, BRO
deployed 1462 persons, 20-Dozers, 24 Excavator and 18 JCB in the State. Important roads had
been opened for traffic.
1.11 The background note also stated that of the total 745 bank branches in Kashmir Division,
708 branches were functioning. Out of the total 854 A TMs of Banks, 544 A TMs were
functioning. In Jammu and Ladakh Divisions of the State, all branches/ A TMs, except one,
were functioning.
1.12 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that after the visit of the affected areas in
the State, the Prime Minister announced an additional special assistance of `1000 crore to the
State for flood relief and rehabilitation. He also announced an ex-gratia amount of ` 2 lakh
each to the next of kin of the deceased and `50,000/ each to persons who were grievously
injured, from the Prime Minster Relief Fund. The State Government has `1105.6 crore available
in their SDRF for meeting the expenditure for rescue and relief works.

CHAPTER - II
PRESENTATION BY THE UNION HOME SECRETARY AND THE REPRESENTATIVES OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF J&K
2.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 10th October, 2014 heard the presentation of the
Union Home Secretary and the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on the situations
in J&K in the aftermath of flood and landslides. During the course of presentation, a brief
account of the devastation and its impact was reiterated as was given in the background note
which has already been explained in the Ist Chapter.
2.2 Apprising about the monitoring mechanism over the situation, the Committee was
informed that National Crisis Management Committee under the chairmanship of the Cabinet
Secretary reviewed the situation in the State from 06.09.2014 to 16.09.2014 on a daily basis.
The National Executive Committee under the Chairmanship of the Home Secretary reviewed the
rescue and relief efforts on 22.09.2014 and 01.10.2014. Joint Secretary (DM) of MHA
alongwith officers from other Ministries was stationed at Srinagar from 08.09.2014 to
13.09.2014 to coordinate relief and rescue activities . The Chairman of the NEC i.e. Home
Secretary camped in J&K from 11.09.2014 to 17.09.2014 to co-ordinate the efforts of all
Central Ministries and the State Government.
2.3 Reiterating about various relief operations the Committee was informed that has issued
instructions to the Life Insurance Companies to expeditiously settle the claims in the State of
J&K in the wake of floods. LIC and 4 other public sector companies nominated their nodal
officers for co-ordinating and expediting settlement of the claims. All public sector insurance
companies were directed to convene special camps to facilitate easy reporting and settlement
of claims.
2.4 The representatives of the Government of J&K stated that due to excessive rains, four
tributary rivers of Jhelum, namely Vaishav, Sandran, Lidder and Brengi, overflowed causing
increase in water level of river Jhelum. At various locations, the Jhelum was flowing very high
above the danger level. The Jammu Division also got affected due to overflow of various
rivers. In SuranPoonch the discharge of the river was 2 lac cusecs as against the normal of
50,000 cusecs while in Chenab river, the level was 50 feet as against the danger level of 27
feet. In Tawi the water level reached 33 feet against the danger level of 14 feet and in Ujj the
discharge was 1.4 lac cusecs as against 60,000 cusecs. In Basantar the level was six feet as
against the normal of 2 feet.
2.5 The Committee further took note of the areas which were affected due to flood and
landslides. The Districts of Anantnag, Pulwama, Shopian and Kulgam in Kashmir division and
the Districts of Poonch, Reasi and Rajouri in Jammu division got affected on 3rd and 4th of
September 2014. Other Districts of both the divisions got affected due to floods subsequently.
Srinagar city also was affected due to floods. Most of the residential colonies and commercial
areas of the Srinagar got submerged. The Committee was informed that during monsoons,
4

5
normally some of the areas of Jammu division experience flood like situation, however, during
September, 2014 the situation was worst and has not been witnessed since last few decades.
In Jammu most of the areas were affected due to flash floods and the effect remained for two
to three days. Whereas such flood situation in Kashmir, particularly in Srinagar, has not been
witnessed since more than 100 years i.e. 1902.The effect of floods in southern Kashmir
remained for more than a week whereas the Srinagar city was the worst affected. Large parts
of Srinagar city remained submerged for more than three weeks.
2.6 Apprising about the impact of devastation, the representative of Jammu and Kashmir
Government stated that there was severe impact of floods across the State particularly in
Srinagar city. All the important institutions like Civil Secretariat, High Court, Police Control
Room, Five major hospitals in Srinagar and other important offices remained submerged for
more than three weeks. Due to the effect of floods and submergence of major institutions,
the people had to suffer and the functioning of the administration was also adversely
affected. Entire communication network such as Telephone, TV station, Mobile Network, and
the internet etc got totally disrupted. Road/Rail connectivity, power and water supply was
severely affected. Health care was also affected due to submergence of the major hospitals
in the city.
2.7 The Committee was further informed of challenge before the State Administration
which inter-alia  was carrying out assessment of damages/losses and immediate disbursement of
relief, restoration of public infrastructure, removal of garbage and animal carcasses, restoration
of supply of essential commodities, documentation/preparation of a special financial package.
2.8 The representative of State Government of Jammu & Kashmir further apprised the
Committee about the assessment of loss/damages and disbursement of relief to the affected
people. It was stated that the damages to the public infrastructure and losses to the private
property were very large. As per preliminary assessment, the loss to the public infrastructure
has been assessed to the tune of Rs 7000 cr. approx. As per the norms, amount eligible for
temporary restoration of public infrastructure works out to the tune of Rs. 1747 cr approx.
The temporary restoration of public infrastructure is being fast tracked. Losses to the private
property were being assessed by the Insurance Companies. The amount of relief admissible for
loses on account of private property as per SDRF norms has been worked out to Rs.1200 cr
approx. The representative also stated that the assessment was carried out by the teams of
officers in each district. The disbursement of relief to private individuals as per existing SDRF
norms has already started.
2.9 Apprising about restoration of Public Infrastructure viz.  health, it was stated that
Control Room was set up and advisories were issued to the public for taking various
precautions.110 medical centers were affected due to floods. 107 have been already restored
in the rural areas. Remaining 3 will be operationalized soon. 5 major Hospitals in Srinagar
which were submerged, have started functioning again partially or fully. It was further stated
that more than 60 metric tons of medicines were provided either through camps or through
the hospitals and medical institutions. More than 9.00 lac children were vaccinated against
measles. More than 25 lac chlorine tablets were distributed.The district hospitals were further
augmented to cater to the need of the people. 12 rapid response teams were constituted for
reporting any suspected outbreaks. Due to poor connectivity, heli-dropping of medicines was

6
carried out in rural areas. Damaged equipments in major hospitals are being replaced. Regarding
drinking water schemes, it was stated that out of nearly 5000 water supply schemes, 3000
schemes suffered partial and major damages. Restoration work was taken up on war footing
basis and water supply has been restored in nearly 90% areas. Tanker service is also being
provided as an additional support. In order to provide pure drinking water 60 R.O. pumps have
been installed at various locations. Process of permanent restoration of various schemes has
been taken up.
2.10 As regards the road connectivity, it was stated that due to damage to roads and
bridges, the connectivity between various areas had got affected. Immediately after the water
level receded, steps were taken to restore the connectivity. Due to major damages at some
places, the temporary restoration was not possible as such diversions were provided. All areas
are presently connected. But due to some major damages at various locations, people have to
reach destination through longer routes.
2.11 Apprising about the Power supply, the Committee was intimated that in view of the
damage to 4207 substations and damage to more than 11000 kms of cables, the power supply
across the State had got disrupted. With the receding of water level the process of restoration
was initiated. In some areas the restoration work got delayed as transmission tower had
collapsed. 95% of the areas have been provided electricity and the remaining areas are being
provided electricity shortly. At most of the places, the above restoration has been done on
temporary basis and the process for permanent restoration has been initiated.
2.12 Regarding the irrigation and Flood Control, the representative of the State Government
stated that nearly 6483 works of I&FC department had suffered damages. The damages on one
side has affected irrigation facilities and on other hand flood protection bunds have severely
been damaged. Temporary steps have been taken for restoration of the damaged works,
however permanent restoration shall need huge resources.
2.13 About removal of garbage and carcasses, the Committee was informed that though the
floodwater level had receded in Srinagar but most of colonies remained water logged for more
than three weeks. 200 pumps were arranged and pressed into service. The process of
removing floodwater by pump has been completed. Removal of garbage from various flooded
areas was a big challenge. 31000 metric tons of garbage had been removed from various areas
of Srinagar city.1646 animal carcasses have been disposed off. All areas were provided with
disinfectants and chemicals and people were provided phenyl solution also for cleaning of their
residential houses.
2.14 Regarding Higher Education, the Committee was informed that infrastructure of 13 colleges
in Srinagar, Anantnag and Pulwama have suffered losses to the tune of Rs. 135.00 crore. Buildings,
labs and libraries have got damaged due to which the functioning of colleges has got affected.
Temporary arrangements have been made to make these colleges operational after safety audit.
2.15 The Committee was also informed that supply of essential commodities was monitored
by the State Government. The stocking of essential commodities to Leh , Kargil and accessible
areas in the State was being done. Free ration for the month of September stands distributed
to all the flood affected families. Supply position of petroleum products had been streamlined;
buffer stock for 20 days supply has been created.

7
2.16 The representative of State Government apprised the Committee about some of the
issues concerning need for a Special Financial Package which inter-alia  included the
following:-
(i) While the losses are much more, the entitlement of the State under SDRF is to
the tune of `2947.20 crore only.
(ii) The norms fixed for payment of ex-gratia relief to the private individuals are too
meagre and cannot help the affected families for rehabilitation.
(iii) The business/trading community in the State has suffered huge losses.
(iv) Under the SDRF norms, there is no provision to provide any assistance.
(v) Similarly as against the loss of `7000 crore of public infrastructure, the
entitlement under SDRF is only to the tune of `1700 crore for temporary
restoration.
(vi) State Government is not in a position to provide funds for permanent
restoration.
(vii) Therefore for the revival of the economy of the State, a special dispensation is
required.
(viii) In order to meet the above requirements and to ensure rehabilitation of the
affected families, revival of economy and permanent restoration of
infrastructure, huge resources are required.
(ix) The State Government shall need liberal financial assistance from Central
Government to meet the above requirements.
(x) In this regard a detailed memorandum in the shape of a special financial
package for rehabilitation of affected families and rebuilding of public
infrastructure is being submitted to Central Government shortly for providing of
special financial assistance.
2.17 The Committee wanted to know whether the State Government and the people of
Jammu & Kashmir ware satisfied with the rescue and relief operation work in the aftermath
of flood and landslides. Responding to the Committee’s query the Principal Secretary,
Government of Jammu and Kashmir stated as under:-
“In the present circumstances, this is something which was not expected, something
which happened after more than one hundred years. But the turn-around has been very
fast. We received excellent cooperation from the Government of India. Probably what
happened, .....was that with the snapping of the telecommunication line, anybody who
was marooned in his mohalla, he thought probably he was the only one who had been
in that kind of a situation and why everybody else was not coming to his rescue, while
the situation was that the entire capital city was under water. So, they took some time
to reach him. That is one initial anger which was there. Other than that, .....the State
Government is okay with the pace of rescue.”

8
2.18 The Committee sought to know whether the meteorological department had not
forewarned the State Government that the intensity of rain could be higher than the normal and
whether any kind of preemptive measures were taken by the State Government in respect of
evacuation or other issues. Replying to the query, the Principal Secretary, Government of J&K
stated that the State Government did receive the forecast that normal rain would be more than
heavy but it continued for almost six days.
2.19 The Committee is concerned to observe that the State Government of Jammu and
Kashmir received forewarning that State would receive heavier rainfall than the normal
rain but the kind of preemptive measures taken by State Government were not
sufficient to withstand the fury of the nature and the result was heavy casualties in
terms of human loss and properties including public infrastructure in the State. The
Committee notes that in the previous year when Phailin struck Odisha, the State
Government of Odisha had done a commendable job in terms of evacuation and other
facilities that were provided but comparatively, Jammu and Kashmir had more death
toll.
2.20 The Committee further sought to know as to why Jammu region received a huge death
toll in comparison to Srinagar. Answering the specific question of the Committee, the
representative of the State Government submitted before the Committee as under:-
“We did receive a kind of rain forecast, but we did not really anticipate that it will
be of that heavy nature. But, boats were mobilized,.... In Kashmir, people were
normally not evacuated. If we look at the areas which were submerged and which
remained submerged, water had never entered these areas, Sir. The colonies, which we
were speaking of, like Badami Bagh Cantt., where the Army Corps Headquarter is
located, Rajbagh, Mahjong Nagar and other colonies are located, these are basically
flood plains which were meant to serve as flood plains. But what has happened is over
the last one hundred years, they have come to be heavily populated. On the night of
6th, advance warnings were mounted from the mosques and all over the people with
loud speakers did go around, but people living in those areas probably did not believe
that it will come to that kind of a situation where it will be water of ten feet or fifteen
feet, depending upon the depression........as river Jhelum flows through Srinagar, the
way it was designed is that it was designed to spill over to one side, north side, as
the river flows. So, the embankments of the river were also put in such a way that right
embankment was always higher than the left. But since these houses and colonies had
covered the flood plain, they thought that probably this is not going to come and this
is what happened. But with the announcement, people did come out of the houses. If
you look at the death toll, in the entire Kashmir Valley, it is 91, of which in the
Srinagar city, which remained submerged, it is around 50 because people had moved out
of their houses. People who didn’t heed to the warnings and wanted to remain in their
houses, were the ones who had to be evacuated later .”
2.21 While the Committee would like to convey its gratitude to the many personnel
and the agencies of Central Government particularly, the Ministry of Defence who had
done a splendid work even at the risk of their own lives in this J&K flood. Over the
last fifteen years, the country has seen quantitative and qualititative development in

9
national capabilities in the matter of dealing with natural calamities viz ., handling
Phailin, wherein the death toll was limited. In the past, in a similar calamity in 1999
in Odisha, the country had lost almost 11,000 lives but in these last 15 years, in various
parts of the country, both at the national level and at the State level, the capabilities
have improved a lot which include early warning systems and efficient systems and
procedures of early mobilisation. The Committee is quite confident that the Disaster
Management apparatus could have done a much better job in the recent calamities in
J&K had there been an early warning followed by resilient set-up of systems and
procedures and smooth coordination and communication in place in the State of J&K
enabling the NDRF and the State Rapid Action Force to perform their entrusted task in
time. The Committee feels that it is not just about early warning systems, evacuation
system is also of paramount importance because, even if the state has an early warning,
evacuating people becomes very difficult in the absence of effective and efficient
evacuation system. In view of the heavy toll of human lives coupled with number of
missing persons, the Committee believes that there have been some lapses in this
regard on the part of the State Government. The Committee in this regard notes with
appreciation that except some hiccups initially, the delivery system after the devastation
was put in motion. The Committee here would like to caution that the duty of the
Government does not end here, as there is huge task of rehabilitation and
reconstruction before it.
2.22 The Committee would like the Government to ensure that the relief has reached
the needy on the ground level and the rehabilitation work has taken off. Since J&K is
a strategic and a sensitive State therefore, it needs to be rebuilt without any
procrastination. The Committee would like to be apprised of the planning and the
concrete steps to rebuild the State. The Committee is of the considered view that the
central Government should not shrug off its responsibility in re-building the state by
taking the plea that activities concerning the long term rehabilitation programme fall
within the jurisdiction of the State Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Central Government should extend all support to the State Government at the
time of unprecedented crisis. In the effort for rebuilding that State, Central
Government should extend the requisite financial assistance to the State Government
and in fact both the Governments should work intandem in rebuilding the State. The
Committee therefore recommends that rehabilitation of affected people and
reconstruction of the infrastructure along with revival of economy in the State should
be taken up on utmost priority.
2.23 The Committee takes note of the submissions made by the representative of State
Government that while the losses are much more, the entitlement of the State under SDRF is
to the tune of `2947.20 crore only. The norms fixed for payment of ex-gratia  relief to the
private individuals are too meagre and cannot help the affected families for rehabilitation and
the business/trading community in the State has suffered huge losses. The Committee also
takes note of the fact that under the SDRF norms, there is no provision to provide any
assistance.
2.24 The Committee feels that the compensation amount given to victims is very low
because the guidelines regarding compensation amount, etc. were framed in 2001. The

10
Committee observes that the unprecedented flood situation in Jammu & Kashmir led to
collapse of the entire economy of J&K and immediate steps are required to help the
people who have lost their businesses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should undertake assessment of loss of assets and prepare comprehensive
rehabilitation and reconstruction plan. Concerted efforts must be taken to do early
rehabilitation and put the economy on the right path to get back the confidence of the
people of J&K.
2.25 The Committee would like to point out discrepancies between the reported
feedback and the relief mechanism engaged in distribution of relief packages by the
Government agencies. The Committee has been given to understand that the food
packages were being distributed to the people of J&K on the basis of the 2001 census.
It is worthwhile to mention here that since 2001, the population has increased at a
considerable rate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
take into account the concern of the people and 2011 census be made as the basis for
executing the long term rehabilitation plan.
2.26 The Committee also desires to highlight the apprehension of affected people of
the Jammu & Kashmir regarding compensation against damages to buildings during the
flood. The Committee were given to understand that compensation was being given to
people whose buildings was completely damaged, whether it was concrete house or mud
house. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that there were a number of
buildings which were severely damaged and either started shattering or are on the verge
of collapse and the owners of such buildings apprehend that they would not get
compensation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should take
into account the concern of people whose buildings are in dilapidated conditions caused
due to floods.
2.27 The Committee observes that the presentation of the Ministry of Home Affairs
and State Government contained the assessment of land loss but none of the
Governments took into account the loss of cattles. The Committee understands that the
main source of the means of livelihood of the people of J&K is cattle, therefore, the
State Government should take into account loss of cattles during the flood. The
Committee recommends that the rehabilitation policy and plan must also take into
account compensation for loss of cattles so that the economy of affected people must
return to support their livelihood.
2.28 The Committee also takes into account the loss of land and the standing crops
which were totally washed away, which the Government would take into account but
siltation due to accumulation of mud, sand and stones on the land made the land
uncultivable. The Committee feels that such land may not be cultivable for a long time
unless the Government takes timely intervention for making such land cultivable. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should prepare Action Plan in
this regard too in order to enable the farmers to sow the crops without losing the
cropping cycle.
2.29 The Committee notes that even when the State of J&K had an early warning, the
State had not enough satellite phones available which resulted into break down of

11
communication system and there was no way to contact the officials at district level.
Secondly, even with an early warning, the personnel available with the State
Government were not trained, making them incapable to mobilize resources sufficiently
in advance.
2.30 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that in order to combat the natural
calamities/furies, the Central Government needs comprehensive National planning with
resilient system for better disaster management throughout the country, irrespective of
the frequency of disasters in a particular area/ region. For combating the possible
onslaught of natural fury, there is urgent need for better coordination between national
and State agencies. The Committee, therefore, feels that at the national level, the
country should have a much better pre-emptive action from the Central authorities,
particularly for the States which are not used to this kind of disaster frequently. The
Central Government should apprise the State Governments some kind of advanced
planning and mechanism that the State Governments must put in place invariably
without any failure. The Committee believes that the State Government must realize
the consequences of nature fury and should not be complacent at any time and must
have comprehensive planning for enhancing capabilities at the time of natural
calamities.
2.31 The Committee feels that States like J&K are not well prepared to combat
natural disasters and such States should not be caught on sleeping mode at the time of
disaster. The Committee, therefore, desires that training and updating of State
Government machinery should be on continuous basis and it should always be on alert
mode.
2.32 W ith regard to declaring the flood and the landslides in Jammu and Kashmir a national
calamity, the Committee notes the views expressed by the Home Secretary who deposed before
it as below:-
“As of now, ...., the quantum of relief that has been sent to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir and the amount of assistance that the Central Government is willing to further
give the State of Jammu and Kashmir to get back on its feet and start resuming
normalcy there, is enormous. Earlier if you r emember, ...., last time also the same
question was asked at the time of Uttarakhand as to why was this not declared a
national calamity. .....under the norms that we have under disaster, there is no
terminology called ‘national calamity’. So the whole purpose is: Is the State
Government equipped to handle it and if it is not, will the Centre step in to give it
the maximum possible support? That is the whole purpose of a disaster and how we are
going to tackle it. The Prime Minster has already announced that `1000 crores that I
am announcing today is the first installment.’ Anything else that is required for Jammu
and Kashmir will be available and that money is available. So the effort from the
Government of India side will not be lacking. There is an absolute determination on
the part of the Central Government that the State of Jammu and Kashmir must be
assisted to the maximum possible extent. The only difficulty is, we are still waiting for
the State Government to send us proposals that they have.”

12
2.33 While appreciating the feelings of the Home Secretary, the Committee feels
that resource reach was not there in the interior valley, particularly in those villages
which are known to have extremism problem. It was pointed out to the Committee
that apart from all the issues of preventive planning, the reach of relief to the people
and other things was grossly inadequate despite the claim of both the Central
Government and the State Government that there was no dearth of resources. It was
also pointed out that there was increased feeling among the affected people that relief
was not reaching to them inspite of generous help from all quarters. The Committee
in this background is of the opinion that both the Central Government and the State
Government should understand the complexities involved in the matter as the problem
is not merely a question of providing relief to the people who are victims of natural
disaster but of winning hearts with relief service in their distress. The Committee
feels that if there is any truth in the allegation that relief is not reaching the affected
people in J&K, the Government should ensure that all the loopholes should be
plugged.
2.34 Responding to the queries of the Committee, regarding the issue of whether funding
availability, and the fund hat has been provided to the State Government, the Home Secretary
stated as under:-
“the first part is, the State disaster response fund has ` 1,100 crores in it. The
Prime Minister on his visit had announced in the State that as a first installment
another Rs. 1000 crores would be made available and the State Government was
asked to prepare the necessary proposals so that this money could be released. The
Finance Ministry released more than ` 800 crores of cash so that the State should
not feel the difficulty of liquidity during this difficulty. We are still waiting for
the State Government to send us the details of the damage that have occurred and
the relief and rehabilitation measures that should be put in position. We have been
in constant touch with the State Government. I was camping in Srinagar for more
than seven days. My Joint Secretaries were there. Other officers were there. We
were virtually working all along with the State Government in Srinagar. As things
stand now, I am still waiting for the proposal which will indicate to us what is
the quantum of assistance required by the State Government. It is only once we
get that that we will be able to answer the questions you have raised, whether
there is enough money available, whether we are going to do it in a two months’
time frame, four months’ time frame, six months’ time frame, what is going to be
done and how. So, our first request which has been going on constantly with the
State Government is that please send us the proposal as quickly as you can. I am
given to understand that their proposal is ready. Probably it is awaiting the
clearance of the Cabinet and thereafter they will send it to us. So, we have again
requested the State Government to expedite the process because winter is
approaching fast and the working season in the Valley primarily is going to be
difficult. Once the temperature goes below a particular level it becomes very
difficult to carry on work there. So, we will again ask the State Government to
expedite the dispatch of that.”

13
2.35 Elaborating further the Principal Secretary of the State Government supplemented
as under:-
“ as pointed out by the Home Secretary an amount of ` 1,100 crores is available under
the SDRF . Whatever relief is admissible as per the SDRF Norms is being released. An
amount of ` 629 crores has been released in favour of Divisional Commissioner. It is
in the process of being disbursed. Anything over and above will become a part of
Memorandum which, hopefully, approved in the afternoon.”
2.36 The Ministry in its subsequent written information has given following details of the
financial assistance extended to the State till date:
(i) “In pursuance of the Prime Minister’ s announcement, ` 1000 cr. has been
released as Special Project Assistance to the State. In addition, ` 94.33 crore,
as central share of State Disaster Response Fund, has also been released in
advance.
(ii) Fur ther, the Prime Minister has announced, an immediate relief of `570 crore
for rebuilding of damaged houses, `175 crore for upgrading the affected
hospitals and ` 20 crore for replacement of lost books to all 10 lakh children
in primary and upper secondary schools from the Prime Minister National
Relief Fund over and above the assistance from the National Disaster Relief
Fund. An ex-gratia amount of ` 2 lakh each to the next of kin of the deceased
and `50,000/ each to grievously injured persons was also announced from the
Prime Minister National Relief Fund.
(iii) W e have so far, received the bank account details of 9,270 beneficiaries, who
have suffered complete damage to their houses. We are awaiting the details of
the other beneficiaries from the State Government. Assistance to the identified
beneficiaries will be released shortly. Besides, procurement orders for medical
equipment worth `142 crore are being placed. The State Government is in the
final stage of assessing district and class wise requirement of text books.
(iv) The State has requested for providing `1926.11 crore from the National Disaster
Response Fund (NDRF) and a special package of `41033.45 crore for items,
which were not covered under the norms of NDRF . An Inter Ministerial Central
Team (IMCT) has visited the State for assessment of damages as per NDRF
norms. The IMCT has sought some additional information from the State
Government in order to finalize its report. The report of IMCT will be
considered by the Government as per laid down procedure immediately after it
is submitted.
Nature of Relief provided:
“The financial assistance from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and
National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) is provided for immediate relief and
not for compensation of losses suffered. The objective of relief fund is to assist

14
the affected persons to restart their economic activities. Revision of norms of
SDRF/NDRF is a continuous process and is done in consultation with the
Ministry of Finance.”
2.37 The Committee takes into account the funds provided to the State Government
of J&K by the Central Government. The Committee feels that funds so released by the
Central Government must be utilized for the purpose and its utilization must be under
close supervision and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should constitute Joint Team consisting of the representative of State
Government and the Central Government for better administration and implementation
of programmes with fair deal of justice and equitable distribution.
2.38 The Committee desires to highlight that so far as Srinagar is concerned, it was
patently obvious that flood pathways that have been in existence since Moghul times
have all been heavily populated. The Committee notes the submission of the
representative of the State Government that the colonies like Badami Bagh Cantt.,
where the Army Corps Headquarter is located, Rajbagh, Mahjong Nagar are basically
flood plains which were meant to serve as flood plains. The Committee was given to
understand that there was rampant encroachment on river banks and natural drains, for
instances, in Poonch near Sher-e-Kashmir bridge there was reportedly a colony of 250
buildings and in another area there was brick kiln which were washed away by the floods.
It has also been alleged that the real estate in Jammu and Kashmir, especially, the
Srinagar Valley, has been rampantly violating the established  norms and modalities.
Needless to say it is well established fact that fiddling with natural courses of rivers and
drains by constructing buildings, etc, whether legal or illegal, will, not only, have adverse
impact on the ecology and environment but will also invite natural disasters. Knowing fully
well that these are the traditional pathways for the outflow of water, the Committee
wonders as to how the State Government and the administration permitted
constructions in such areas. The Committee observes that on both the banks of
Jhelum River where the disaster has taken place and in the major areas of Srinagar
city, there was water for three weeks. The Committee believes that the accumulated
water was not just allowed to flow through its normal and natural route, as the same
was blocked. The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure as to why the
local authorities allowed such encroachments on a large scale which led to such
disaster. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that the Government
should bring into force building bye laws keeping in view the topology of the State so
that encroachments on river banks are avoided.
2.39 Another aspect which drew the attention of the Committee relates to the role of
deforestation in inviting floods. It was given to understand that a lot of deforestation
has taken place in Jammu and Kashmir, and the successive Governments have not
addressed this. The Committee, therefore, recommends that as a long-term measure,
the Government must ensure that deforestation does not take place. The Committee
feels that State Government should also consider whether the natural disaster had been
preceded by any ecological disaster because we have experienced the most gruesome
situation in Uttarakhand very recently.

15
2.40 Responding to the Committee’s query relating to carrying capacity of rivers, the
Principal Secretary of J&K stated before the Committee as under:-
“ the total carrying capacity of River Jhelum is around 35,000 cusecs and another spill
channel which has been constructed some time back to take care of the overflowing
waters in case such a situation is around, is another 20,000 cusecs. Taken together,
Jhelum and spill channel can take care of only around 55,000 to 60,000 cusecs. That
is the best optimum capacity. ...., ... With that in background, since the year 2010, Sir,
the State Government has been in correspondence with the Government of India for
deepening and dredging River Jhelum and creating another spill channel so as to
exactly take care of this kind of situation. …….. We will try and pursue with the
Government of India. This project which we have submitted is worth around `2,200
crores.”
2.41 The Committee notes that it has become normal to ignore dredging aspect of the
water bodies be it sea or rivers and the projects for deepening and dredging hang fire
for long, gathering dust in the shelfs. The Committee takes serious note of this and
desires that dredging proposals of the rivers submitted by State Governments
particularly flood prone States should be cleared at the earliest so that the work on this
is finished before next monsoon. The Committee also desires that the State
Governments should be asked to adhere to the time limit.
2.42 The Committee was given to understand that Central Government grants `60
crores to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir to clean drains and rivers by removing
silt and sand but the related work had reportedly not been carried out. The Committee,
therefore, desires that Central Government should regularly monitor the works under
the sanctioned money.
2.43 Ministry of Home Affairs in its subsequent written reply about Study on floods in
Jammu and Kashmir, mentioned that the Ministry of Water Resources has constituted a three
member Group comprising of Chairman, Central Water Commission, Commissioner (Indus) and
Director, National Institute of Hydrology Roorkee on 18.09.2014 to conduct an in depth study
and analysis of the recent unprecedented floods in Jammu and Kashmir, so as to make suitable
recommendation along with a detailed action plan to deal with such threat in future.
Representative from the State Government of J&K and India Meteorological Department were
co-opted in the Group. The Group has finalized their report.
2.44 The Ministry further informed that the Group in its conclusions has pointed out that
the exceptionally heavy rainfall during 4th-6th September was the main cause of heavy flooding
in Jhelum, Chenab and Tawibasisn of J&K. During the 4th-6th September 2014, a lot of run
off was contributed from the higher catchment to the Srinagar valley. Due to lack of steep
slopes, the runoff caused severe drainage congestion and inundation in Srinagar and adjoining
areas. Earlier low lying areas along the course of River Jhelum were functioning as natural
flood detention basin during floods and were absorbing flood water spilling over the banks of
river Jhelum. Subsequently, the same flood water used to get released slowly. However, during
the last 3-4 decades, maximum urbanization has taken place in these low lying areas due to

16
which there is no space for water to get stored during flood season. The situation in Jhelum
basin has got further aggravated due to siltation and encroachments/development of various
waterways like river, lakes, marshy land etc resulting in limited carrying capacity of Jhelum
and water bodies.
2.45 The recommendations include non structural measures like flood forecasting and
disaster management as well as structural measures as channel improvement and construction
of additional supplementary flood spill channel.
2.46 The Committee notes that siltation and encroachments have been identified as
one of the causes of flood in the State. The Committee also notes that the Group has
also recommended measures viz.  non structural measures like flood forecasting and
disaster management as well as structural measures as channel improvement and
construction of additional supplementary flood spill channel. The Committee desires that
lessons should be learnt from this disaster to avoid recurrence. The Committee hopes
that the Government would examine the recommendations of the study group and would
come forward with resilient disaster management mechanism. The structural measures
as recommended should also be addressed without any delay.
2.47 The Committee would further like to stress that the Government must examine
the situation arising in the Jammu region of the State where there have been severe
landslides and it is reported that villages have been washed away. The Committee feels
that in addition to excess rainfall, such immense landslide may have been triggered by
some other factors. The Committee, therefore, desires the Government to examine
other factors, particularly, seismic factors that could be involved in the unfortunate
incident. The Committee recommends that the Government should set up an expert
group of scientists and geologists for detailed study about the factors/reasons which
could contribute in major landslides with the instruction to submit the report within
stipulated timeframe.
2.48 The Committee understands that the economy in Kashmir is mainly based on
tourism and the rains and floods have destroyed the entire tourism industry there. The
Committee wishes to point out that the paradise on earth has collapsed due to the flood
and the Government has to rebuild the paradise in order to attract tourists not only
from the country but also from abroad. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that a special Action Plan or a project should be prepared both by the State Government
and the Central Government, covering all the aspects of tourism while rebuilding the
State.
2.49 The Committee is not quite satisfied with the preparedness of rescue and relief
machinery and disaster Management set up in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The
Committee is of the opinion that there is no use of referring to the provisions of
National Disaster Management Act 2005 and to reiterate that Disaster Management
Activities fall within the jurisdiction of the State Government and Central Government
only provides logistic support to the State Government. Therefore, the moot issue is the
actual implementation of the provision of the Act. The Committee therefore,

17
recommends that necessary steps may be taken to strengthen the National Disaster
Management mechanism. The Committee has already given its One Hundred and
Seventy Eighth Report on Disaster Management in the Country. The Committee is of
the considered view that actual implementation of the recommendations contained in
that report would definitely lead to better functioning of disaster management
machinery at the national and State level.
2.50 The Committee feels that there should be a comprehensive plan with sufficient
funds to rebuild the State, rebuild its economy, its infrastructure. The Committee
understands that rebuilding the economy of J&K is a great challenge for both the State
and the Central Governments and both the Governments should give sufficient attention
to the programme of rebuilding the economy of the State within a set time frame.

OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE- AT A GLANCE
Insufficient Preemptive Measures
The Committee is concerned to observe that the State Government of Jammu
and Kashmir received forewarning that State would receive heavier rainfall than the
normal rain but the kind of preemptive measures taken by State Government were
not sufficient to withstand the fury of the nature and the result was heavy casualties
in terms of human loss and properties including public infrastructure in the State.
The Committee notes that in the previous year when Phailin struck Odisha, the
State Government of Odisha had done a commendable job in terms of evacuation and
other facilities that were provided but comparatively, Jammu and Kashmir had more
death toll. (para 2.19)
Requirement of Better Disaster Manangment Appratus in the State
While the Committee would like to convey its gratitude to the many personnel
and the agencies of Central Government particularly, the Ministry of Defence who had
done a splendid work even at the risk of their own lives in this J&K flood. Over the
last fifteen years, the country has seen quantitative and qualititative development in
national capabilities in the matter of dealing with natural calamities viz ., handling
Phailin, wherein the death toll was limited. In the past, in a similar calamity in 1999
in Odisha, the country had lost almost 11,000 lives but in these last 15 years, in various
parts of the country, both at the national level and at the State level, the capabilities
have improved a lot which include early warning systems and efficient systems and
procedures of early mobilisation. The Committee is quite confident that the Disaster
Management apparatus could have done a much better job in the recent calamities in
J&K had there been an early warning followed by resilient set-up of systems and
procedures and smooth co-ordination and communication in place in the State of J&K
enabling the NDRF and the State Rapid Action Force to perform their entrusted task in
time. The Committee feels that it is not just about early warning systems, evacuation
system is also of paramount importance because, even if the state has an early warning,
evacuating people becomes very difficult in the absence of effective and efficient
evacuation system. In view of the heavy toll of human lives coupled with number of
missing persons, the Committee believes that there have been some lapses in this
regard on the part of the State Government. The Committee in this regard notes with
appreciation that except some hiccups initially, the delivery system after the devastation
was put in motion. The Committee here would like to caution that the duty of the
Government does not end here, as there is huge task of rehabilitation and
reconstruction before it. (para 2.21)
18

19
Central Assistance In Rehabilitation And Reconstruction Programme
The Committee would like the Government to ensure that the relief has reached
the needy on the ground level and the rehabilitation work has taken off. Since J&K is
a strategic and a sensitive State therefore, it needs to be rebuilt without any
procrastination. The Committee would like to be apprised of the planning and the
concrete steps to rebuild the State. The Committee is of the considered view that the
central Government should not shrug off its responsibility in re-building the state by
taking the plea that activities concerning the long term rehabilitation programme fall
within the jurisdiction of the State Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Central Government should extend all support to the State Government at the
time of unprecedented crisis. In the effort for rebuilding that State, Central
Government should extend the requisite financial assistance to the State Government
and in fact both the Governments should work intandem in rebuilding the State. The
Committee therefore recommends that rehabilitation of affected people and
reconstruction of the infrastructure along with revival of economy in the State should
be taken up on utmost priority. (para 2.22)
Proper Assessment Of Loss Of Assets And Adequate Compensation
The Committee feels that the compensation amount given to victims is very low
because the guidelines regarding compensation amount, etc. were framed in 2001. The
Committee observes that the unprecedented flood situation in Jammu & Kashmir led to
collapse of the entire economy of J&K and immediate steps are required to help the
people who have lost their businesses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should undertake assessment of loss of assets and prepare comprehensive
rehabilitation and reconstruction plan. Concerted efforts must be taken to do early
rehabilitation and put the economy on the right path to get back the confidence of the
people of J&K. (para 2.24)
Census 2011 As Basis For Executing The Long Term Rehabilitation Plan
The Committee would like to point out discrepancies between the reported
feedback and the relief mechanism engaged in distribution of relief packages by the
Government agencies. The Committee has been given to understand that the food
packages were being distributed to the people of J&K on the basis of the 2001 census.
It is worthwhile to mention here that since 2001, the population has increased at a
considerable rate. The concern of the people and 2011 Census be made as the basis for
executing the long term rehabilitation plan. (para 2.25)
Compensation For Dilapidated Conditions Of Buildings
The Committee also desires to highlight the apprehension of affected people of
the Jammu & Kashmir regarding compensation against damages to buildings during the
flood. The Committee was given to understand that compensation was being given to
people whose buildings were completely damaged, whether it was concrete house or mud
house. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that there were a number of

20
buildings which were severely damaged and either started shattering or are on the verge
of collapse and the owners of such buildings apprehend that they would not get
compensation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should take
into account the concern of people whose buildings are in dilapidated conditions caused
due to floods. (para 2.26)
Compensation For Loss Of Cattles
The Committee observes that the presentation of the Ministry of Home Affairs
and State Government contained the assessment of land loss but none of the
Governments took into account the loss of cattles. The Committee understands that the
main source of the means of livelihood of the people of J&K is cattle, therefore, the
State Government should take into account loss of cattles during the flood. The
Committee recommends that the rehabilitation policy and plan must also take into
account compensation for loss of cattles so that the economy of affected people must
return to support their livelihood. (para 2.27)
Action Plan For Uncultivable Land
The Committee also takes into account the loss of land and the standing crops
which were totally washed away, which the Government would take into account but
siltation due to accumulation of mud, sand and stones on the land made the land
uncultivable. The Committee feels that such land may not be cultivable for a long time
unless the Government takes timely intervention for making such land cultivable. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should prepare Action Plan in
this regard too in order to enable the farmers to sow the crops without losing the
cropping cycle. (para 2.28)
Training Of District/State Personnel For Better Disaster Management
The Committee notes that even when the State of J&K had an early warning, the
State had not enough satellite phones available which resulted into break down of
communication system and there was no way to contact the officials at district level.
Secondly, even with an early warning, the personnel available with the State
Government were not trained, making them incapable to mobilize resources sufficiently
in advance. (para 2.29)
Comprehensive National Planning
The Committee is, therefore, of the view that in order to combat the natural
calamities/furies, the Central Government needs comprehensive national planning with
resilient system for better disaster management throughout the country, irrespective of
the frequency of disasters in a particular area/ region. For combating the possible
onslaught of natural fury, there is urgent need for better coordination between national
and State agencies. The Committee, therefore, feels that at the national level, the
country should have a much better pre-emptive action from the Central authorities,
particularly for the States which are not used to this kind of disaster frequently. The

21
Central Government should apprise the State Governments some kind of advanced
planning and mechanism that the State Governments must put in place invariably
without any failure. The Committee believes that the State Government must realize
the consequences of nature fury and should not be complacent at any time and must
have comprehensive planning for enhancing capabilities at the time of natural
calamities. (para 2.30)
Alert State Disaster Machinery
The Committee feels that States like J&K are not well prepared to combat
natural disasters and such States should not be caught on sleeping mode at the time of
disaster. The Committee, therefore, desires that training and updating of State
Government machinery should be on continuous basis and it should always be on alert
mode. (para 2.31)
Inadequate Reach Of Relief/Resource To The People
While appreciating the feelings of the Home Secretary, the Committee feels
that resource reach was not there in the interior valley, particularly in those villages
which are known to have extremism problem. It was pointed out to the Committee
that apart from all the issues of preventive planning, the reach of relief to the people
and other things was grossly inadequate despite the claim of both the Central
Government and the State Government that there was no dearth of resources. It was
also pointed out that there was increased feeling among the affected people that relief
was not reaching to them inspite of generous help from all quarters/ countries. The
Committee in this background is of the opinion that both the Central Government and
the State Government should understand the complexities involved in the matter as
the problem is not merely a question of providing relief to the people who are victims
of natural disaster but of winning hearts with relief service in their distress. The
Committee feels that if there is any truth in the allegation that relief is not reaching
the affected people in J&K, the Government should ensure that all the loopholes
should be plugged. (para 2.33)
Close Monitoring Of Utilisation Of Funds By Joint Team
The Committee takes into account the funds provided to the State Government
of J&K by the Central Government. The Committee feels that funds so released by the
Central Government must be utilized for the purpose and its utilization must be under
close supervision and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should constitute Joint Team consisting of the representative of State
Government and the Central Government for better administration and implementation
of programmes with fair deal of justice and equitable distribution. (para 2.37)
Rampant Encroachment On River Banks And Natural Drains
The Committee was given to understand that there was rampant encroachment
on river banks and natural drains, for instances, in Poonch near Sher-e-Kashmir bridge

22
there was reportedly a colony of 250 buildings and in another area there was brick kiln
which were washed away by the floods. It has also been alleged that the real estate in
Jammu and Kashmir, especially, the Srinagar Valley, has been rampantly violating the
established norms and modalities. Needless to say it is well established fact that fiddling
with natural courses of rivers and drains by constructing buildings, etc, whether legal
or illegal, will, not only, have adverse impact on the ecology and environment but will
also invite natural disasters. Knowing fully well that these are the traditional pathways
for the outflow of water, the Committee wonders as to how the State Government and
the administration permitted constructions in such areas. The Committee observes that
on both the banks of Jhelum River where the disaster has taken place and in the major
areas of Srinagar city, there was water for three weeks. The Committee believes that
the accumulated water was not just allowed to flow through its normal and natural
route, as the same was blocked. The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure
as to why the local authorities allowed such encroachments on a large scale which led
to such disaster. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that the
Government should bring into force building bye laws keeping in view the topology of
the State so that encroachments on river banks are avoided. (para 2.38)
Deforestation And ecological Disaster Inviting Floods
Another aspect which drew the attention of the Committee relates to the role of
deforestation in inviting floods. It was given to understand that a lot of deforestation
has taken place in Jammu and Kashmir, and the successive Governments have not
addressed this. The Committee, therefore, recommends that as a long-term measure,
the Government must ensure that deforestation does not take place. The Committee
feels that State Government should also consider whether the natural disaster had been
preceded by any ecological disaster because we have experienced the most gruesome
situation in Uttarakhand very recently. (para 2.39)
Deepning And Dredging Of The Water Bodies
The Committee notes that it has become normal to ignore dredging aspect of the
water bodies be it sea or rivers and the projects for deepening and dredging hang fire
for long, gathering dust in the shelves. The Committee takes serious note of this and
desires that dredging proposals of the rivers submitted by State Governments
particularly flood prone States should be cleared at the earliest so that the work on this
is finished before next monsoon. The Committee also desires that the State
Governments should be asked to adhere to the time limit. (para 2.41)
Monitoring By central Government Of Funds Meant For Clearing Drains And Rivers
The Committee was given to understand that Central Government grants `60
crores to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir to clean drains and rivers by removing
silt and sand but the related work had reportedly not been carried out. The Committee,
therefore, desires that Central Government should regularly monitor the works under
the sanctioned money. (para 2.42)

23
Implementation Of Recommendations Of Study Groups UnderMinistary Of Water
Resources
The Committee notes that siltation and encroachments have been identified as
one of the causes of flood in the State. The Committee also notes that the Group has
also recommended measures viz.  non structural measures like flood forecasting and
disaster management as well as structural measures as channel improvement and
construction of additional supplementary flood spill channel. The Committee desires that
lessons should be learnt from this disaster to avoid recurrence. The Committee hopes
that the Government would examine the recommendations of the study group and would
come forward with resilient disaster management mechanism. The structural measures
as recommended should also be addressed without any delay. (para 2.46)
Setting Up Of Expert Groups
The Committee would further like to stress that the Government must examine
the situation arising in the Jammu region of the State where there have been severe
landslides and it is reported that villages have been washed away. The Committee feels
that in addition to excess rainfall, such immense landslide may have been triggered by
some other factors. The Committee, therefore, desires the Government to examine
other factors, particularly, seismic factors that could be involved in the unfortunate
incident. The Committee recommends that the Government should set up an expert
group of scientists and geologists for detailed study about the factors/reasons which
could contribute in major landslides with the instruction to submit the report within
stipulated timeframe. (para 2.47)
Special Plan For Tourism
The Committee understands that the economy in Kashmir is mainly based on
tourism and the rains and floods have destroyed the entire tourism industry there. The
Committee wishes to point out that the paradise on earth has collapsed due to the flood
and the Government has to rebuild the paradise in order to attract tourists not only
from the country but also from abroad. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that a special Action Plan or a project should be prepared both by the State Government
and the Central Government, covering all the aspects of tourism while rebuilding the
State. (para 2.48)
Better Functioning Of Disaster Management Machinery At The National And Staste
Levels
The Committee is not quite satisfied with the preparedness of rescue and relief
machinery and disaster Management set up in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The
Committee is of the opinion that there is no use of referring to the provisions of
National Disaster Management Act 2005 and to reiterate that Disaster Management
Activities fall within the jurisdiction of the State Government and Central Government
only provides logistic support to the State Government. Therefore, the moot issue is the
actual implementation of the provision of the Act. The Committee therefore,

24
recommends that necessary steps may be taken to strengthen the National Disaster
Management mechanism. The Committee has already given its One Hundred and
Seventy Eighth Report on Disaster Management in the Country. The Committee is of
the considered view that actual implementation of the recommendations contained in
that report would definitely lead to better functioning of disaster management
machinery at the national and State level. (para 2.49)
Comprehensive Planning And Suf ficient Fund For Rebuilding State Economy
The Committee feels that there should be a comprehensive plan with sufficient
funds to rebuild the State, rebuild its economy, its infrastructure. The Committee
understands that rebuilding the economy of J&K is a great challenge for both the
State and the Central Governments and both the Governments should give sufficient
attention to the programme of rebuilding the economy of the State within a set time
frame. (para 2.50)

MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 10 th October, 2014 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
9. Shri Selvakumara Chinayan S.
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
12. Shri Kaushal Kishore
13. Shri Harish Meena
14. Shri Nagaranjan P.
15. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
16. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
17. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
18. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
19. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
20. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
27

28
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Secretary (Home)
2. Smt. Snehlata Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri Prakash Mishra, Special Secretary
4. Shri B. K. Singh, Addl. Secretary
5. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Addl. Secretary
6. Shri S.C. Panda, Addl. Secretary
7. Shri Rakesh Singh, Joint Secretary
8. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary
9. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary
10. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary
11. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Joint Secretary
12. Shri V . Vumlunmang, Joint Secretary
13. Smt.  V . K. Meena, Joint Secretary
14. Shri  J. P. Agrawal, Joint Secretary
15. Shri K. K. Pathak, Joint Secretary
16. Shri Bhupal Nanda, Joint Secretary
17. Smt. Rashmi Goel, Joint Secretary
18. Shri Sailesh, Joint Secretary
19. Shri G.V .V . Sarma, Joint Secretary
20. Smt. Poonam Juneja, Joint Secretary
21. Shri S. K. Mishra, Joint Secretary
22. Dr. C. Chandramouli, Joint Secretary
23. Shri S. K. Chakraborty, Joint Secretary
24. Shri R. K. Mitra, Joint Secretary
25. Smt. Bina Prasad, Joint Secretary
26. Shri N. S. Kalsi, Joint Secretary
27. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary
28. Shri I. S. Chahal, Joint Secretary
29. Shri Dilip Kumar, Joint Secretary
30. Shri G . K. Dwivedi, Joint Secretary
31. Shri H. K. S. Makwana, Joint Secretary
32. Shri Ranjit Punhani, Joint Secretary

29
Representative of Delhi Police
Shri B. S. Bassi, Commissioner of Police
Representative of Intelligence Bureau
Shri S. A. Ibrahim, Director
Representative of BSF
Shri D. K. Pathak, Director-General
Representative of CRPF
Shri Dilip Trivedi, Director-General
Representatives of CISF
1. Shri Arvind Ranjan, Director-General
2. Shri S. B. Singh, IG
Representative of SSB
Shri B. D. Sharma, Director-General
Representative of ITBP
Shri Dipesh Juneja, IG
Representative of NIA
Shri Sharad Kumar, Director-General
Representatives of NSG
1. Shri J. N. Chaudhary, Director-General
2. Shri U. C. Sarangi, IG
3. Shri B. S. Das, IG
Representative of Assam Rifles
Lt. General R. K. Rana, Director-General
Representatives of NDRF
1. Shri O. P. Singh, Director-General
2. Shri S. R. Rathore, IG
Representatives of Government of J&K
1. Shri B. R. Sharma, Principal Secretary
2. Shri Lokesh Jha, Principal Resident Commissioner
3. Shri Vinod Kaul, Secretary

30
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee
informing them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. , to hear the presentation of the Home
Secretary on the:- (i) mandate, working and performance of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(ii) rescue, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities going on in Jammu & Kashmir after the
recent floods there.
[On Arrival of The Home Secretary]
3.0 The Chairman then welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials of the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the State Government of J&K to the sitting and asked the Home Secretary
to first brief the Committee on the rescue operations and rehabilitation plans in J&K followed
by presentation on the mandate, working and performance of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
The Chairman also asked him to brief the Committee on the recent blast that took place in
Burdwan, West Bengal and on the situation prevailing on the Indo-Pak Border, after the
presentation on the general working of the Ministry.
4.0 Presentations on the subjects in the agenda of the meeting were made by the Home
Secretary and other officials during the meeting. After the presentations, Members sought
clarifications on the issues such as forewarning of heavy rain fall and pre-emptitive steps taken
in J&K,  Coordination between national and state agencies, relief in interior parts of Kashmir
valley, stone pelting on relief and rescue personnel, encroachment causing hindrance in flow
of water, financial compensation to the victims, constitution and vacancies in NDMA, dredging
of rivers and canals, firing by Pakistan along LOC and response thereto, and compensation to
the killed and affected persons, which were responded to by the officials.
5.0 A Verbatim record of the Proceeding of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.55 P.M.

31
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 04 th December, 2014 in Committee
Room-A, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Selvakumara Chinnayan S.
9. Shrimati Kirron Kher
10. Shri Kaushal Kishore
11. Shri Harish Meena
12. Shri Nagarajan P.
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.
He, thereafter, apprised Members of the following agenda of the meeting which was to
consider and adopt the following two draft Reports of the Committee:-
31

32
(i) 181 st  Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eightieth Report on
Administration of Union Territories (Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and
Chandigarh) of the DRSC on Home Affairs; and
(ii) 182 nd Report on Rescue, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction in the aftermath of
the floods and landslides in Jammu & Kashmir.
I . Consideration and adoption of 181 st and 182 nd Reports
2.1 * * * *
2.2 The Committee, then, took up draft 182nd Report on Rescue, Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction in the aftermath of the floods and landslides in Jammu & Kashmir for
consideration. The Chairman of the Committee informed the Members that whereas the
Committee had identified the subject as “Devastation caused by Natural Disaster, heavy
rains and floods in Jammu & Kashmir”, it had examined issues of rescue, rehabilitation
and reconstruction in Jammu & Kashmir and it would be appropriate to give the title
of the Report as “Rescue, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction in the aftermath of the
floods and landslides in Jammu & Kashmir” to give more clarify to the issues under
examination. The Committee, thereafter, agreed to the suggestion of the Chairman.
After a brief discussion, the draft report was adopted by the Committee with some minor
changes.
3.0 The Committee then decided to present/lay the 181 st and 182 nd Reports to both Houses
of Parliament in the current Session of Parliament. For the purpose, the Committee authorized
its Chairman to carry out any typographical mistakes and make necessary corrections in the
both reports and nominate members from Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha for presentation/laying
of report and also to finalise the date of presentation.
II. Visit to Andhra Pradesh and Odisha
4.0 * * * *
III Future course of Action
5.0 * * * *
6.0 The Committee the adjourned at 3.23 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE -I
1st On Demand Nos. 42 & 44 of the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs for the
year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill,
1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of
Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards
to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
LIST OF REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
Report Title of the Report Date of Date of
No Presentation Laying in
in Rajya Lok Sabha
Sabha
12 3 4
28.4.1993
19.8.1993
20.8.1993
20.8.1993
27.8.1993
6.12.1993
17.3.1994
17.3.1994
19.4.1994
19.4.1994
19.4.1994
28.4.1993
19.8.1993
20.8.1993
20.8.1993
27.8.1993
6.12-1993
17.3-1994
1.3.1994
19.4.1994
19.4-1994
19.4.1994
35

36
12th The Representation of the People (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the -
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service
Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment
Bill, 1995
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of
Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill,
1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies
(Regulation) Bill, 1994
12 3 4
15.12.1994
15.12.1994
15.12.1994
8.5.1995
8.5.1995
8.5.1995
22.5.1995
1.6.1995
4.8.1995
7.8.1995
8.8.1995
28.11.1995
28-11-1995
6.12.1995
19.12.1995
28.2.1996
13.12.1994
13.12.1994
13.12-1994
8.5.1995
8.5.1995
8.5.1995
22.5.1995
1.6.1995
4.8.1995
7.8.1995
8.8.1995
28.11.1995
28.11.1995
6.12.1995
22.12.1995
28.2.1996

37
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 1994
29th The Action taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on
the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
30th The Action taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on
the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
31st The Action taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report
on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern
Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
12 3 4
28.2.1996
27.8.1996
27.8.1996
27.8.1996
30.8.1996
30.8.1996
30.8.1996
26.11.1996
26.2.1997
2.5.1997
2.5.1997
28.2.1996
27.8.1996
27.8.1996
27.8.1996
30.8.1996
30.8.1996
30.8.1996
26.11.1996
26.2.1997
2.5.1997
2.5.1997

38
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the
Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill, 1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45
th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the
Ministry of Law and Justice and Company
Affairs
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill,
1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
2.5.1997
9.5.1997
3.7.1998
6.7.1998
13.7.1998
13.7.1998
13.7.1998
2.12.1998
2.12.1998
2.12.1998
17.12.1998
25.2.1999
25.2.1999
25.2.1999
11.3.1999
19.4.1999
2.5.1997
9.5.1997
3.7.1998
6.7.1998
13.7.1998
13.7.1998
13.7.1998
2.12.1998
2.12.1998
2.12.1998
17.12.1998
25.2.1999
25.2.1999
25.2.1999
11.3.1999
22.4.1999
12 3 4

39
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the
Ministry of Law and Justice and Company
Affairs.
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions
of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions
of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi High
Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill,
1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment)
Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
22.4.1999
22.4.1999
15.3.2000
15.3.2000
19.4.2000
19.4.2000
19.4.2000
26.7.2000
26.7.2000
27.7.2000
27.7.2000
28.7.2000
17.4.2001
19.4.1999
19.4.1999
15.3.2000
15.3.2000
19.4.2000
19.4.2000
19.4.2000
26.7.2000
26.7.2000
27.7.2000
27.7.2000
28.7.2000
18.4.2001
12 3 4

40
68th Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report on
the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
69th Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-first Report
on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
70th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill,
2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in
Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 2000
12 3 4
17.4.2001
17.04.2001
18.04.2001
19.04.2001
19.04.2001
19.04.2001
26.04.2001
25.07.2001
25.07.2001
25.07.2001
25.07.2001
07.08.2001
20.11.2001
18.4.2001
18.04.2001
19.04.2001
19.04.2001
19.04.2001
19.04.2001
26.04.2001
25.07.2001
25.07.2001
25.07.2001
25.07.2001
07.08.2001
20.11.2001

41
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial
Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment)
Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its 75 th Report on Cross-Border
Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu &
Kashmir
92nd The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
18.12.2001
18.12.2001
19.12.2001
31.12.2001
(presented to
Chairman)
7.3.2002
(Rajya Sabha)
31.12.2001
(presented to
Chairman)
7.3.2002
(Rajya Sabha)
24.04.2002
24.04.2002
24.04.2002
14.05.2002
23.07.2002
23.07.2002
23.7.2002
12.12.2001
12.12.2001
19.12.2001
31.12.2001
(forwardedto
Speaker)
26.02.2002
(Lok Sabha)
31.12.2001
(forwardedto
Speaker)
26.02.2002
(Lok Sabha)
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
14.05.2002
23.07.2002
23.07.2002
23.7.2002
12 3 4

42
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension
Scheme
97th The Election & Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2002
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of
Home Af fairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department
of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of
Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103 rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers
of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment)
Bill, 2003
23.08.2002
(forwardedto
Speaker)
21.11.2002
(Lok Sabha)
17.09.2002
(forwardedto
Speaker)
21.11.2002
(Lok Sabha)
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
18.12.2002
08.04.2003
22.04.2003
22.04.2003
22.04.2003
22.07.2003
5.12.2003
5.12.2003
23.08.2002
(presented to
Chairman)
21.11.2002
(Rajya Sabha)
17.09.2002
(presented to
Chairman)
21.11.2002
(Rajya Sabha)
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
18.12.2002
08.04.2003
22.04.2003
22.04.2003
22.04.2003
22.07.2003
5.12.2003
5.12.2003
12 3 4

43
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill,
2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth & Second
Amendment) Bill, 2003 & the State of Delhi
Bill, 2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003
109th Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry
of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region
111st Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112nd Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of Ministry
of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws
Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of
Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 83rd Report
of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel
Policy of C1SF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment)
Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
M/o Home Affairs
12 3 4
5.12.2003
5.12.2003
12.12.2003
19.12.2003
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
04.03.2005
20.04.2005
20.04.2005
27.07.2005
25.08.2005
25.08.2005
28.11.2005
09.03.2006
19.05.2006
5.12.2003
5.12.2003
12.12.2003
19.12.2003
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
02.03.2005
20.04.2005
20.04.2005
27.07.2005
25.08.2005
25.08.2005
28.11.2005
09.03.2006
19.05.2006

44
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of ‘Administration’ of Union
Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, control
and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in
the One Hundred and Nineteenth Report on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
125th Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in
the One Hundred and Twentieth Report on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry
of Development of North-Eastern Region
126th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of
Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (007-08) of Ministry
of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in
126 th  Report on DfGs (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Govt. on the
recommendations/observations contained in the
19.05.2006
02.08.2006
13.12.2006
27.02.2007
20.03.2007
20.03.2007
26.04.2007
08.05.2007
16.08.2007
28.02.2008
16.04.2008
16.04.2008
19.05.2006
02.08.2006
13.12.2006
27.02.2007
20.03.2007
20.03.2007
26.04.2007
08.05.2007
16.08.2007
28.02.2008
16.04.2008
16.04.2008
12 3 4

45
127th Report on DfG (2007-08) of the Ministry
of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Home Affairs
133 rd The Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of
Indo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence
in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
138th The Central Industrial Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation)
Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/ recommendations contained in
132nd Report on DfGs (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the
133 rd Report on DfG (2008-09) of the
Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of
Modernisationof Prison Administration
143 rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Home Affairs
12 3 4
16.04.2008
16.04.2008
21.10.2008
21.10.2008
21.10.2008
13.02.2009
13.02.2009
13.02.2009
26.02.2009
26.02.2009
26.02.2009
24.02.2010
27.04.2010
16.04.2008
16.04.2008
21.10.2008
21.10.2008
21.10.2008
13.02.2009
13.02.2009
13.02.2009
26.02.2009
26.02.2009
26.02.2009
22.02.2010
27.04.2010

46
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region .
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
149th Action Taken by Govt. on the observations/
Recommendations contained in the 145th
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Govt. on the observations/
Recommendations contained in the 144 th Report
on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o
Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the
recommendation/observations contained in the
136th Report on Revamping & Revitalisation of
Civil Defence in the country.
12 3 4
06.05.2010
23.06.2010
(presented to
Chairman)
30.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
10.11.2010
22.2.2011
2.6.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
01.8.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
2.6.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
01.8.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
2.6.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
01.8.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
06.05.2010
23.06.2010
(forwardedto
Speaker)
30.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
10.11.2010
22.2.2011
2.6.2011
(presented to
Speaker)
02.8.2011
(Lok Sabha)
2.6.2011
(presented to
Speaker)
02.8.2011
(Lok Sabha)
2.6.2011
(presented to
Speaker)
02.8.2011
(Lok Sabha)
3. 11.2011
(presented to
Speaker)

47
153rd Action Taken by Government on the
recommendation/observations contained in the
135 th  Report on Border Fencing & Flood
Lighting Projects along Indo-Pak Borders.
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill,
2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second
Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the
recommendation/observations contained in the
142 nd Report on Implementations of Central
Scheme of Modernisation of Prison
Administration.
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North-eastern Areas (Re-organisation)
Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of
Home Af fairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o DoNER
12 3 4
23.11.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
23.11.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
23.11.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Chairman)
23.11.2011
(Rajya Sabha)
22.12.2011
28.03.2012
28.03.2012
28.03.2012
28.03.2012
30.04.2012
07.05.2012
22.11.2011
(Lok Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Speaker)
22.11.2011
(Lok Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Speaker)
22.11.2011
(Lok Sabha)
3.11.2011
(presented to
Speaker)
22.11.2011
(Lok Sabha)
22. 12.2011
28.03.2012
28.03.2012
28.03.2012
28.03.2012
30.04.2012
07.05.2012

48
163 rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2012
165th Action Taken by Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the
One Hundred and Sixty-First Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
166th Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its
One Hundred and Sixty-second Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Development of North-Eastern Region
167th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill,
2013
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/Observations contained in the
163rd Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad.
12 3 4
30.08.2012
23.11.2012
01.03.2013
01.03.2013
01.03.2013
01.03.2013
25.04.2013
25.04.2013
30.05.2013
(presented to
Chairman)
05.08.2013
(Rajya Sabha)
05.08.2013
30.08.2012
22.11.2012
01.03.2013
01.03.2013
01.03.2013
01.03.2013
26.04.2013
26.04.2013
30.05.2013
(presented to
Speaker)
05.08.2013
(Lok Sabha)
05.08.2013

49
173 rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of
DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects
meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in
the One Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
175th Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
177th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the
Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/observations
contained in its 137 th Report on Rehabilitation
of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union
Territories (Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar
Haveli and Chandigarh)
181st Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations /observations contained in its
180th Report on Administration of Union
Territories (Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar
Haveli and Chandigarh)
182nd Rescue, Rehabilitation and reconstruction in
the aftermath of the floods and landslides in
J&K
12 3 4
29.8.2013
13.12.2013
13.12.2013
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
18.12.2014
22.12.2014
29.8.2013
13.12.2013
13.12.2013
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
18.12.2014
22.12.2014

50
183 rd Problems Being Faced by Refugees and
Displaced Person in J&K
184th Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the
179th Report (ATR on 137th Report) of the
Committee on the Rehabilitation of J&K
Migrants
185th Demands for Grants (2015-2016) Ministry of
Home Af fairs
186th Demands for Grants (2015-2016) Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
187th Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the
177th Report on Coastal Security Scheme
188th Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the
178th Report on Disaster Management in the
Country
22.12.2014
19.03.2015
23.04.2015
23.04.2015
31.07.2015
31.07.2015
22.12.2014
19.03.2015
24.04.2015
24.04.2015
31.07.2015
31.07.2015
12 3 4

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.