 
   
 
DEPARTMENT 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED 
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OB 
ONE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (201 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF 
1 
   
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2017/Magha, 1938 (Saka) 
ONE HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT 
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OB SERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (201 6-17) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
AFFAIRS  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8 TH   FEBRUARY , 2017) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  8 TH  FEBRUARY, 2017) 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
(Saka)  
REPORT 
NO.  199  
REPORT  
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
SERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
REPORT ON  
) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME 
FEBRUARY , 2017)  
FEBRUARY, 2017)  

 
 
 
DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED 
AC 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED 
NINETY SEVENTH 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 
 
2 
Hindi version of this publication is also 
available          
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS  
ONE HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT 
 
AC TION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED 
NINETY SEVENTH  REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (201 
THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
                                    
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8 TH  FEBRUARY, 2017) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 TH  FEBRUARY, 2017) 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2017/Magha, 1938 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also 
 
C.S. (H.A.)-      
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT  
TION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED  
REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (201 6-17) OF  
HOME AFFAIRS  
                                     
FEBRUARY, 2017)  
FEBRUARY, 2017)  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
(Saka)  

3 
 
ACRONYMS  
AAI Airport Authority of India 
AAC Administrator’s Advisory Council 
ACA Additional Central Assistance 
ACP Assistant Commissioner of Police 
APWD Andaman Public Work Department 
AR Assam Riffles 
ASI  Assistant Sub-Inspector 
ATI Andaman Timber Industries 
BADP Border Area Development Programme 
BE Budget Estimates 
BM Border Management 
BSF Border Security Force 
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces  
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security  
CCTNS Crime & Criminal Tracking Network System  
CCTV Close Circuit Television  
CFSL Central Forensic Science Laboratory 
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CIAT Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorist  
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CNE Non-Plan Expenditure 
CoBRA Commando Battalions for Resolute Action  
CP Commissioner of Police 
CPMFs Central Para Military Forces 
CPOs Central Police Organisations 
CPWD Central Public Work Depatment 
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force 
CTD Counter-Terrorism Department  
CSS Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
C-Visa Centralized Visa Issuance System 
DA Dearness Allowance 
DCP Deputy Commissioner of Police 
DGMO Director General of Military Operation 
DPC District Planning Committee 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EFA Encroached Forest Area   
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
EOI Expression of Interest 
FIR First Information Report 
GoI Government of India 
GNCTD Government of National Capital Territory of D elhi 
HC Head Constable 
HHTI Hand Held Thermal Imager 

4 
 
 
HM Home Minister 
HMAC Home Minister's Advisory Committees 
IAP Integrated Action Plan  
ICPs Integrated Check Posts 
IMB Indo-Myanmar Border 
ITBP Indo-Tibetan Border Police  
JIT Joint Investigation Team  
KLNLF Karbi Longri NC Hills Liberation Front  
KNO Kuki National Organisation 
LORROS Long Range Reconnaissance & Observation Syst em  
LPAI Land Port Authority of India 
LSI Large Scale Industry  
LTV Long Term Visa 
LWE Left Wing Extremist/Extremism  
MCP Mega City Policing 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MSI Medium Industry  
MoD Ministry of Defence 
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPCS Multi-Purpose Cyclone Shelters 
MPF Moderenisation of Police Forces  
NATGRID National Intelligence Grid  
NBCC  National Building Corporation Company 
NCRMP National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project  
NCT National Capital Territory 
NDFB/P National Democratic Front of Bodoland/Progre ssive  
NDFB/RD National Democratic Front of Bodoland/ Ranj an Daimary 
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority  
NDRF National Disaster Response Force  
NEPA North Eastern Police Academy 
NFSC National Fire Service College 
NIA National Investigation Agency 
NIP New Implementation Plan  
NITI AAYOG National Institution for Transforming India Aayog 
NPA National Police Academy 
NPR National Population Register 
NSCN/R National Socialist Council of Nagaland/Refor mation 
NSG National Security Guards 
OBC Other Backward Class 

5 
 
 
  
OCI Overseas Citizens of India 
OIDC Omnibus Industrial Development Corporation 
OL Official Language 
ORGI Office of Registrar General of India 
OSINT Open Source Intelligence  
PH Physically Handicapped Personnel 
PHQ Police Headquarters 
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
PMKVY Pradhan MantriKaushalVikasYojana  
PMRP Prime Minister Reconstruction Programme 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PMU Project Management Unit  
POC Project Oversight Committee 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSC Project Steering Committee 
PWD Public Works Department 
RE Revised Estimates 
RIB Rigid Inflatable Boats  
RGI Registrar General of India  
SDMC South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
SHO Station House Officer 
SI Sub-Inspector 
SIMI Students Islamic Movement of India 
SIS Special Infrastructure Scheme 
SLEIAA State Level Environment Impact Assessment Au thority  
SoO Suspension of Operation 
SP Superintendent of Police  
SPG Special Protection Group 
SPSC State Project Steering Committees  
SRE Security Related Expenditures  
SSB Sashastra  Seema Bal 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
SVPNPA Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Aca demy 
UC Utilisation Certificates 
UPF United Progressive Front 
UTs Union Territories 

6 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  REPORT      1 - 62 
 Chapter-  I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accept ed by the 
Government 
3 - 11 
 Chapter- II  
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee  does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
12 - 22 
 Chapter-        III  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
23 - 47 
 Chapter-        IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which fina l reply of the 
Government have not been received  
48 - 55 
    4. OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE 
COMMITTEE  -  AT A GLANCE 
 
56 - 63 
    5. *RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 _____________________________________ 
*to be appended at the printing stage 

7 
 
                                 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS  
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st  September, 2016)  
 
1.      Shri P. Chidambaram   - Chairman 
 
                  RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan 
3. Shri V. Maitreyan 
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
5. Shri Majeed Memon 
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
7. Shri Derek O'Brien 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9. Shri R.K. Sinha 
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan  
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Ramen Deka 
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav 
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar 
21. Shri P. Nagarajan  
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
23. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda 
24. Shri Dilip Patel 
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
27. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil 
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP 
29. Shri Bishnupada Ray 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31.       Shri B. Sreeramulu  
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Assistant Director 
(i) 
 

8 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this One Hundred Ninety Ninth Report on Action Take n by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report on Demands 
for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
2. The One Hundred and Ninety Seventh  Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to  the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the 
Lok Sabha on 3 rd  May, 2016.   After presentation of the Report, the copies thereo f were sent to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of 
the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry  furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said 
report to the Committee on 14 th  September, 2016. 
 
3. The Minister of Home Affairs laid the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the  Committee on the Table of Lok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha on 14 th  December, 2016, pursuant to the direction of Chair man, Rajya Sabha dated 24th 
September 2004.   
 
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred a nd Ninety Ninth Report and adopted the 
same at its meeting held on 31 
st  January 2017. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committe e are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
 
P. Chidambaram  
NEW DELHI                                         C hairman 
31 
st  January,  2017                                                    Department –related Parliamentary 
       Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
(ii)  

9 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action T aken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its One Hundred Ninety  Seventh Report on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for the years (2016-17).  The said Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 3 rd May, 2016. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes were received from the Minist ry of Home Affairs in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 197 
th Report on 14 th  September, 2016. The Minister of Home 
Affairs laid the statement on the status of impleme ntation of the recommendations contained in the 
said Report of the Committee on the Table of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 14 th  December, 2016 The 
Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Home Affairs have been categorised as follows: 
 
Chapter-I:   The recommendations/Observations, which have been a ccepted by the 
Government:  Para Nos. 2.6, 2.15, 2.24, 2.27, 3.1.1 0, 3.3.5, 4.7.6, 4.9.9, 4.9.10, 5.18.7, 5.19.7, 5.1 9.8, 
5.19.9, 5.48, 5.50, 5.53.12, 5.53.14, and 5.53.15 (of One Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report)   
Total - 18 Recommendations 
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as 
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Chapter-II:  The recommendations/observations which the Committe e does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: Para No s. 2.17, 2.18, 2.20, 2.23, 3.1.8, 3.4.5, 3.5.11, 
3.5.12, 5.3.5, 5.5.2, 5.6.2, 5.12.2, 5.13.2, 5.14.5 , 5.16.3, 5.18.8, 5.18.9, 5.19.10, 5.52, 6.3.2, 6.3 .3, and 
6.5.4  (ibid)  
Total - 22 Recommendations 
 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations fu rnished by the Ministry and, therefore, 
does not wish to pursue the recommendations further. 
 
Chapter-III:   The recommendations/observations in respect of whic h the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para No s. 2.16, 2.19, 2.25, 3.1.6, 3.2.4, 3.4.9, 3.4.10, 3 .4.11, 
3.5.10, 4.1.9, 4.1.10, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.9, 4.3.9, 4.5.3, 4.5.4, 4.11.3, 5.7.2, 5.8.3, 5.9.3, 5.11.2, 5.14.4, 
5.49, 5.51, 5.53.13, 6.2.6, 6.2.7, 6.2.8, 6.2.9, and 6.4.2   (ibid )  
Total - 31 Recommendations 
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-im plementation of its recommendations 
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Minis try should furnish convincing explanations in 
respect of those recommendations. 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13, 4.3.8, 4.5.2, 4.6.7, 4.9.8, 4.11.2, 5.1.18, 
5.4.2, 5.10.2, 5.14.3, 5.16.2, 5.18.6, 5.18.10, and 5.53.11  (ibid )  
Total - 15 Recommendations 
 
In respect of 15 recommendations in Chapter-IV, the  Ministry has either furnished interim 
reply or couched its response in vague terms. There fore, the Committee desires that the Ministry 

10 
 
should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorised 
in Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendations. 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Notes have been analysed in the succeeding chapters. 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.1.1 The Committee notes that there is an increase  of 12.15% over BE 2015-16 and 9.84% over RE 
2015-16 to the Ministry of Home Affairs BE 2016-17.  The Committee apprehends that this nominal 
increase would just meet the inflationary pressures. The Committee recommends that the Ministry after 
making a thorough scrutiny of its needs to run the 15 projects in hand and projects proposed, may 
approach the Ministry of Finance for enhancing allo cation at RE stage, otherwise ongoing schemes 
and projects would be seriously affected. Besides, currently launched projects would also be adversely  
affected. 
(Para 2.6 of 197 
th  Report ) 
Action Taken  
 
1.1.2 The allocated budget is less than the demand projected by the Ministry in the Budget of the 
current financial year. Based on the project evalua tions and physical targets achieved during the year , 
the matter of providing additional funds will be ta ken up with Ministry of Finance at the time of 
Revised Estimate Stage. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.1.3 The Committee notes the overall security situ ation in the country particularly in the North-
Eastern States and Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affect ed States and the efforts to bring ultras from 
North East to negotiating table. The Committee is o f the view that the Ministry should enhance its 
efforts to bring these separatist forces to the mainstream through dialogue and negotiation. 
(Para 2.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.4 ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ being State subje cts, maintenance of law and order is primary 
responsibility of the State Governments concerned. However, the Central Government supplements the 
efforts of the States to fight extremism.  
 
1.1.5 The Government positively considers any offer  of talks, once the extremists renounce violence 
and express faith in the democratic set up. The Cen tral as well as State Governments encourage 
extremists to leave violence, surrender and come in to the mainstream. For this purpose, the State 
Governments have their Surrender-cum-Rehabilitation  policies, which provide financial as well as 
physical help for their rehabilitation and settlement.    
 
1.1.6 As regards Left Wing Extremism, the Central G overnment also provides financial assistance to 
the LWE affected States under Security Related Expe nditure (SRE) Scheme.  Due to such constant 
efforts of the Central as well State Governments, t he number of surrendered LWE cadres have 
increased to 878 in 2016 (up to 31.7.2016) against 272 in the corresponding period of 2015.   Hence, 
the LWE cadres are coming forward for surrendering before the Government to join the mainstream. 

12 
 
 
1.1.7 As regards, North Eastern States, the Central  Government is pursuing a policy for 
talks/negotiation with such groups which categorica lly abjure violence, lay down arms and seek 
solutions for their problems peacefully within the framework of the Constitution of India. At present,  
the Government is engaged in peace talks with vario us insurgent groups of NE Region and talks are 
continuing with United Liberation Front of Assam [U LFA/Pro-talk], National Democratic Front of 
Bodoland/Progressive [NDFB/P], NDFB/Ranjan Diamary [NDFB/RD], Karbi Longri NC Hills 
Liberation Front [KLNLF] of Assam.  
 
1.1.8 National Socialist Council of Nagaland/Isak M uivah [NSCN/IM], NSCN/Kitovi-
Neopaokonyak [NSCN/KN] and NSCN/Reformation [NSCN/R ] of Nagaland are under ceasefire 
agreements. A total of 23 UG outfits of Manipur, un der two conglomerates (United Progressive Front 
[UPF] -8, Kuki National Organisation [KNO] -15) are  presently under Suspension of Operation (SoO) 
agreement with the Government. Three valley based U G outfits of Manipur, namely, United 
Revolutionary Front [URF], Kangleipak Communist Par ty (Lamphel) [KCP/L] and Kanglei Yawol 
Kanna Lup/MDF [KYKL/MDF] have signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Govt. of 
India.  
 
1.1.9 Pursuant to the policy of talks, various insu rgent outfits viz. United People’s Democratic 
Solidarity [UPDS], Dima Halam Daogah [DHD] of Assam  and Achik National Volunteer Council 
[ANVC] and ANVC/B of Meghalaya have signed Memorand um of Settlement (MoS) with the 
Government and dissolved themselves. As a result, a  number of cadres of insurgent outfits have 
surrendered after laying down arms and joined the mainstream of society. 
 
Recommendation 
  
1.1.10 The Committee also notes that the Government  proposes to adopt multi-pronged strategy to 
deal with extremists/separatists of North East Regi on. The Committee is of the view that the 
Government should start dialogue with these groups and address sympathetically their grievances 
within the framework of the Constitution of India w ith an aim to bring them into the mainstream. The 
multipronged strategy should include this aspect also. 
(Para 2.24 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.11 The Government is following a multi-pronged strategy to deal with insurgent and militant 
activities in the North-East Region which, inter-alia  includes willingness to talk to groups, provided 
they abjure violence.  
1.1.12 At present, the Government is engaged in pea ce talks with various insurgent groups of NE 
Region and talks are continuing with United Liberat ion Front of Assam [ULFA/Pro-talk], National 
Democratic Front of Bodoland/Progressive [NDFB/P], NDFB/Ranjan Diamary [NDFB/RD], Karbi 
Longri NC Hills Liberation Front [KLNLF] of Assam.  
 
1.1.13 National Socialist Council of Nagaland/Isak Muivah [NSCN/IM], NSCN/ Kitovi-
Neopaokonyak [NSCN/KN] and NSCN/Reformation [NSCN/R ] of Nagaland are under ceasefire 
agreements. A total of 23 UG outfits of Manipur, un der two conglomerates (United Progressive Front 
[UPF]-8, Kuki National Organisation [KNO] -15) are presently under SoO agreement with the 
Government. Three valley based UG outfits of Manipu r, namely, United Revolutionary Front [URF], 

13 
 
Kangleipak Communist Party (Lamphel) [KCP/L] and Ka nglei Yawol Kanna Lup/MDF 
[KYKL/MDF] have signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Govt. of India.  
 
1.1.14 Pursuant to the policy of talks, various ins urgent outfits viz. United People’s Democratic 
Solidarity [UPDS], Dima Halam Daogah [DHD] of Assam  and Achik National Volunteer Council 
[ANVC] and ANVC/B of Meghalaya have signed Memorand um of Settlement (MoS) with the 
Government and dissolved themselves.  
 
1.1.15 As a result, a number of cadres of insurgent  outfits have surrendered after laying down arms 
and joined the mainstream of society. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.1.16  The Committee is displeased to note the underutilis ation of funds in respect of many of 
the plan schemes of the Ministry of Home Affairs co nsistently during the years 2012-16 (as on 29th 
February, 2016). The main concern of the Committee is that during the last four financial years, the 
Ministry has not even been able to spend the reduce d allocation at RE Stage in several schemes which 
is an indicator of under-performance. The Committee  notes that under many schemes/projects like 
infrastructure for CAPFs or Border Management there  are still huge gaps in terms of what is desired 
and what is existing. Moreover, the funds available  have not been optimally utilized. The Ministry 
needs to gear up its machinery to analyze what is t he cause of this consistent underutilisation and ta ke 
adequate measures to plug the gaps for achieving th e desired objectives and goals. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the steps to be tak en for strengthening the absorption capacity of 
various schemes and agencies. Besides, the Committee has apprehension that this underutilisation may 
prove to be a valid ground for further reduction in  allocation during future financial allocations. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should pay attention to 
restructure its implementation agencies so that the  schemes /projects would be completed without time 
and cost overrun. 
(Para 2.27 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.17 Due to various bottlenecks in the implementa tion of projects/schemes, the allocated funds 
could not be utilized fully in past. However, the f ollowing efforts/initiatives/measures have been taken 
by the MHA for ensuring completion of projects in a time bound manner:– 
 
• Decentralization of execution: 
 
/head2right Earlier works were being executed mostly through CP WD and some through 
NBCC. 
/head2right MHA has issued order on 16.07.2015 that DGs can exe cute works through any 
Central/State PSU/PWOs following General Financial Rules and CVC guidelines. 
/head2right Ministry of Finance on 13.04.2016 issued amendment to GFR Rules, 2005, which 
inter alia, prescribe that award of works to the PS Us/other Government 
organizations, as defined in the amended Rule 126(3 ), shall be based on 
competition among such PSUs/organizations. This com petition shall be essentially 
on the lump sum service charges to be claimed for execution of work.  
 
• Delegated power of DGs of forces has been increased.  

14 
 
 
• Regular review meetings are being held in MHA at se nior level to monitor the progress 
of the works assigned to construction agencies. 
 
• In pursuance to NITI Aayog’s guidelines dated 29.03 .2016, this Ministry has issued 
directions on 13.05.2016 to CAPFs to set up a force -level Standing Committee to fix the 
responsibility for cost and overrun, both for the r evised cost proposals to be submitted for 
approval of Cabinet/CCEA as well as the proposals t o be decided within the delegated powers 
of the Ministry or within the delegated powers of the DGs. 
 
1.1.18 It is submitted that the expenditure in the Ministry is reviewed periodically at the highest le vel 
with the heads of budget controlling authorities an d suitable instructions are given to avoid 
underutilisation of funds. This exercise is also ai med at identifying and removing bottlenecks in the 
implementation process. Necessary advisory has been  issued from time to time to prepare the 
budgetary allocations / estimates, keeping in view the ground realities and achievability of targets, with 
the stipulation that scarce resources should not be tied to schemes which do not take off.  
 
1.1.19 It is mentioned that the exercise has paid o ff in improving the situation on all fronts. For th e 
first time in many years, almost 50% of Budget Esti mate 2015-16 had been utilized during the first six  
months i.e. upto September, 2015. Consequently, dur ing the year 2015-16, the reduction in the plan 
outlay was very marginal and the expenditure has be en recorded at approximately 96% of the total 
available plan outlay for the whole year.   
  
1.2 Demand No. 46 – Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.2.1 The Committee observes that against projected  demand of Rs.5003.97 crore under Demand No. 
46 only Rs.4630.90 crore (Rs.1250.00 crore under Pl an and Rs.3380.90 crore Non-Plan) has been 
allocated for the year 2016-17. The Committee also observes that there is a shortfall in major Heads 
such as Secretariat-General Services, Official lang uage, Disaster Management, Civil Defence and 
Fire and Emergency Service, Home Guards, etc. The C ommittee presumes that this shortfall in 
allocation is a clear indicator of low absorption o f funds as highlighted in the trend of expenditure 
during last financial year and hence impresses upon  the Ministry to optimize its utilisation capacity to 
put up a robust case for more allocations at RE stage. 
 
(Para 3.1.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.2.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the matter of providing additional 
funds will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the time of Supplementary Demands for Grants and 
Revised Estimate Stages. 
 
1.3 FIRE & EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of  the Ministry that Fire Services in most of the 
States fall within the jurisdiction of local bodies  which are often starved of financial resources and  

15 
 
hence are ill-equipped. The Committee also takes no te of the submission of the Ministry that financial  
constraints have also been a major factor for the S tate Governments for neglecting Fire Services. The 
Committee is concerned to note that the Central Gov ernment has discontinued Scheme for 
‘Modernization of Fire and Emergency Services’ in t he name of 14th Finance Commission 
recommendations which according to Committee are no t practicable. The Committee in view of this 
recommends that a serious introspection is needed b y the Central Government in this regard to avoid 
the problems which might emerge due to discontinuation of many centrally sponsored schemes. 
(Para 3.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.2 The provision of modern equipment and strengt hening urban fire station under Scheme for 
Modernization of Fire and Emergency Services has been recommended by the EFC/CNE in its meeting 
held on 20.07.2016 at a cost of Rs. 1250 crore for the years 2017-18 to 2019-20. 
 
1.4 LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.4.1 The Committee expresses concern to note that only Rs. 80 crore (Plan fund) has been allocated 
against ₹320.00 crore of the projected demand of the Ministr y for LPAI which is almost one fourth of 
actual requirement. The Committee is of the view th at the reduced allocation might lead to obstruction  
in ongoing as well as upcoming projects and therefo re, recommends that MHA should take up the 
matter with the Finance Ministry to look into this and make enhancement at RE stage. 
(Para 4.7.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.4.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the matter of providing additional 
funds at RE stage has been taken up with Ministry o f Finance vide DO letter dated 24.06.2016 for 
appropriate allocation of funds. 
 
 
1.5 MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.5.1 The Committee further notes that “The Mega Ci ty Policing”, a sub set of the Non-Plan MPF 
Scheme was initiated in 2005-06 onwards and hopes t hat this scheme  will prove to be a catalyst in 
terms of establishing robust policing infrastructur e and improving safety scenario in six identified 
mega cities. The Committee hopes that the concerned  State Governments will give priority to this 
scheme, contribute their share and there will be no  unspent balances lying with the State Governments 
under this scheme. With the implementation of this scheme, the Committee also hopes that policing in 
the identified mega cities will improve to a large extent. 
(Para 4.9.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.5.2 The Megacity Policing (MCP) Plans of all the six cities (a sub-component of MPF Scheme) 
have been approved and following funds released: 
 

16 
 
 
1.6 MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE  
 
Recommendation  
  
1.6.1 The Committee understands that MPF Scheme is an important initiative which aims at capacity 
building of the State Police Forces and helps impro ve police infrastructure in the states. The 
Committee notes that the utilisation pattern of the  States is improving over the years, however, it 
recommends that the Ministry should pursue with Sta te Governments, which are lagging behind, to 
expedite works under this scheme in their respective States. 
(Para 4.9.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.6.2 The following measures are being taken to pur sue with state Governments which are lagging 
behind, to expedite works under MPF scheme in their respective States: 
 
(i) To expedite works under this scheme, the Utilisatio n Certificates (UCs) for the funds 
released during previous years are to be furnished by the State Governments duly certified 
by the competent authority.  
 
(ii) The States are regularly reminded for submission of UCs.  
 
1.6.3 To ensure proper utilisation of funds, a quar terly concurrent audit is being conducted by the 
Internal Audit Wing of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
1.7 DEMAND NO. 91 (CHANDIGARH) 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.7.1 The Committee also notes the submission that the low allocation under the Head “Health” is 
also insufficient for many projects to improve Heal th infrastructure in the UT.  The Committee 
recommends that the Government should look into thi s and seek enhanced allocation to help improve 
health facilities in the UT of Chandigarh. 
(Para 5.18.7 ibid) 
 
 
 
S.No.  City  Allocation  Releases  Total  
2013-14  2014-15  TOTAL  2013-14  2014-15  2015-16  
1 Ahmedabad 5.02 10.03 15.05 5.02  10.03 0.00  15.05 
2 Mumbai 45.74 91.47 137.21 0.00  0.00 44.997  44.997 
3 Chennai 29.49 58.98 88.47 0.00  0.00 29.49  29.49 
4 Hyderabad 16.03 32.07 48.10 0.00  22.34 0.00  22.34 
5 Kolkata 31.92 63.85 95.77 0.00  0.00 31.92  31.92 
6 Bengaluru 16.10 32.20 48.30 0.00  40.73 0.00  40.73 
Total  144.30  288.60  432.90  5.02  73.1  106.407  184.527  

17 
 
Action Taken  
1.7.2 The details have already been given in para N o. 5.18.2 of 197 
th  report of DRSC on Home 
Affairs (at page no. 76-77 of report) and an additi onal amount of Rs.1022.00 crore has been projected 
which will cover the grant for Health Sector. 
 
1.8 DEMAND NO. 92 (DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI) 
 
Recommendation   
  
1.8.1 The Committee notes that the allocation to UT  of Dadra and Nagar Haveli BE 2016-17 is not 
in tune with what was projected by the UT as alloca tion is almost half of projected amount. The 
Committee is not convinced with the submission of t he UT Administration that it would try to 
implement the schemes/programmes with the agreed al location in B.E.2016-17 and recommends that 
the UT should be provided with additional fund at R E Stage otherwise development of this UT will be 
hampered.  
(Para 5.19.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.8.2 Additional fund will be demanded at RE stage as recommended by the Committee. 
 
Recommendation  
  
1.8.3 The Committee takes note of the schemes/proje cts to be initiated in the year 2016-17 on Energy 
security, Health, Rural Development and Housing and  Urban Development in the UT and hopes that 
these schemes will be completed without time and co st overrun and go a long way in development of 
this Union territory.  
(Para 5.19.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.8.4 All out efforts will be made to speed up the implementation of Schemes/Projects on Energy, 
Health, Rural Development and Housing and Urban Dev elopment as recommended by the Committee. 
Instructions on these lines will be issued to the concerned departments. 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.8.5 The Committee takes serious view of the fact that a meagre sum of Rs. 5.97 crore has been 
allocated in BE 2016-17 for "Small and Village Indu stries" which is drastic reduction over RE 2015-
16 i.e. Rs.11.98 crore. The Committee is unconvince d with the reply of the Ministry that the reduced 
allocation will not impact the project underway as there are less project proposals due to slow down of 
industrial growth and recommends that the Ministry should give clear picture on the issue as "Small 
and Village Industries" as this is considered to be   source of livelihood for many poor people and in 
view of the Committee higher allocation may increase pace of growth in the said sector. 
(Para 5.19.9 ibid) 
  

18 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.8.6 The allocation of Rs.11.98 crore in 2015-16 w as for development of infrastructure of existing 
industrial estates which has been completed last ye ar. Additional fund in RE 2016-17 will be 
demanded as one time grant as recommended by the Committee. 
 
1.9 DEMAND NO. 93 (Daman & Diu) 
 
Recommendation  
  
1.9.1 The Committee notes that there is under expen diture in Demand No- 93 pertaining to UT of 
Daman & Diu during the financial year 2015-16 which  in view of the Committee might have led to 
reduction in allocation in BE 2016-17 compared to B E 2015-16. The Committee also notes that the 
grant to this UT is also not in consonance with pro jected demand as it has been allocated very much 
less than the projected one. The Committee recommends that additional fund should be allocated to the 
UT as per the requirement at Supplementary stage of Demands for Grants. 
(Para 5.48 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 All the Departments in UT of Daman & Diu have  been instructed to ensure proportionate 
monthly expenditure to avoid under expenditure for the Demand for Grant during the current financial 
year 2016-17. The additional fund on the basis of s pending capacity will be projected at the 
supplementary stage of Demands for Grant.   
 
Recommendation  
 
1.9.3 The Committee notes the projects and initiati ves likely to be undertaken during this financial 
year in the sectors such as Forestry and Wild Life Development, Health, Rural Development and 
Housing and Urban Development.  The Committee hopes  that these projects will be completed without 
time and cost overrun. 
(Para 5.50 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.9.4 The UT Administration is committed to ensure that the projects proposed during the current 
financial year (2016-17) are completed without time and cost overrun. 
 
1.10 DEMAND NO. 94 (Lakshadweep) 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.1  The Committee also takes note of the major projects, schemes, initiatives, etc. proposed 
to be undertaken during the year 2016-17 under the health, education, agriculture, energy and allied 
sectors and recommends that all these works should be completed in a time bound manner. Procedural 
wrangles should be avoided to fast pace these works. 
(Para 5.53.12  ibid) 
  

19 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.2  Necessary instructions are issued regularly  to all concerned Departments of 
Lakshadweep UT Administration to implement the proj ects in a time bound manner.  Further review 
meetings will be arranged on regular intervals to m onitor the progress of major projects, schemes, 
initiatives etc., proposed to be undertaken during 2016-17 so as to ensure timely completion and to sort 
out any related issues to minimize the effect of procedural wrangles.  
 
Recommendation  
 
1.10.3  The Committee notes the various issues flag ged by Members of the Committee which 
pertain to development of social and physical infra structure in the UT of Lakshadweep and 
recommends that the Ministry may look into all thes e issues and apprise the Committee of the action 
taken. 
(Para 5.53.14 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.10.4  Various issues flagged by Members of the Co mmittee which pertain to development of 
social and physical infrastructure in the UT of Lak shadweep reflected in the report of the Committee 
have already been circulated to all concerned Depar tments of Lakshadweep UT Administration for 
further follow up action.  MHA will also monitor de velopmental and other issues pertaining to the 
Lakshadweep Islands. Action taken on each issue wil l be submitted in due course and intervention of 
the Ministry will be ensured as and when required, where the issue is beyond the level of Lakshadweep 
UT Administration.  
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.5  The Committee is aware that none of the ite ms like paddy, wheat or coarse grains are 
grown in Lakshadweep, though the rice is a staple d iet of the islanders. The entire requirement of ric e 
has to be transported from the mainland to the Isla nd. The Committee is also aware that the islanders 
cannot afford to buy the rice at the market prices as they are mainly rural and tribals. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends that an additional amount of Rs.3 crore per annum should be provided to 
Lakshadweep to meet this contingency.  
(Para 5.53.15 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.10.6  In view of the recommendation of the Commit tee, UT Lakshadweep Administration 
will work out a Plan for supply of rice, which is a  staple diet of the islanders, at a reasonable pric e 
through the Fair Price Shops with its financial implication.  Additional requirement of funds, if any, for 
2016-17 will be projected at RE 2016-17 stage and f or future it will be included in the budget 
proposals of the respective year.    
  

20 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
 
2.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the procedure for se curity clearance of proposals relating to 
Defence/ Infrastructure Projects and Maintenance Po licy for the Border Infrastructure (i.e. Border 
Roads, Flood Lights, Border Fencing and Border Outp osts) has been finalised.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the same. 
(Para 2.17 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.1.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has formulated a  policy for national security clearance for 
certain sensitive sectors of the economy including Defense/Infrastructure projects by codifying all 
existing practices. The new policy is aimed at brin ging about a healthy balance between meeting the 
imperatives of national security and facilitating ease of doing business and promoting investment in the 
country. The policy has been formulated in discharge of the mandate of the Ministry of Home affairs to 
exercise oversight over India’s internal security. 
 
2.1.3 The maintenance policy for the border assets along the Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pakistan 
borders has been reviewed and finalized, whereas in  respect of Indo-China border, maintenance policy 
is under finalization. In respect of infrastructure  projects on Indo-Myanmar Border (IMB), Assam 
Rifles, the operational clearance/security clearance is given by DGMO, MoD (Army) and subsequently 
the same is submitted to this Ministry.  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.1.4 The Committee also notes that the Government has approved 33% reservation for women in 
direct recruitment for Non-Gazetted posts from Cons table to Sub-Inspector in the CAPFs & police 
forces of all the UTs including Delhi Police.  The Committee hopes that assured 33% recruitment of 
women in these forces will instill confidence among  women folk and bridge gender divide prevalent in 
the society.  It should be implemented at the earliest. 
(Para 2.18 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.1.5 After approval of reservation of 33% for wome n in direct recruitment in Non-Gazetted posts 
from Constable to Sub-Inspector in the police force s of all the Union Territories including Delhi 
Police, Union Territories including GNCTD were requ ested to make enabling provisions in the 
relevant Recruitment Rules to ensure implementation  of the above decision of Government of India.  
UTs of Andaman & Nicobar, Chandigarh, Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
NCT of Delhi have made enabling provisions in the r elevant Recruitment Rules.  UT of Puducherry 
has amended the Recruitment Rules of the post of Co nstables.  Action is underway regarding 
amendment of Recruitment Rules to the post of Sub-I nspector; and other posts are promotion posts.  
Following implementation status has been reported by the UTs (including Delhi Police): 
 

21 
 
Sl.No. Name of the 
UT 
Implementation status 
1. Delhi  88 vacancies of women/ Sub-Inspector (Exe .) were already sent to 
Staff Selection Commission for filling up the same through direct 
recruitment.    
450 candidates (311 males and 139 female) have been selected to the 
post of constable through special recruitment drive / nomination from 
North Eastern States. 
Vacancies of 4669 posts (3115 males 1554 female) of  constables are 
being conveyed by Delhi Police to SSC for filling t he same through 
direct recruitment.  
2. Puducherry 100 women candidates have been recrui ted for the post of 
constables. 
3. Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli  
In the recruitment for filling up of 67 posts of co nstables, 23 women 
candidates have been selected.  
4. Daman & 
Diu 
12 women candidates have been selected for the post  of constables 
out of 44, and 03 posts are vacant due to non-avail ability of female 
candidates in OBC category. 
5. Chandigarh 520 posts of constables have been adv ertised keeping 260 posts 
exclusively for women candidates. 
 
2.1.6 No separate quota for women is sanctioned in the CAPFs. However, on 31.05.2011, advisory to 
CAPFs (CRPF, BSF, ITBP, CISF, SSB & Assam Rifles) t o increase the percentage of women in the 
Forces to 5% was issued. Further, to enhance the re presentation of women in CAPFs, it has been 
decided to reserve 33% posts at Constable level for  being filled up by women in CRPF & CISF to 
begin with and 14-15% posts at Constable level in b order guarding forces i.e. BSF, SSB & ITBP. This 
reservation would be horizontal. Order has been issued on 05.01.2016. 
 
 Recommendation  
 
2.1.7 The Committee is happy to note that various r elaxations for long-term visa (LTV) holders of 
Pakistani minorities have been approved which inclu de the facilitation for studies of their children, 
visit to additional places and employment in privat e sector, easy renewal of LTVs and renewal for 
prolonged period. The Committee is hopeful that thi s relaxation for Pakistani minorities residing in 
India will help in their rehabilitation. 
(Para 2.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.8 The Central Government has been constantly re viewing the hardships being faced by the 
applicants from the neighboring countries, especial ly the minorities in those countries, for grant of 
Indian Citizenship and Long term Visa (LTV). This is a continuous process. 
 
2.1.9 To further facilitate the persons belonging t o minority communities in Afghanistan, Bangladesh 
and Pakistan, namely, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jai ns, Parsis and Christians staying in India on Long 
Term Visa (LTV),it has been decided to provide the following facilities to such persons: 
 
i. Opening of bank accounts. 

22 
 
ii. Permission for purchase of dwelling unit for self-o ccupation and suitable accommodation 
for carrying out self-employment. 
iii. Permission to take up self-employment or for doing business. 
iv. Issue of driving license, PAN card and Aadhaar number.  
v. Allowing free movement within the State/UT where they are staying. 
vi. Permission for the transfer of LTV papers from one State/UT to another State/UT. 
vii. Reduction of penalty on non-extension of short term visa/LTV on time. 
viii. Permission to apply for LTV at the place of present residence in cases where the applicants 
have moved to the present place of residence without prior permission. 
 
2.1.10  Further it has been decided to simplify the  procedure for grant of Indian citizenship to 
such persons staying in India on Long term Visa (LTV) as mentioned below:- 
 
i. Empowering the Collector, Deputy Commissioner or  the District Magistrate to authorize, 
in his absence, in writing an officer not below the  rank of Sub Divisional Magistrate for 
administering the oath of allegiance to the applicant. 
 
ii. Delegation of powers to the Collectors or the D istrict magistrates of the following 16 
Districts in 7 States for a period of two years for  registration of such persons as citizens of 
India:- 
 
S.No Name of State Name of Districts 
1. Chhattisgarh Raipur 
2. Gujarat Ahemdabad, Gandhinagar and Kutch 
3. Madhya Pradesh Bhopal and Indore 
4. Maharashtra Nagpur, Mumbai, Pune and Thane 
5. National Capital Territory of Delhi West Delhi a nd South Delhi 
6. Rajasthan Jodhpur,  Jaisalmer and Jaipur 
7. Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 
 
In respect of other districts in the above mentione d 7 States, the power to register such 
persons as citizens of India may be delegated to th e Secretary, Home Department of the 
respective States for a period of 2 years. 
 
iii. Reduction of fees for registration as citizen of India for such persons from the existing 
level ranging from Rs. 3000 (under registration) to  Rs. 15,000 (under naturalization), to a 
uniform fee of Rs.100/- each at the time of grant o f certificate of registration/ 
naturalization. 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.1.11  The Committee notes that the prime focus area of th e Central Government on the 
Internal Security front will be countering terroris m in Jammu & Kashmir, North Eastern Areas, Left 
Wing Extremism affected States and the hinterland o f the Country. The Committee also notes that the 
Government of India in tandem with the State Govern ment of Jammu and Kashmir has adopted a 
multi-pronged approach to check cross border infiltration, promote economic growth, provide relief to 
victims and strengthen the State Government apparatus. 
(Para 2.23 ibid) 

23 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.12   No further action has been recommended by the Committee. 
 
2.2 DEMAND NO. 46 - MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.2.1 The Committee takes a serious view of the und erutilisation of funds under this grant (Grant 
No.53) during the year 2015-16. The Committee is co nstrained to note that the Ministry was allocated 
Rs.1570 crore under Demand No. 53 (which is now kno wn as Demand No. 46) which was increased to 
Rs.1751.16 crore at RE stage in the year 2015-16 bu t the Ministry has been able to spend only 
Rs.1303.17 crore at the fag end of the last fiscal.  It reflects low absorption capacity of the Ministr y 
under the scheme and will weaken its case before th e Finance Ministry while arguing for 
augmentation in allocation. 
(Para 3.1.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 Grant No.53-MHA is one of the Major Grants of  the Ministry consisting of budgetary provision 
of MHA Secretariat, RGI, Official Language, National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) etc. 
During the year, an amount of Rs.1570 Cr. was alloc ated for Grant No.53 at BE stage which was 
enhanced to Rs.1751.16 Cr. at RE Stage. Out of the available allocation, an amount of Rs.1689 Cr. was 
utilised under the Grant amounting to 96.45% of the available allocation.   
 
2.2.3 Saving occurred under Non-Plan Section of the  Grant due to non-filling of vacant posts, less 
claims of medical reimbursement and non-receipt of the utilisation certificate etc. 
 
2.2.4 Ministry makes all the efforts to make out re alistic budgeting and consequently 
guidelines/instructions are issued from time to tim e to all Budget Controlling Authorities under the 
Ministry to scrupulously follow instructions for re alistic budgeting and determine their outlays on th e 
basis of performance and target fixed. 
 
2.3 RELIEF & REHABILITATION OF MIGRANTS AND REPATRI ATES 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.3.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Mi nistry has been able to spend approximately 
50% (till 29th February, 2016) of allocation made i n RE 2015-16 under Relief & Rehabilitation of 
Migrants and Repatriates (Major Head 3601) as it ha s utilized only Rs.96.24 crore out of allocation of  
Rs.188.03 crore in RE 2015-16. The Committee is not  satisfied with the submission that Rs.90 crore is 
under process for the scheme of rehabilitation pack age for the returnees from former Indian enclaves 
in Bangladesh and up-gradation of infrastructure in  former Bangladeshi enclaves in India and 
observes that months have passed since enclaves wer e exchanged with Bangladesh but rehabilitation 
package for the Indian enclave dwellers is still no t processed. Besides, the Committee hopes that 
installment of Rs.1.76 crore for reimbursement to t he Government of Tamil Nadu for providing relief 
assistance to the Sri Lankan Tamil refugees will be released soon. 
 
(Para 3.4.5 ibid) 

24 
 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.2 Under Relief and Rehabilitation of migrants a nd repatriates (Major Head 3601) an amount of 
Rs.188.03 crore was allotted to this Ministry in RE  2015-16 for providing relief assistance to Sri 
Lankan Tamil refugees staying in camps, Tibetan ref ugees and rehabilitation of returnees from 
erstwhile Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and creatio n and up-gradation of infrastructure in former 
Bangladeshi enclaves in India and in Cooch Behar Di strict in West Bengal. Rs.188 crore has been 
utilised up to 31 
st  March, 2016 which includes Rs.140 crore as grant-i n-aid to the Govt. of West 
Bengal for rehabilitation of returnees from erstwhi le Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and creation and 
up-gradation of infrastructure in former Bangladesh i enclaves in India and in Cooch Behar District in 
West Bengal, and reimbursement to Govt. of Tamil Na du of Rs.48 crore including the installment of 
Rs.1.76 crore for providing relief assistance to the Sri Lankan Tamil refugees staying in camps. 
 
2.4 DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.4.1  The Committee takes note of the mandate of World Ba nk assisted Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) wh ose objective is to address the vulnerability of 
coastal community to cyclones, who are generally po or and from weaker section of the society, 
through minimizing the vulnerability to cyclone and  making people and infrastructure disaster 
resilient. The Committee hopes that this project wi ll be completed in a time bound manner and go a 
long way in terms of establishing robust mitigation infrastructure to withstand cyclone. The Committee 
may be periodically apprised of the status of diffe rent projects under this scheme and also of the ste ps 
being taken to avoid any element of delay. 
(Para 3.5.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.4.2  The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) m anages the project on behalf of 
Ministry of Home Affairs and has overall responsibi lity for implementation.  The Project Management 
Unit (PMU), NDMA and Project Implementation Units ( PIUs) at State level are responsible for 
implementation of the project.  At National level, Project Steering Committee (PSC) headed by 
Member, NDMA reviews progress of project at quarter ly interval while at State level same function is 
performed by State Project Steering Committees (SPS C) headed by Chief Secretary of the State 
Government concerned.  To resolve inter-ministerial  issues, Project Oversight Committee (POC) 
headed by Home Secretary, GoI meets whenever need i s felt.  In addition, Project is being monitored 
through World Bank Missions and Inspections conduct ed by Project Management Unit (PMU) 
officials.  255 Nos. of Multi-Purpose Cyclone Shelt ers (MPCS), 770 Kms of Roads, 20 Nos. Bridges 
and 22 Kms of Saline Embankments have been complete d under National Cyclone Risk Mitigation 
Project (Phase-I) benefitting 14 lakhs (approx.) pe rsons of coastal community with an expenditure of 
Rs.1350 crore (approx.).  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.4.3  The Committee is aware of the fact that the concern ed State Governments have primary 
responsibility for disaster management in the event  of occurrence of any disaster and the States with 
their limited resources undertake relief & rehabili tation measures in the wake of natural disasters.  
The Committee recommends that the Central Governmen t should play a major role in the event of big 

25 
 
disasters taking place in any State.  The Committee  also recommends that the Central Government 
should set up a monitoring mechanism to oversee the status of the rehabilitation measures taken by the 
State Government without undue interference. 
(Para 3.5.12 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.4.4 In the event of severe disasters, the Central  Government always helps the State Government 
with necessary logistics and financial assistance f rom time to time. Personnel from Army, Air Force, 
CAPFs and NDRF are deployed at required places to c arry out relief and rescue operations. In addition 
to the funds already allocated/placed at the dispos al of the states from the State Disaster Response 
Fund, additional financial assistance is also provi ded to the States from National Disaster Response 
Fund, whenever required, by following the prescribed norms and established procedures. 
 
2.4.5 Since, Disaster Management is primarily the r esponsibility of the concerned State Government, 
to have a monitoring mechanism to oversee the State ’s rehabilitation measures would tantamount to 
interfering into the sovereign functions of the Sta te. It may create situations of confrontation betwe en 
the Centre and the State particularly, where the ru ling party in the State is different from the rulin g 
party at the Centre. It would also be against the p rinciple of decentralization. In any case, undertak ing 
rehabilitation work is a sovereign function of the State Government and they should be relied upon to 
perform their job with a free hand as per their expertise and capacity.  
 
2.5 DEMAND NO. 90 (ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS) 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.5.1 The Committee strongly recommends that commit ted liabilities under Plan fund (whatever 
amount it may be) must be transferred to Non-Plan f und. Besides, Rs.893.46 crores should be given as 
additional Plan fund for development of the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
(Para 5.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.5.2 Committed liabilities for an amount of Rs.893 .46 crores were proposed to be transferred from 
Plan to Non-Plan in the Budget Estimate (BE) of 201 6-17, based on the projections made by different 
departments at the RE stage of 2015-16. The project ion under Plan Section also includes the 
committed liabilities. The proposal for transfer of  committed liabilities from Plan to Non-Plan was no t 
considered. However, while fixing the ceiling for B E (2016-17), Non-Plan provision for the proposed 
transferable expenditures were accordingly kept in the BE (2016-17) Plan. Additional requirement (if 
any) will be projected at the RE stage of 2016-17 based on realistic assessment.  
 
 
Consultation with Peoples Representatives 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.3  The Committee is of the view that peoples' represen tatives should have a say in decision 
making process of UT since it does not have a legis lative assembly where grievances of the people can 
be heard. The Committee recommends that the UT Admi nistration should consult elected 

26 
 
representatives while taking any policy decision/de velopment measures/allocation of funds on any 
Head concerning the UT. 
(Para 5.5.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.5.4 A&N Islands is following grassroots level pla nning. Plan formulation process starts from the 
Gram Panchayat level. All the Districts prepare Dis trict Development Plan covering policy 
decision/developmental measures/allocation of funds  concerning the District which is placed before 
the District Planning Committee (DPC) having repres entation of elected representatives for 
deliberation and recommendation. 
 
2.5.5 The consolidated District Development Plan re commended by the DPCs, restricted to the 
budgetary ceiling for Budget Estimate fixed by the Govt. of India, is placed before the A&N State 
Planning Board having representation for deliberation and approval. 
  
2.5.6 Further, major policy decisions are also disc ussed in the Administrator’s Advisory Council 
which have members from political parties, trade or ganizations, prominent citizens etc. besides the 
local Member of Parliament. It has also been decide d to reconstitute the Home Minister's Advisory 
Committees (HMAC) under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Home Minister. 
 
Rural Roads 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.7 The Committee takes note of the reply and fee ls that the development of rural roads and 
maintenance is not as per requirement of the UT. Th e Committee is not satisfied with slow pace of 
development of rural roads and maintenance of the s ame. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should pay attention to development of r ural roads to help improve connectivity in the 
UT. 
(Para 5.6.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.8 Construction of the rural roads is taken up b y both PRIs and Andaman Public Works 
Department (APWD). Majority of the road work is tak en up by the APWD. Efforts are being made for 
better coordination between PRIs and APWD to avoid duplication of works and also to have integrated 
approach while executing rural road works. 
 
2.5.9 Almost all the habitations are connected by b lack top road except some Encroached Forest 
Area (EFA) and rural village which have sea route c onnectivity. Major hindrance in rural road 
construction is land availability & forest clearanc e which has delayed the progress enormously in 
addition to limited working season. The Administrat ion is taking steps to connect newly regularised 
EFA and those habitations which are free from encumbrances. 
 
  

27 
 
Payment of Ex-Andaman Timber Industries (ATI) Workers 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.5.10  The Committee recommends that the Ex-ATI workers sh ould be compensated while 
taking their issues and concerns under consideratio n at the earliest. The Committee should also be 
apprised action taken in this regard. 
(Para 5.12.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.5.11  The Administration has filed/diarised a Cur ative Petition (Diary) No.19340 of 2016 on 
03.06.2016 in Review Petition No.888 of 2015 in Civ il Appeal No.1810 of 2009 titled Collector of 
Land Acquisition & Ors. Vs M/s Andaman Timber Indus tries & Ors. before the Hon’ble Apex Court. 
The matter is under adjudication and on receipt of requisite verdict, it shall be disposed of accordingly 
 
Fund for Municipal Council 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.12  The Committee is not satisfied with the rep ly and feels that the allocation is not in sync 
with the demand made by the Municipal Council. The Committee understands that the Municipal 
Council is burdened with a lot of work pertaining t o civic amenities and improvement of social 
infrastructure. The Committee in view of this recom mends that allocation should be enhanced at RE 
stage. 
(Para 5.13.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.13  An amount of Rs.36.45 crores has been alloc ated in the BE 2016-17 for Municipal 
Council. The council has further sought additional funds for development of newly extended wards, 
which is being examined. The allocation at RE stage  of 2016-17 will be made based on the ceiling 
fixed by the Govt. of India and utilisation capacity of the institution. 
 
Issues raised in meeting of DRSC on Home Affairs  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.14  The Committee takes note of the submission of the M inistry regarding relaxation of cut-
off date for UTs of Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep and would like to be apprised of the 
decision taken in this regard in writing.  
(Para 5.14.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.5.15  A proposal in this regard was taken up with  M/o Finance at Home Secretary level on 
15 
th May, 2015. Even though, no reply was received in this regard, it is relevant to mention here that the 
issue was discussed during the discussion on budget  at RE stage and no cut was imposed at the RE 
Stage in the last Financial year.  
 
  

28 
 
DA to the DRMs working in APWD  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.16  The Committee notes that the allocation to the UT i s not as per requirement, especially 
on Plan side and therefore the Government should co nsider enhancement at RE stage. It also takes 
note of the slow pace of umpteen numbers of project s in various sectors in the UT. The Committee is 
unable to understand the dichotomy between higher a llocation and incompletion of projects. Crores of 
funds are being pumped in the UT but nothing substa ntial is visible on the ground in terms of social 
and physical infrastructure. The Committee strongly  recommends that policy makers should deliberate 
on the slow pace of development in the UT of Andama n and Nicobar Islands and come out with short 
term strategies to achieve them. The Committee also  recommends that the Government should 
seriously look into all the issues flagged by the M ember representing Andaman and Nicobar Islands in 
Lok Sabha and address them at the earliest and appr ise the Committee about action taken in this 
regard. 
(Para 5.16.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.5.17  55-60% of the plan fund is only available f or development. All materials for 
development works are to be brought from mainland.  Fragile ecology, Island’s topography and limited 
working season are constraints for development. Thu s, there is slow pace of development. 
Administration is taking all efforts to give moment um to development. All the spending authorities 
have been instructed to project their requirement b ased on realistic assessment. Provisions for Plan 
expenditure are to be made for the schemes that have been fully worked out and accepted by competent 
authority viz. SFC/EFC and where infrastructure for  implementation exists. Administration has set up 
an online tool to monitor the progress of all proje cts costing Rs.4.00 crore and above. Further, 
continuous monitoring of major projects/ expenditur e is being done. All the issues flagged by the 
Hon’ble Member representing A&N Islands in Lok Sabha are also being addressed.  
 
2.6 DEMAND NO. 91(CHANDIGARH) 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.6.1 The Committee notes the submission of the Mem ber of Committee and recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should pay attention to gr owing crisis of traffic congestion in the UT of 
Chandigarh. Besides, the issue of declaring Punjabi  as second language of the UT of Chandigarh may 
be considered in view of the location of the UT. 
(Para 5.18.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 This is an administrative matter and necessar y steps will be taken to solve the issues 
administratively. 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.6.3 The Committee understands that Chandigarh bei ng the joint capital of States of Punjab and 
Haryana, is a centrally-administered union territor y (UT) where for about four decades, the 60:40 
quota system is in place for filling vacancies in t he Chandigarh administration from Punjab and 

29 
 
Haryana, respectively. The Committee recommends tha t this system should be adhered to and there 
should be no violation of this arrangement sanctioned by Punjab Reorganization Act, 1966. 
(Para 5.18.9 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.4 This is an administrative matter and necessar y steps will be taken to solve the issues 
administratively. 
 
2.7 DEMAND NO. 92 (DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI) 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.7.1 The Committee also takes note of the issues c oncerning the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
flagged by Member of the Committee. The Committee a lso notes that most of the issues were raised 
earlier and taken up with the Ministry, however, no thing has reflected on ground. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should look into the issues and address them at 
the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
(Para 5.19.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 Instructions have been given to concerned Dep artments to give special attention to address the 
issues noted by the Committee. 
 
2.8 DEMAND NO. 93 (Daman & Diu) 
 
Repealing/Amending of Portuguese Laws  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.8.1 The Committee also finds merit in the represe ntation made by Daman Industries Association 
regarding issues pertaining to the industrial devel opment of the UT. The Committee understands that 
the UT of Daman & Diu, being an underdeveloped UT, should be given incentives in terms of tax 
holidays (sales tax and income tax exemption) for more years, to stop migration of industry and capital 
from the UT and subsequent loss of employment and i ncome. Besides, issues of giving subsidies, like 
power subsidy, Interest subsidy on Capital, Industr ial promotional subsidy, in different forms, 
technological up gradation subsidy, should be considered in the interest of the development of the UT. 
(Para 5.52 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 In the UT of Daman & Diu, exemption from paym ent of Central Sales Tax is up to 31.12.2017 
or 15 years whichever is earlier from the date of 1
st  Sale by the Medium Industry (MSI)/Large Scale 
Industry (LSI) registered as such in U.T. of Daman & Diu. A proposal for extension of tax benefit 
beyond 2017 is also under consideration. 
 
2.8.3 Further, a robust Industrial Policy has alrea dy been formulated so that not only industries find  
an incentive to stay back but new industries are al so attracted to the territory. UT Administration of  
Daman & Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli has announce d the New Industrial Policy on 22.01.2015 to 

30 
 
ensure sustained Promotion Schemes-2015 so as to fu rther improve the conducive industrial climate in 
the UTs and to provide global competitive edge to t he industries. The said policy includes subsidies 
like interest subsidy on Capital, Industrial promot ional subsidy in different form, technology 
upgradation subsidy etc. 
 
2.9 PATHANKOT AIRBASE ATTACK 
 
Foreign Hand Behind The Attack 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.9.1 In view of the Committee, there can be no two  opinions on the fact that Pakistan based Jaish-e-
Mohammad terror group was behind this ghastly terro r attack, which was established through 
interception of calls between terrorists and their handlers based in Pakistan, thanks to their use of 
robbed mobile phones from Pathankot SP and his frie nd. Besides, weapons, ammunitions and many 
items found in possession of killed terrorists are also said to be having 'Made in Pakistan' marking. 
(Para 6.3.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.9.2 No action is required as these are statements  of facts. 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.9.3 In view of the ease with which the terrorists  sneaked into our side from Pakistan, the 
Committee understands that the attack cannot take p lace without active support from security and 
intelligence agencies of Pakistan as four armed men  cannot easily pass through heavy Pakistani 
defence establishment situated near border area. 
(Para 6.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.9.4 The NIA is investigating the incident from al l aspects.  
 
Preventing Measure for Future Attacks  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.5 The Committee notes the various measures take n by the Government of India to effectively 
counter future terror attacks. The Committee is of the view that only security 
establishment/infrastructure in place will not do b ut there should be proper intelligence gathering an d 
timely sharing of inputs between various security a gencies in real time which will help anticipate an 
attack and launch counter terror operations. The Co mmittee hopes that the security agencies would 
learn lessons from terror attacks of past to avoid mistakes in future. 
(Para 6.5.4) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.6 Different agencies involved in the Border gua rding and intelligence generating have undertaken 
review of their preparedness and capabilities.  Act ions have also been taken to plug the loopholes and  
improving the capabilities. 

31 
 
CHAPTER - III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
3.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.1.1  The Committee simultaneously expresses its anguish on the grievous breach of security in 
Pathankot and Gurdaspur (Punjab) and feels that the se incidents put a question mark on our security 
preparedness and reflects of gaps in our intelligen ce network. The Committee observes that these 
incidents put shadow on all other achievements made  on the internal security front and hence 
impresses upon the Ministry to take all steps to see that such incidents are not repeated in future. 
(Para 2.16 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.1.2 There was close coordination between the Cent ral Intelligence /Security Forces and the State 
Security Forces before and during the anti-terroris t operation at Pathankot air base. Due to the well 
planned, well-coordinated anti-terrorist operation by the security forces and the real-time mobilizati on 
and deployment of security forces, all the terrorists involved in the attack were neutralized without any 
loss of assets of the Indian Air force, which was t he main target of attack by the terrorists.  There was 
clear chain of command and control during the operation. 
 
3.1.3 The exact mode and the route taken by the ter rorists, while infiltrating from Pakistan, is still  
under investigation by the NIA.  However, the steps  taken by the Government to strengthen the 
security measures and to counter the cross-border infiltration in Punjab border areas as under: 
 
i. In order to strengthen border domination, one more Battalion of BSF has been inducted in 
Gurdaspur sector on Punjab Border. 
ii. One pilot project for deploying technological solut ions in 2 patches of 5-6 kilometers of 
riverine gaps and sensitive areas of Jammu Frontier has been sanctioned. 
iii. Introduction of Force Multipliers and Hi-tech surveillance equipments to reduce stress level 
of troops and enhance the surveillance border. 
iv. Up-gradation of Intelligence Network and coordination with sister agencies. 
v. Conduct of special operations along the Border and in-depth areas. 
vi. Vulnerability mapping of BOPs along Indo Pak Border  are being reviewed from time to 
time. 
vii. Four Pilot Projects of approx. 30-40 kilometers eac h in different terrains and sensitive 
riverine gaps in Jammu, Punjab, Gujarat and West Bengal States have been approved by the 
Government. 
viii. Forty-five more laser / IR Intrusion detection syst em are being fabricated and being 
installed in Punjab (eight have been fabricated and installed). 
ix. Twenty-Six Training Companies are being deployed on Border for better domination. 
 
3.1.4 However, the Government has taken note of the  observations of the Committee and reaffirms 
its firm commitment to fight the menace of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
 

32 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.1.5 Despite the several steps reportedly taken by  the Government to strengthen the security 
measures, it has comprehensively failed to prevent recurrence of such attacks that took place at 
Pampore, Uri, Baramula, Handwara and Nagrota. The C ommittee observes that the 
Government has not learnt any lesson from the Patha nkot attack. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that there remains an urgent need to fur ther strengthen the security network and 
plug the serious gaps in security establishment and intelligence gathering/sharing that have come 
to the fore in the recent attacks.  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.1.6 The Committee notes that 78% (approx. 12000) Police Stations are registering 100% FIR and 
an advisory to ensure no discrimination in register ing FIRs was issued on 12th August, 2015. 
However, the Committee doubts this claim and therefore, would like to know the basis used to arrive at 
this claim that 78% (approx. 12000) Police Stations  are registering 100% FIR. However, efforts 
should be continued to achieve this in all police stations. 
(Para 2.19 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.1.7 All States except Bihar and Rajasthan which a re encountering delays in engaging System 
Integrators are using CCTNS software. Out of total 14999 Police Stations (PS) in the country 1757 PS 
are in these two States.  
 
3.1.8 In the balance 13242 PS in the country, prese ntly 12519 PS (94.54%) are entering 100% FIRs 
using CCTNS software. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
 
3.1.9 The Committee is displeased to note that the Government is furnishing a vague and 
evasive reply to the serious issue like, refusal of  registration of FIR. The Committee had 
recommended to ensure FIR registration in Police stations without any discrimination so that the 
common people could get justice but the action taken in this regard reflects filing of FIR through 
CCTNS software. Filing of FIR through CCTNS softwar e is entirely secondary issue. The main 
issue is refusal to register FIR by the Police in P olice stations.  The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Government should consider maki ng refusal of registration of FIR by 
Police Personnel, a criminal offence, and action be  taken 
 against such erring Police Personnel. 
Merely issuing an advisory to the States in this regard will not suffice.  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.1.10  The Committee also notes that the priority of Centr al Government in dealing with Left 
Wing Extremism (LWE) is development, ensuring right s and entitlements of local communities and 
public perception management. The Committee is of t he view that development measures should have 
precedence over security measures while dealing wit h Left Wing Extremists, though security measures 
cannot be ignored. 
(Para 2.25 ibid) 
  

33 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.11  Development in the States is the primary re sponsibility of the States concerned.  The 
LWE affected states have taken/been taking various initiatives in the field of development.  The 
Central Governments supplements efforts of the Stat e Governments through various 
flagship/developmental schemes.  
 
3.1.12  The Government is committed for overall/hol istic development of the LWE affected 
States. This is one of the most important parts of the multi-pronged strategy of the Government. Some 
of the major flagship/developmental schemes being i mplemented in LWE affected States and their 
achievements are as follows: 
 
(i) Road Requirement Plan (RRP-I): The MoRTH is imp lementing this scheme for constructing 
5,422 km roads in 34 LWE affected districts, of whi ch 4,092 km roads have been completed up 
to 30.06.2016. Construction of 1,330 km roads is under progress. 
 
(ii) RRP-II: MoRD has circulated draft note for CCS  to the concerned departments seeking 
their comments. The MoRD has included 5412 kms of R oads and 126 bridges/CD works in 44 
districts of 9 LWE states having financial implicat ion of Rs. 11725 crores (approx.). The 
roads/bridges proposals were selected by MHA. 
 
(iii) Skill Development in 34 LWE affected district s: The Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship (MoSDE) is constructing 01 ITI and 02 Skill Development Centers (SDCs) in 
each of 34 LWE affected districts along with skill training for 5,340 youths of these districts. 
Construction of ITIs and SDCs is in progress.  Up t o 30.06.2016, total 4,290 youths been 
identified for training of which 2,979 have completed or are undergoing training.  
 
(iv)    Pradhan MantriKaushalVikasYojana (PMKVY):   This flagship Scheme is being 
implemented in whole of the country, including LWE affected States to enable a large number 
of Indian youth to take up industry-relevant skill training that will help them in securing a 
better livelihood. Out of 35 most LWE affected dist ricts, 31 are already covered under the 
scheme. 
 
(v)  Integrated Action Plan (IAP)/Additional Centra l Assistance (ACA): - This scheme was 
under implementation from 2010-11 to 2014-15 for providing public infrastructure and services 
in 88 districts in the LWE affected States. Under this Scheme, total 1,70,024 projects have been 
sanctioned in 10 LWE affected States.  As on 11.07. 2016, 1,65,0681 projects have been taken 
up, of which 1,42,884 projects have been completed and 22,184 projects are in progress. The 
scheme has been delinked from central assistance from 2015-16. 
 
(vi) Forest Rights Act 2006: - Under the Forest Rig hts Act 2006, title deeds are distributed to 
traditional forest dwellers/local committees to pro tect and vest their rights & entitlements on 
the forest land. Up to 31.05.2016, total 14,37,651 title deeds have been distributed in 10 LWE 
affected states.   
 
(vii)   Installation of Mobile Towers:  Under this Scheme of DoT, total 2,199 mobile towers are 
to be installed in LWE affected States, of which 21 19 mobile towers have been completed. 
Installation of remaining towers is in progress. Be sides, other Ministries/Department, like 

34 
 
Ministry of Power, Department of Financial Services , Ministry of Rural Development, 
Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry  of Drinking Water & Sanitation etc., are 
also implementing various schemes in LWE affected States.  
 
3.1.13  Progress of these flagship/developmental sc hemes is monitored/reviewed by the 
Ministries/Departments concerned as well as MHA.   In the MHA, progress of the schemes/ programs 
is reviewed on regular basis through meetings/video  conferences with the Ministries/Departments and 
State Governments. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.1.14  The Committee notes with regret that the In tegrated Action Plan (IAP)/ 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) scheme which wa s implemented for a period of 5 years in 
88 districts in the LWE affected states, was delink ed from central assistance with effect from 
2015-16. The action taken note does not say why a s cheme that has been successfully 
implemented for 5 years and was generally acclaimed was delinked from central assistance.   
 
3.1.15  The Committee would like to know: 
i. The status of the 22,184 projects that had been tak en up but had not been 
completed on account of the delinking. 
ii. Which State Governments have continued IAP/ACA usin g their own funds and 
which State Governments have discontinued the scheme?  
iii. Have the State Governments, which continued IAP/ACA  schemes, made adequate 
provision for taking up vital infrastructure projec ts in accordance with the 
original objective of IAP/ACA? 
iv. What alternative arrangements have been made by the  State Governments which 
have discontinued IAP/ACA altogether to meet the original objective of IAP/ACA? 
 
3.1.16   Since the Government appears to have reduc ed the emphasis on the development 
measures by delinking IAP/ACA scheme from central a ssistance, the Committee would like to 
know whether this has been duly compensated by enhanced security measures.  
 
3.2 DEMAND NO. 46- MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.2.1  The Committee takes note of the various reasons cit ed for decrease of Rs.237.20 crore in RE 
2015-16 over BE 2015-16 under 'Non-Plan' and expres ses its displeasure that non finalization of 
proposal under various Schemes of National Disaster  Response Force, non-finalization of proposal of 
shifting of campus of National Fire Service college , Nagpur and non-finalization of rehabilitation 
package of displaced Kashmiri Migrants which included providing 3000 Government Jobs to Kashmiri 
Migrants and construction of transit accommodation in the Valley are some of the reasons for this 
decrease. In view of the above, the Committee recom mends that the Ministry should dwell into the 
reasons for these delays in many important schemes/ projects under the Head and put its machinery 
into gear to fast pace finalization of these schemes/packages at the earliest.  
(Para 3.1.6 ibid) 
 
 

35 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.2.2 Recommendation of the committee has been note d for compliance. Efforts shall be made to put 
machinery into gear to fast pace finalization of sc hemes pertaining to DM Division at the earliest. 
However, updates with regard to the concerned schemes may be seen as under: - 
 
3.2.3 Shifting of the Campus of National Fire Servi ce College, Nagpur: The construction work of the 
building for NFSC, Nagpur is likely to be completed shortly.  
 
3.2.4 National Disaster Response Force: In terms of  Rule 134 of the GFR, a Committee has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of JS (DM), MHA.  Director (Finance), IFD MHA, Head (Project 
of the concerned PWOs/CPWD and IG, NDRF are other m embers of the committee. The purpose of 
the committee is to monitor the status of developme nt of approved projects in NDRF and to ensure 
maintenance of even pace of expenditure, so that bu dgetary allocations made available to NDRF are 
not reduced at RE stage. The Committee would also s uggest appropriate measures to be taken by 
NDRA/PWOs in proper execution of projects and utilisation of funds. 
 
3.2.5 Taking into account the past experience regar ding return and rehabilitation of Kashmir 
migrants, it was felt that a new package for rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants needs to be finalized in 
consultation with State Government and the represen tatives of the migrants, who are the main effected 
party. A number of meetings were held with State Go vernment officials and representatives of 
migrants which took some time and on certain matter s a decision was taken that the scheme may be 
prepared in phases. First phase scheme for providin g state government jobs to the Kashmiri migrants 
and construction of transit accommodations in the v alley is to be launched. Government of India has 
approved a package, involving an estimated expendit ure of Rs.2000 crore on 18/11/2015 for providing 
3000 additional State Govt. jobs to the Kashmiri mi grants and construction of about 6000 transit 
accommodations in the valley.  Approval of the Govt . in this regard has been sent to State Govt. of 
J&K on 04/12/2015 requesting them to take necessary  action to implement the proposal at the earliest.  
Ministry is making all out efforts to streamline th e scheme/project. Since the main implementing 
agency is the State Govt. of J&K, it takes time for collaborating with the State Govt. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.2.6 The Committee takes into account the assuranc e of the Government with regard to fast 
pacing of finalization of schemes of DM Division. T he Committee hopes that the construction 
work of the building for NFSC, Nagpur would be comp leted as per schedule. The Committee 
desires that the Central Government should persuade  the State Government of J&K for early 
implementation of the fresh package. 
 
3.3 CIVIL DEFENCE 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.3.1  The Committee takes serious view of the fact that d uring 2015-16, there was no Central 
financial assistance to the States for revitalizati on of Civil Defence since all the Centrally Sponsor ed 
schemes have been subsumed in the State Plan Funds since 1 
st April, 2015. The Committee is not 
satisfied with the argument put forward by the Mini stry to justify scrapping of Central support on the  
ground of so called higher share of allocation to S tates in the 14th Finance Commission. The 

36 
 
Committee is unable to understand why the Central G overnment in a federal set up is abdicating its 
responsibilities and leaving the State Governments in a lurch. The Committee is aware of the fact that  
some State Governments are already hard pressed eve n in terms of paying salaries to their employees, 
etc. and it is almost impossible for them to manage  additional resources to carry out the plan schemes  
as per their own requirement. Therefore, the Commit tee recommends that the Government must 
continue to give financial assistance to the States for revitalization of Civil Defence. 
(Para 3.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.3.2 Concern of the committee has been noted for f uture compliance. 
 
3.3.3 An EFC proposal for the Scheme for strengthen ing of Civil Defence set up in the country 
costing Rs. 328 crore was submitted to Ministry of Finance for approval but the same has not been 
agreed to. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.3.4 The Committee does not agree with the decisio n of the Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affa irs should pursue with Ministry of 
Finance for approval of the proposal for the Scheme  for strengthening of Civil Defence set up in 
the Country.  
 
3.4 RELIEF & REHABILITATION OF MIGRANTS AND REPATRI ATES 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.4.1 The Committee takes serious view of the fact that R s.174.22 crore only was spent till February 
2016 out of the allocation of Rs.280 crore made in RE 2015-16 for relief and rehabilitation of 
Kashmiri migrants under Security Related Expenditur e. The committee would like the Ministry to find 
out the reasons for underutilisation of funds for a  scheme which calls for immediate attention and tak e 
all measures to hasten the pace of expenditure. The  Committee would like to be apprised of the 
detailed action plan drawn in this regard. 
 
(Para 3.4.9 ibid) 
 Action Taken  
 
3.4.2 A scheme for providing additional 3000 state government jobs to the Kashmiri migrants and to 
construct 6000 transit accommodations in the Kashmir migrants has been approved by the Government 
of India on 18 
th November 2015. The scheme is to be implemented by t he state Government of Jammu 
and Kashmir, accordingly the same has been requeste d vide MHA letter dated 04-12-2015 to take 
immediate necessary action for implementation of th e proposal at the earliest. Implementation of the 
scheme is a gradual process. The amount is to be ut ilized by the MHA by way of reimbursement to the 
state government under Security Related Expenditure  (Relief & Rehabilitation)-SRE (R&R), against 
its claim for expenditure incurred in implementatio n of the scheme. No claim was received from the 
state government of J&K in this respect during 2015 -16, except some claims against providing a living 
in Jammu, so the full amount could not be utilized.  The State Government is being pursued to expedite 
the implementation of the scheme. Implementation of  the various schemes for relief and rehabilitation 
of Kashmiri migrants is being closely reviewed and monitored by the Ministry of Home Affairs. In 

37 
 
addition, a Coordination Committee has been constit uted for monitoring the progress in 
implementation of the package(S) for the return and rehabilitation of the Kashmir migrants.  
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
 
3.4.3 The Committee deeply regrets to note that whi le the Central and State Governments had 
repeatedly expressed serious concerns about the ret urn and rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants 
but the funds allocated for the purpose have not be en utilised. The responsibility for return and 
rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants rests heavily upon the State Government and the Committee 
is concerned about the approach of the State Govern ment in this regard as it appears to be 
callous.  The Committee desires that the Central Go vernment should prevail upon the State 
Government to take up the matter of return and reha bilitation of Kashmiri migrants with the 
seriousness that it deserves and ensure that the funds allocated for the purpose are fully utilised. 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.4.4 However, the Committee simultaneously notes t hat the Government has approved a package in 
November 2015, involving an estimated expenditure o f Rs.2000 Crore for providing financial 
assistance for additional 3000 State Government job s to the Kashmiri migrants and construction of 
6000 transit accommodations in the Kashmir Valley. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would 
pursue the J&K State Government to speed up impleme ntation of this package in terms of providing 
jobs and construction of transit accommodations for Kashmiri Migrants. 
(Para 3.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.5 The State Government is being pursued to expe dite the implementation of the scheme. It has 
been informed by the State Government that 300 post s have been identified in 16 different 
Departments and necessary action is being taken for  creation of these posts.  Authorization has been 
issued to executing agency (JKPCC) for construction  of 400 transit accommodations and about 90 
acres’ land has been   identified in seven district s in Kashmir valley for remaining transit 
accommodations. 
 
3.4.6 Implementation of the various schemes for rel ief and rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants is 
being closely reviewed and monitored by the Ministr y of Home Affairs. In addition, a Coordination 
Committee has been constituted for monitoring the p rogress in implementation of the package(s) for 
the return and rehabilitation of the Kashmiri migrants. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.4.7 The Committee takes into account the steps ta ken in implementing estimated expenditure 
of Rs. 2000 crore for providing financial assistanc e for additional 3000 State Government jobs to 
the Kashmiri migrants and construction of 6000 tran sit accommodations in the Kashmir Valley. 
The Committee desires that Central Government should persuade the State Government of J&K 
for early implementation of scheme for filling up i dentified/targeted number of posts and 
construction of adequate number of transit accommod ations in a time bound manner for 
actualizing the policy of return and rehabilitation of the Kashmiri migrants. 
 

38 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.4.8 The Committee also notes that the Government has approved a proposal with estimated 
expenditure of Rs.13.45 crore per annum, to provide  relief to the migrants of the hilly areas of Jammu  
division (who migrated from different hilly areas o f Jammu division to safer places of nearby towns 
due to security reasons) at par with the Kashmiri m igrants. The Committee appreciates that they will 
be provided with cash relief of Rs.2500 per head per month (maximum Rs.10000 per family per month) 
plus relief for ration/fodder. The Committee is hopeful that this relief measure is implemented in a time 
bound manner. The Committee would like to be inform ed about the steps proposed to be taken to fast 
track these rehabilitation moves of the Government. 
(Para 3.4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.4.9 The Govt. of India has approved, on 18-11-201 5, a proposal for providing relief to the migrants 
of the hilly areas of Jammu division at par with th e Kashmiri migrants i.e. cash relief of Rs. 2500 pe r 
head per month (maximum Rs. 10000 per family per mo nth) plus relief for ration/fodder, involving a 
total estimated expenditure of Rs. 13.45 Crore per annum. The State Government has been requested 
by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide its letter dated 04.12.2015 to take immediate necessary action for 
implementing the proposal. The State Government of J&K has issued necessary order of implementing 
the proposal vide letter dated 19-01-2016. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
  
3.4.10  The Committee takes into account the relief  package to the migrants of the hilly 
areas of Jammu division at par with the Kashmiri mi grants i.e. cash relief of Rs. 2500 per head 
per month (maximum Rs. 10000 per family per month) plus relief for ration/fodder, involving a 
total estimated expenditure of Rs. 13.45 crore per annum and the directions of the State 
Government of J&K in implementing the same. The Com mittee desires that Central 
Government should persuade the State Government of J&K for early implementation at the 
ground level in a time bound manner for adequate an d expeditious relief to the aggrieved 
individuals.  Since complaints come about the lack of implementation at ground level, the 
Committee recommends that the Government may persua de the State Government to ensure 
that the transfer of the cash relief is done through Aadhaar linked bank accounts.  
 
3.5 DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.5.1 The Committee is constrained to note that Rs.  919.29 crore allocated under the Head 'Disaster 
Management' in BE 2015-16 was reduced to Rs. 650.99  crore at RE stage due to delay in undertaking 
the works of development of infrastructure of vario us NDRF battalions. The Committee does not want 
to go into procedural wrangles leading to delay in taking off of any project and recommends that 
procedural complexities should be minimized to fast  pace the project concerning development of 
infrastructure of various NDRF battalions. The Comm ittee would like to be apprised of the utilisation 
status of funds in the first quarter of the current  financial year against the administration sanction  
order. 
(Para 3.5.10 ibid) 

39 
 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.5.2 The concern of the committee regarding slow p ace of the project concerning development of 
Infrastructure of various NDRF battalions is very w ell appreciated. As part of the monitoring 
measures, since March 2016, 3 meetings have been ta ken at a very senior level with the officers of 
NDRF and representatives of the PWOs/CPWD etc., to review the progress of construction works 
approved for NDRF BNs.  
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.5.3 The Committee strongly recommends that the pr oject concerning development of 
infrastructure must be implemented at an accelerate d pace for effective disaster management in 
the country.   
 
3.6 DEMAND NO. 48 – POLICE 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.6.1 The Committee notes that major reduction has been made under Schemes of Border 
Infrastructure & Management and Police Infrastructure. 
(Para 4.1.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.6.2 Regarding Border Infrastructure & Management,  in actual RE 2015-16, the original BE 
allocation in respect of Border infrastructure of f ence, road, BOP, Floodlights, ICPs was largely 
retained for almost majority of items. The reductio n under coastal plan was mainly on account of non-
materialization of procurement of Boats for Coastal  Security Scheme Phase - II. It is stated that out of 
actual RE of Rs.2744.24 crore, a sum of Rs.2742.34 crore i.e. 99.93% has been utilised. 
 
3.6.3 For infrastructure for CAPFs, an amount of Rs .4150.59 crore was projected for 2016-17 against 
which an amount of Rs.2593.82 crore has been allocated in BE 2016-17. 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.6.4 The Committee also notes that there is an inc rease of 12.97 % in BE 2016 as compared to what 
was allocated in BE 2015-16 whereas there is an inc rease of 10.33 % in comparison to RE 2015-16 
under Demand No. 48. However, this nominal increase  does not seem to be in sync with what was 
projected by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Comm ittee also notes that the major shortfall has been 
under Schemes concerning Central Armed Police Force s, Security Related Expenditure (SRE), Border 
Infrastructure & Management and Police Infrastructu re which are of vital importance in terms of 
ensuring internal security in the country. In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue with Finance Ministry/NITI Ayog for higher allocation 
at RE stage as reduced allocation might hamper ongo ing schemes/projects as well as taking off of new 
projects. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry  to take steps for judicious and optimum 
utilisation of available resources to ward off any impact of decrease in allocation vis-à-vis projecte d 
allocation. 
(Para 4.1.10 ibid) 

40 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.6.5 Rs. 300 crore has been allocated under SRE Sc heme for NE States in BE 2016-17 against the 
demand of Rs. 450 Cr. Enhanced budgetary provisions  from Rs. 300 Cr. to 450 Cr. will be taken up at 
RE stage based on actual requirement. 
 
3.6.6 In BE 2015-16, Rs. 210 crore was allocated un der Security Related Expenditure (SRE) scheme 
for LWE States.  The amount was increased at RE sta ge to Rs. 258.65 crore. The entire amount 
allocated in RE stage has been spent. 
 
3.6.7 An amount of Rs.4150.59 crore was projected f or 2016-17 against which an amount of 
Rs.2593.82 crore has been allocated in BE 2016-17. Further, demand of Rs.12243.25 crore has been 
projected in the Mid-Term Review of 12 
th  Plan for capital infrastructure.  
 
3.6.8 The border projects along all the land border s of the country as well as the Scheme of Coastal 
Security are on-going schemes/projects and the requ irement of additional funds at RE stage will be 
projected/ demanded as per the pace of work and req uirement of funds by the 
construction/implementing agencies. 
 
3.6.9 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the matter of providing additional 
funds will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the time of Supplementary Demands for Grants and 
Revised Estimates Stages. 
 
3.6.10  Due care is taken to optimally utilize budg etary allocation through various mechanisms 
developed for oversight. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.6.11  The Committee notes that, according to the action taken note under Border 
Infrastructure and Management, the BE amount for 20 15-16 was largely retained at the RE 
stage. Of this, in the case of the Coastal Security Scheme Phase II, 99.93% of the RE amount was 
actually spent by the end of 2015-16.  If this is t he position, it is not clear why in respect of 
infrastructure for CAPFs, against the projection of  Rs.4150.59 crores, only Rs.2593.82 crores 
was allocated in BE 2016-17.  The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the reasons why the 
projection of the Ministry of Home Affairs was not accepted and what prompted the Ministry of 
Finance to drastically reduce the amount at the sta ge of BE 2016-17. While furnishing their 
answer to this recommendation, the Ministry may pre sent the figures in tabular form showing 
the overall allocation for Border Infrastructure an d Management and the amounts allocated for 
each component under Border Infrastructure and Management. 
 
3.7 NATGRID 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.7.1 The Committee is aware that NATGRID was conce ived after the 2008 Mumbai Terror Attack 
which, many in security establishments believe, cou ld have been averted but for delayed scattered 
intelligence. It aims to bring to one platform inte lligence from over 20 agencies like railways, banks , 

41 
 
IB, RAW, CBI, ED, Central Board of Direct Taxes, et c. The NATRGID is expected to use cutting edge 
technology to place all the details regarding telep hone, residential, travel and banking of a suspect on 
a common platform. However, the Committee is extrem ely disappointed at the slow progress. 
NATGRID was conceived in 2010-11 to be put in place  in four phases. Two phases were planned to be 
completed by 2014 at an estimated cost of Rs. 1100 crore. It is disheartening to know that even phase 
one has not been completed till date. 
(Para 4.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.2 In this regard, it is stated that the work of  DRC at Bangalore is in final stage. The Data Centr e 
& BCP, New Delhi was delayed due to the dispute between SDMC and DDA which was resolved only 
recently and hence the construction could be started in Feb., 2016.  
 
3.7.3 Meanwhile, an Advisory Committee has revalida ted the DPR and has also suggested 
improvements in technologies by incorporating Big D ata Technology, Network Level Encryption, use 
of Data Diode, etc. User Agency requirements have b een finalized.  Providing Organizations have 
been taken on board and necessary legal requirement s are being formulated. Expression of Interest 
(EOI) of Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) is under issue. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION   
 
3.7.4 The Committee is examining NATGRID separately  and will give detailed observations on 
this in that report.  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.7.5 The Committee is also aware that construction  of a building to house NATGRID was given to 
NBCC after foundation stone was laid in 2014 in Sou th Delhi. It has taken around 2 years to get 
clearance from the State Level Environment Impact A ssessment Authority (SLEIAA), which was 
granted in November, 2015. Though as per the Minist ry's information, construction has begun w.e.f 
February, 2016, the estimated cost of the proposed complex is Rs. 150 crore but the total budget 
allocation in 2016-17 is only Rs. 45 crore. It is v ery clear to the Committee that Government has gone  
slow on the NATGRID project whereas it strongly fee ls that this project should be given priority in 
order to tackle high-tech terrorism which has becom e order of the day. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry must prepare a plan wi th clear timeframe within which all the four 
phases should be completed as per set target and if  required, the Ministry should ask for enhanced 
allocation at RE stage. 
(Para 4.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.7.6 It is clarified that the total budget allocat ion for NATGRID under the head Major works is Rs 
59 Cr for year 2016-17. The construction work for New Delhi has been awarded for Rs 154.25 Cr to be 
completed over a period of 2 years. The demand for Major works is a conservative demand, keeping in 
view the earlier savings in BE. The sanction of bui lding plans is likely to be considered by the South  
Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) in the month of September 2016. The requirement of any 
additional fund for 2016-17 would be assessed and s ought through Supplementary Demand for Grants 
/ RE stage. The budgetary requirements for 2017-18 would be planned suitably as per progress of the 
works. 

42 
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION   
 
3.7.7 The Committee is examining NATGRID separately  and will give detailed observations on 
this issue in that report.  
 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.7.8 The Committee is given to understand that NAT GRID aims to enhance the country’s counter-
terrorism capability through sharing information on line and providing actionable intelligence. The 
Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry, j ustifying uneven trend of allocation of funds meant  
for NATGRID since last financial year, hopes that N ew Implementation Plan (NIP) as envisaged 
would prove to be successful experiment in terms of  cost effectiveness and conducive to maintain 
strategic control. Since this project is of nationa l importance in terms of ensuring internal security  of 
this country, the Committee also recommends that bu reaucratic red-tapism should be kept at minimum 
to check procedural delay without compromising quality in implementation of this project. Besides, the 
Government should make allocation as per requirement to help erect necessary physical infrastructure 
and make NATGRID functional at the earliest.   
(Para 4.2.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.7.9 Allocation already exists for the said requir ement for erecting necessary physical infra- 
structure and making NATGRID functional at the earliest. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
  
3.7.10  The Committee is examining NATGRID separate ly and will give detailed 
observations on this in that report.  
 
3.8 DELHI POLICE 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the imple mentation status of modernization plans of Delhi 
Police during the last financial year. The Committe e finds that in most of the Plan schemes such as 
"Modernization of Traffic and Communication Network  of Delhi Police", "Induction of Latest 
Technology and Capacity Building", "Public Private Partnership Initiative, the Ministry has not even 
been able to spend 50% of the allocation made at RE  2015-16 till 29th February, 2016. It exposes low 
absorption capacity of Delhi Police which might hav e led to low allocation by the Finance Ministry in 
this fiscal. The Committee strongly recommends that  Delhi Police should evaluate and analyze the 
reasons for underutilisation of funds in its plan i nitiatives and draw an action plan to fast track 
completion of its schemes/projects without further time and cost overruns, otherwise it would be a 
futile attempt projecting higher allocation. 
(Para 4.3.9 ibid) 
 
 
 

43 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 Regular expenditure review meetings are held in MHA and implementing units of Delhi Police 
are sensitized on the issue. Delhi Police has repor ted that all Plan implementing units have been 
directed to fast track the proposals for obtaining requisite approvals and all possible efforts be mad e to 
complete the proposals/projects within the time fra me and fully utilize the allocated funds during the  
current financial year 2016-17. Delhi Police has al so reported that regular meetings on monthly basis 
are being held to discuss the status of proposals a nd review of expenditure for optimum utilisation of  
budget during the current financial year 2016-17.  
 
3.8.3 The details of BE, final allocation and expen diture incurred by Delhi Police during 2015-16 
under Plan and Non-Plan heads are as under: 
 
                                                                                                 (Rs. in crores) 
Non-Plan/ Plan 2015-16 
B.E.  Final Allocation  Exp. upto 31/3/16  
Non-Plan 4979.48 5024.38  5021.95 
Plan 390.00 442.07  441.89 
Total 5369.48 5466.45  5463.84 
 
3.8.4 Additional allocation received for Delhi Poli ce Building Programme and “Induction of Latest 
Technology and Capacity Building” during 2015-16 has been fully utilized during the year. 
 
3.8.5 Status of the PPP projects as reported by Del hi Police is as under: 
 
o Dheerpur Housing Complex:  Due to non-achievement o f financial closure by the 
Concessionaire, the construction work of Residential Complex at Dheerpur could not be 
started.  However, all the mandatory clearances hav e already been obtained from local 
bodies on 19 March 2015.   
 
o Construction of Delhi Police Head Quarter: Approval  of building plans of New PHQ 
building have been received from NDMC on 23 March 2 016. Excavation work has 
already been started at site. Appointed date as per  Concession Agreement has been 
fixed for 31 March 2016 and construction work will be completed within 840 days from 
the appointed date. 
 
3.8.6 It is also added that regular meetings are be ing held by MHA with Delhi Police to monitor the 
progress of the projects, to ensure that the same are completed in a time bound manner. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
 
3.8.9 The Committee expresses its displeasure that despite mandatory clearance from local 
bodies on 19 
th  March, 2015, Dheerpur Housing Complex for Delhi Po lice could not be started 
due to non achievement of financial closure. The Co mmittee would like to be apprised whether 
financial closure has since been achieved and wheth er the construction of the housing complex 
has started; if so, from which date. If, despite th e passage of 22 months, the construction of the 
housing complex has not yet been started, the Commi ttee would like to be apprised whether 

44 
 
accountability has been fixed on the persons concer ned. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised whether the role of the concessionaire sho uld be examined and whether there are any 
lapses or defaults on the part of the concessionair e and, if so whether any action has been taken 
against the concessionaire, including its replacement, so that construction of the housing complex 
may start immediately. 
 
 
3.9 BORDER MANAGEMENT  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.9.1 The Committee takes note of the status of ong oing as well as new schemes/projects likely to be 
undertaken during this financial year. The Committee also notes various bottlenecks coming in the way 
of the fencing, flood lighting and border road proj ects such as issues in land acquisition, bilateral 
issues, protests by people residing in border areas , concerns of some border State Governments. The 
Committee, in view of this, recommends that these b ottlenecks should be dealt with by taking State 
Governments and people at large into confidence. Is sues involving neighboring countries who are 
opposed to fencing, flood lighting and border roads  in any particular patch of border areas should be 
taken up by the Ministry of Home Affairs in coordin ation with the Ministry of External Affairs through  
formal channels. 
(Para 4.5.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.9.2 All out efforts are being made to speed up th e process of obtaining forest/wildlife clearances a s 
well as acquisition of land. Wherever required, mat ter has been taken up with State Governments for 
land acquisition. Issues concerning other countries  are also being taken up in bilateral talks at 
appropriate levels. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.9.3 The Committee has taken up Border Management for detailed examination separately 
and accordingly, detailed observations will be made in that report.  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.9.4 The Committee notes the targets set under pha se-II of the Coastal Security Scheme such as 
construction of Coastal Police Stations, jetties, M arine Operation Centres, boats, Rigid Inflatable 
Boats (RIBs), large vessels, four wheelers and moto rcycles. The Committee also notes the submission 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs that approval of th e Cabinet Committee on Security for extension of 
the period of implementation of the Phase-II of the  Scheme for a period of 3 more years, w.e.f. 1st 
April, 2016 is being sought. The Committee observes  that the phase II of this scheme was supposed to 
be completed in the last financial year i.e. 2015-1 6, however, a lot of work is yet to be done under t his 
scheme. The Committee in view of this, while being hopeful that these proposals would be approved by 
CCS, strongly recommends that the Government should  make all out efforts to complete this scheme 
during extended time period without any time and cost overrun. 
(Para 4.5.4 ibid) 
 
 

45 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.9.5 During the Phase-II of the Scheme, the coasta l States/UTs were sanctioned 131 Coastal Police 
Stations (CPS), 60 Jetties, 225 Boats, 131 Four Wheelers, 242 Two Wheelers and a lump sum of Rs.15 
lakhs per CPS for purchase of Surveillance equipment, computer systems and furniture.   
 
3.9.6 Out of the sanctioned components, 109 CPSs ha ve been operationalized and 78 CPSs have 
been constructed. 35 CPSs are under various stages of construction.  Out of the 60 sanctioned Jetties,  
22 Jetties have been constructed/in operation. 127 Four Wheelers and 234 Two Wheelers have been 
purchased.  The process of the procurement of 225 b oats is presently underway in Police 
Modernization (PM) Division of MHA. 
 
3.9.7 The observations of the Department Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee have been 
noted.   
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.9.8 The Committee has taken up Border Management for detailed examination separately 
and accordingly, detailed observations will be made in that report.  
 
 
3.10 POLICE INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.10.1  The Committee takes note of the fact that t he CPWD has not yet started work on the 
construction of 80 quarters in NPA, Hyderabad and t he Ministry is considering a proposal to increase 
the number of quarters for construction. The Committee takes a serious note of all these developments. 
First of all, the CPWD should have started construc tion instead construction work has been halted. 
There seems to be something fishy in entire matter and a thorough probe needs to be done. The 
Committee also desires that construction of 24 quar ters being done in NEPA, Shillong should be 
completed as per the target fixed. There should be no time and cost overrun. 
(Para 4.11.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.10.2  NPA vide letter dated 02.09.2013 had submit ted the proposal for C/o of 80 Nos. 
Residential quarters through CPWD at an estimate co st of Rs. 16.55 cr for its staff members and for 
which the approval has been accorded by this Minist ry vide order dated 29.10.2014. However, NPA 
could not take up the work for construction of 80 Nos. residential quarters due to following reasons: 
 
(i) The Academy has sanctioned 274 new posts in the yea r 2011. Accordingly, the sanctioned 
strength of the Academy increased to 692 personnel.  To provide proper accommodation to 
its staff, the Academy is having only 350 Nos. of r esidential quarters. Thus, the Academy 
needs to construct 342 Nos. additional/new quarters. 
 
(ii) The Academy did not have any exclusive accommodatio n for the CISF contingent 
comprising of 199 personnel and which has been indu cted in the year 2011 for the security 
purpose. These CISF personnel from the date of thei r induction are residing in rented 

46 
 
houses far off from the Campus, which is not correc t from the security point of view, for 
meeting exigencies. 
 
(iii) The Academy had earlier proposed for C/o of 80 nos. of residential quarters in the new land 
as the request for acquisition of 5 Acres land from  State Govt. was under active 
consideration. However, the land acquisition could not be materialised, therefore, the 
proposal for C/o of 80 nos. of residential quarters could not be taken up. 
 
3.10.3  Accordingly, NPA has proposed that it would  not be feasible to construct the required 
total number of residential quarters within the lim ited available land as per the prescribed maximum 
permissible limit, it was decided to go for constru ction of 112 residential quarters with a vertical 
expansion. As such, it has been proposed for constr uction of 112 residential quarters at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 38.06 cr. in supersession of the earlie r approved proposal of 80 residential quarters, as this 
step would also strengthen the security of the campus.  
 
3.10.4  In view of the above, the proposal for C/o of 112 residential quarters of the NPA was 
due to increase in the demand for residential quart ers subsequent to filling up various newly created 
posts and to meet the need for providing residentia l accommodation to the CISF personnel for 
strengthening the security of the Academy campus, t he imperative requirement for constructing the 
required number of residential quarters, the Academ y identified a piece of land measuring 1.25 Acres 
in its own campus which is on the north-east side o f Kendriya  Vidyalaya Teachers Quarters, 
Shivarampally and which is well suited for undertak ing C/o of 112 residential quarters.  Hence, the 
revised proposal for C/o of 112 residential quarter at SVP NPA is under consideration in this Ministry. 
 
3.10.5  In so far as construction of 24 quarters be ing executed in NEPA, it is mentioned that all 
the projects have been started by the executing age ncy i.e. NEPA and will be completed within 
stipulated time. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.10.6    The Committee observes that SVPNPA is in urgent need of 342 residential quarters not 
only from the point of view of accommodating its staff but also to ensure adequate security of the 
premises of the academy. A decision ought to have b een taken about the number of quarters that 
can be constructed (within the limits of land and f unds available) and the construction work 
should have been started long ago. However, valuabl e time was lost in debating whether 80 or 
112 residential quarters should be constructed beca use, in either event, the number would fall 
short of the requirement of 342 additional quarters.  
 
3.10.11  The Committee feels that the Ministry of H ome Affairs should strongly pursue the 
matter of acquisition of additional land with the State Government for construction of additional 
number of residential quarters keeping in mind the security concerns of the Academy. The 
Committee notes that, finally, the Academy has identified 1.25 acres within its own Campus. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of H ome Affairs should immediately approve 
the proposal of construction of 112 residential qua rters on the 1.25 acres of available land and 
should request the State Government for allotment o f additional land for SVPNPA for 
constructing additional quarters. 
 
 

47 
 
3.11 DEMAND NO. 90 (ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS) 
 
Improvement of Existing Roads 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.11.1  The Committee is not satisfied with the rep ly and recommends that allocation should be 
made as per requirement of the UT in terms of improvement of existing roads in the UT.  
(Para 5.7.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.11.2  Construction of the rural roads is taken up  by both PRIs and APWD.  The Gram 
Panchayats are not able to fully utilize the funds allocated to them. Utilisation certificates amounting to 
Rs. 63 crore out of total Rs. 255 crore allotted to  Gram Panchayats for the purpose during the period 
2010-11 to 2014-15 have not been furnished. Suffici ent funds are being provided to the PRIs and 
APWD for construction of road. In order to make ava ilability of fund in Rural Development, MoRD 
has offered to provide fund under PMGSY-II for main tenance purpose of rural road. Approximately, 
258 Km of rural roads have been identified for up-g radation and improvement. Proposal is being 
prepared to take up improvement work of 258 km (app rox.) of rural road under PMGSY-II, which 
shall improve the progress. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.11.3  The Action Taken Note of the Government rev eals a dismal state of affairs in the 
UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands in terms of construction of rural roads. The Committee notes 
that the Gram Panchayats are not fully utilizing th e funds allocated to them. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly urges the Ministry of Home Affa irs to impress upon the UT Administration 
to take up the issue with Andaman Public Works Depa rtment and concerned PRIs to complete 
construction of these roads by proper utilisation of allocated funds.  
 
Establishment of Polytechnics 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.11.4  The Committee is concerned to note that the re are three districts in the UT, however, 
only one district (South Andaman) has got a polytechnic and other two are not having any polytechnic. 
It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the Government of India in 2008-09 with objective 
of skill development sanctioned two more polytechni cs in the 127 districts of Car Nicobar and North 
Andaman district and still it has not been opened. The Committee takes serious view of this fact, that  
years have passed and polytechnics are yet to be established for want of land and fund. The Committee 
in view of this recommends that the UT Administrati on should provide land and fund without any 
procedural delay to fast pace opening of two polytechnics in the UT. 
(Para 5.8.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.5  A feasibility report on starting of new Pol ytechnic in North& Middle Andaman and 
Nicobar Districts has been prepared by a Joint Comm ittee. As per the report, the capital cost involved  
in the establishment of the Polytechnic in N & M An daman shall be Rs. 43.75 crores and for the 

48 
 
Polytechnic at Nicobar District the capital cost sh all be Rs. 51.80 crores. The recurring cost shall b e to 
the tune of Rs. 4 crores per annum which would then  increase subsequently. A DPR in this regard will 
be prepared. 
 
3.11.6  Starting a Polytechnic at Nicobar District has not appeared to be feasible at this stage. 
However, this could be reviewed by year 2020 based on the data available at that time. The feasibility  
study Report is under consideration of the UT Admin istration and necessary action will be taken 
shortly. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
 
3.11.7  The Committee is displeased to note that pr ogress so far in the matter of 
establishing a new Polytechnic at North & Middle An daman District is painstakingly slow to the 
extent that even the DPR has yet not been finalised . The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry must earnestly pursue the UT Administration to expedite the 
establishment of the new Polytechnic. The Committee  also desires to be apprised of the reasons 
for non-feasibility of establishing a Polytechnic in Nicobar District.  
 
Establishment of Sainik School  
 
Recommendation  
  
3.11.8  The Committee is not satisfied with the sub mission of the Ministry and recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs cannot wash its hands off just by writing to the Ministry of Defence for 
opening of Sainik School in the UT of A&N Islands w ith request for sanctioning entire capital cost of 
the project as a special case. The Committee recomm ends that the Government should take a call on 
this issue and make allocation as per requirement t o open up Sainik School in UT. Besides, the 
Committee recommends that the land required for Sai nik School which is available in the UT should 
be acquired for the purpose. 
(Para 5.9.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.11.9  Provision is being made in Annual Plan 2016 -17 for Sainik School. Identification of 38 
acres of land for opening of a Sainik School in South Andaman is in process. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.11.10 The Committee has noted that while provisio n has been made in the Annual Plan 
2016-17, the issue of making the land available for  the Sainik School has not been sorted out.  As 
a result, no work has started on the proposed schoo l and it is likely that the provision made in 
the Annual Plan 2016-17 will remain unutilised. The  Committee is displeased to note that the 
whole year has been wasted in identifying the land and the proposal for the Sainik School has not 
moved forward. The Committee urges the Ministry to pay serious attention to this matter and to 
ensure that the Sainik School begins to function at least from the academic session 2017-18. 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Inadequate Allocation on Road Sectors  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.11.11 It was brought to the notice of the Committee by th e Member representing Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands in Lok Sabha that unspent balances are lying with APWD which were sanctioned long 
back in around 2002-03 and the UT Administration is  not taking any interest in development of roads 
under PMGSY. The Committee would like to be apprise d about reasons behind under expenditure in 
this scheme and year-wise details pertaining to dev elopment of roads and expenditure under PMGSY 
and other centrally sponsored schemes since 2002. 
(Para 5.11.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.11.12 Slow progress was because environment and f orest clearances were not given. PMGSY 
scheme was launched in 2001-02. UT’s Contribution o f Rs. 10.00 crore was released to the DRDA 
during 2001-02 and Rs. 10.00 crore was released dur ing 2002-03 to the Zilla Parishad, South 
Andaman. The Zilla Parishad, South Andaman has cons tructed 3 roads by utilising Rs. 5.31 crore and 
7 roads transferred to newly constituted Zilla Pari shad, North & Middle Andaman along with balance 
fund of Rs. 7.50 crore including interest. DRDA has  taken up 7 roads works through APWD, of which 
4 have been completed and 3 are in progress. Zilla Parishad, North & Middle Andaman has transferred 
all the 7 PMGSY roads to APWD, 4 roads were dropped  and work is being taken up in 3 for which 
tendering is under process, with total cost Rs.12.37 Crore. An amount of Rs.12.07 Crore is available t o 
take up the above works. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.11.13 The Committee is concerned to note such an inordinate delay in completion of 
projects like development of roads under PMGSY sanc tioned more than a decade back. The 
Committee does not accept the argument that slow pr ogress was because environment and forest 
clearances were not given. The Ministry of Home Aff airs should take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and UT Administ ration of A&N Islands for completion of 
road projects under PMGSY without further delay. 
 
Issues raised in meeting of DRSC on Home Affairs 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.11.14  The Member representing Andaman and Nicobar Islands  in Lok Sabha apprised the 
Committee that no meeting of HMAC or AAC has been c alled in the last 8 years not to say of inviting 
him in the said meetings. The Committee is displeas ed to note that the Ministry of Home Affairs is not  
giving clear picture of the issues raised by the Me mber and recommends that the UT Administration 
should call such meetings on regular basis and invite people’s representatives in these meetings. 
(Para 5.14.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.15 Administrator’s Advisory Council (AAC) cons tituted on 24.06.2010 had meeting on 
17.10.2011, 28.11.2013, 18.10.2014 & next meeting i s scheduled to be held shortly. Meeting of the 
Home Minister’s Advisory Committee (HMAC) in respec t of UT of A & N Islands was last held on 

50 
 
20.12.2006. Since no meeting of the HMAC was held a fter 2006, the Committee has become defunct. 
The Ministry has already taken a decision to recons titute the HMAC and a proposal in this regard has 
been initiated.  
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.11.16 The Committee is not happy to note that Adm inistrator’s Advisory Council (AAC) 
constituted in 2010 meets rarely, once in a year an d after 2014 no such meeting has taken place 
and the Government has simply informed the Committee that it would be held shortly. The same 
is true with Home Minister’s Advisory Committee (HM AC) in respect of UT of A & N Islands 
where no meeting of the HMAC was held after 2006 as  it became defunct. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the Administrator’s Adviso ry Council (AAC) should meet frequently 
and peoples' representatives should be invited. Bes ides, the Ministry should reconstitute the 
HMAC without any further delay. 
 
3.12 DAMAN & DIU (DEMAND NO. 93)  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12.1  The Committee takes serious view of the fac t that allocation for "Transport" has been 
drastically reduced presumably due to underutilisat ion of allocated funds which got reduced at RE 
stage in 2015-16. The Committee recommends that pro cedural delay should be minimised to complete 
projects without further delay. 
(Para 5.49 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.2  The reduction in the allocation made during  the year 2015-16 under ‘Transport' sector 
was due to non-finalisation of two major projects i .e. Purchase of Catamaran (Rs.60.00 crore) and 
dredging of Daman Ganga river mouth at Daman and se a mouth at Diu (Rs.14.00crore). The UT 
Administration will ensure minimising the procedural delay and try to complete the project on time. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDNATION  
 
3.12.3  The Ministry has not apprised the Committee  of the progress made in respect of 
the two major projects in 2016-17, although the act ion taken report was furnished in September, 
2016.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the current status of the two projects namely: 
 
(i) Purchase of Catamaran. 
(ii) Dredging of the Daman Ganga river mouth at Dam an and sea mouth at Diu. 
 
3.12.4  The Committee would also like to be apprise d whether adequate provision was 
made in 2016-17 BE and whether the allocated amount  has been spent and the projects 
completed. 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.12.5  The Committee takes note of the submission made by the Member of Committee 
representing Daman & Diu in Lok Sabha.  The Committ ee, while noting that most of the issues 

51 
 
discussed above were discussed at length in its ear lier reports, is concerned to note that nothing 
substantial has been done to solve these issues.  T he Committee, in view of this, strongly recommends 
that the Government should pay attention to these i ssues and address them on priority basis. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about actions/initiatives taken regarding this.  
(Para 5.51 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.6  The UT Administration has taken up the matt er with the concerned authority to resolve 
the issues raised by the Hon’ble Member of Parliame nt representing Daman & Diu from time to time. 
Efforts are being made to address the same on prior ity basis. The action taken from time to time has 
already been apprised to the Committee. Further developments will be intimated. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.12.7  The Committee is not satisfied with the vag ue and general answer given in the 
action taken note. The Committee would like to be a pprised specifically on the progress of the 
issues raised by the Member of the Committee representing Daman & Diu in the Lok Sabha. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the issues that have been resolved and the issues that 
remain to be resolved along with the time line, and  which of the pending issues are likely to be 
resolved. 
 
3.13 DEMAND NO. 94 (Lakshadweep)  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.1  The Committee is in agreement with submissi on of the Member of the Committee that 
connectivity to the mainland with UT of Lakshadweep  is a perennial problem. The Committee 
recommends that the Shipping Corporation of India s hould acquire new ships for ferrying passengers 
as per requirement of the UT. The Committee also re commends that development of tourism sector 
should be given priority on the lines of Maldives w hich has same topography and natural beauty to 
help generate income, employment and investment in the UT. 
(Para 5.53.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.2  The 15 years’ perspective plan for shipping  for the period from 2015 to 2030 has been 
received in the Ministry in which 9 new ships are p roposed to be acquired.  Shipping Corporation of 
India, being the technical consultant of UT Lakshad weep Administration, has a key role to play on 
timely completion & delivery of new ships.   
 
3.13.3  UT Lakshadweep Administration understands t he role of tourism development for 
revenue as well as employment generation. A tourism  policy has been formulated, in which public 
sector, PPP mode & private investors can contribute  their share.  For development of tourism, besides 
creation of infrastructure, up-gradation of transpo rtation facilities is equally important since 
Lakshadweep islands are isolated from mainland. Key  initiative for transportation facilities are as 
follows: 
(i) Ministry of Tourism has already conveyed in-princip le approval of acquisition of 2x250 
pax cruise ships exclusively for tourists, 

52 
 
(ii) Provision is kept in UT Lakshadweep Budget for acqu iring 2 new ferry vessels for inter-
island transportation of tourists,  
(iii) Action is under process to introduce Seaplane operations, etc.  
(iv) For creation of tourist infrastructure facilities, a DPR is submitted to Ministry of Tourism 
for construction of transit accommodation at Androt h and establishment of eco-friendly 
tourist resort at Kalpeni under Central Sector othe r than various programmes under UT 
sector. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.13.4  The Committee takes note of the reply of th e Ministry with regard to its 
recommendation on providing connectivity to the UT of Lakshadweep and desires early 
finalisation of the perspective plan for shipping to ensure timely completion and delivery of ships 
for expanding the horizons of tourism sector in the  UT. The tourism policy needs early 
implementation.     
 
3.14 PATHANKOT AIRBASE ATTACK 
 
Operation to Neutralise Terrorists  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.14.1  First of all, the Committee is unable to un derstand that in spite of terror alert sounded 
well in advance, how terrorists managed to breach t he high-security air base and subsequently attack. 
The Committee is constrained to note that despite c oncrete and credible intelligence inputs received 
from abducted and released Pathankot’s Superintende nt of Police (SP) and his friend and through 
interception of communication between terrorists an d their handlers by the terrorists disclosing that 
they were planning an attack on a defence establish ment, the security agencies of our country were so 
ill-prepared to anticipate threats in time and counter them swiftly and decisively. 
(Para 6.2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.14.2  On the basis of the intelligence, a meeting  of senior officers was held by the Central 
Government, immediately. Consequent to the meeting,  the Army Units were mobilized, Air Force 
Commando Guards were flown along with Air Officer C ommander in Chief, Western Command and 
NSG was airlifted to the most possible target of te rror attack, the Air Force Station, Pathankot, by t he 
evening of 1 
st  January, 2016. As a precautionary measure, high value air assets were moved away from 
the Airbase.  Subsequently, Army also inducted Spec ial Forces (1 Para) Bomb Disposal Units and 
other specialized equipments.   
 
3.14.3  The National Investigation Agency (NIA), wh ich is investigating the terror attack on 
Pathankot Airbase, is also investigating the exact mode and route taken by the terrorists.   
 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.14.4  The Committee feels that something is serio usly wrong with our counter-terror security 
establishment. Despite the fencing, floodlighting a nd patrolling by BSF personnel, Pakistani terrorist s 

53 
 
managed to sneak into India from across the border.  The Committee understands that in this attack, 
the role of Punjab Police is also very questionable  and suspicious as even after abduction of Punjab 
Police SP, the Punjab Police took longtime in arriv ing at the conclusion that their abduction was not 
just a criminal robbery but it was going to be serious national security threat. The Committee is unable 
to understand why the terrorists let the SP and his  friend off, which should be thoroughly examined by  
NIA. Besides, the Committee is of the view that the  role of narco-syndicate active in border areas of 
Punjab should also be investigated as the terrorist s might have taken help of channels or networks 
used by smugglers to infiltrate the border, shelter and carry out terror attack. 
(Para 6.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
3.14.5  The National Investigation Agency (NIA), wh ich is investigating the case, would look 
into all aspects and it would be premature to point fingers at any individual or force at this stage. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.14.6  The Committee is displeased to note that th e investigation by the NIA remains 
incomplete even after a period of one year. Unless the investigation is completed at an early date, 
it will not be possible to answer the grave questio ns that were raised following the terrorist 
attack including: 
 
i) Why was no preventive action taken despite credible  intelligence inputs that were 
received; 
ii) Why was no action taken despite interception of communication between terrorists 
and their handlers? 
 
3.14.7  While the action taken note indicates the u se of Special Forces (1 Para), it is not 
clear whether the Special Forces were actually deployed to neutralise the terrorists. 
 
3.14.8  The Committee would also like to be apprise d of the sequence of events leading to 
the visit of the Joint Investigation Team from Paki stan and in particular the terms agreed 
between the two countries for promoting such a visi t. The Committee would like to be apprised 
whether it was insisted that Pakistan should allow an investigation team from India to visit 
Pakistan to gather evidence and whether Pakistan ag reed to the demand; and, if Pakistan had 
not agreed to the demand, why was the Pakistan team  allowed to visit India without a 
commitment to allow a reciprocal visit by an Indian Investigation Team. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.9  The Committee also recommends that in view of these series of attacks from across the 
international border in this area, the Government o f India should pay attention to effectively sealing  
the border through enhanced patrolling, fencing, flood lighting, etc. 
 
(Para 6.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.10 All the feasible portions of Indo-Pakistan Border are plugged/being plugged by Physical 
barriers. Further, MHA is in process of plugging th e stretches which are not feasible for fencing by 

54 
 
means of Technological solutions. Moreover, the are as not having Physical barriers are being 
dominated by BSF through enhanced patrolling, High Mast Lights, Deployment of Hand Held Thermal 
Imager (HHTI), Long Range Reconnaissance & Observation System (LORROS), Laser, Infra-red etc.                       
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.14.11 The Committee is examining Border Security separately and will address this issue 
in detail in that report.  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.12 The Committee during its visit found that a irbase’s security cover was not robust and it 
had a poorly guarded perimeter wall. The perimeter wall of airbase was not having patrolling road 
around it. The Committee also found growth of long shrubs and trees in the premises which might have 
helped terrorists in hiding and making difficult fo r security forces in combing out these terrorists. The 
Committee recommends that the Pathankot Airbase whi ch is very close to border should be declared 
high security zone and should be properly secured t hrough round-the-clock patrolling and making it 
out of bounds for general people residing around the airbase. 
(Para 6.2.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.14.13 A Security audit of all IAF bases has been carried out with the aim to identify potential 
gaps that can be alleviated by incorporating change s in physical security measures ability to counter a 
terrorist attack and procurement of hi-tech security equipment to detect and neutralize any threat. 
 
3.14.14 An FIR No. 06/16 dated 18
th  February, 2016 registered at Police Station Counte r-
Terrorism Department (CTD), Gujranwala under Sectio n 302, 324,109 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 
1860 and Sections 7, 21-1 of Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997.The Government of Pakistan constituted a Joint 
Investigation Team (JIT) on 25 th  February, 2016 under Section 19(I) of its Anti-Ter rorism Act, 1997, 
to conduct investigation into the attack on Pathankot Air Force base.   
 
3.14.15 The JIT from Pakistan had visited India bet ween 27 th  March, 2016 to 31 st  March, 2016 
to collect, review and document physical evidences and to interview key witnesses and victims through 
the National Investigation Agency, with regard to t he Pathankot Airbase terror attack.  The interactio n 
with JIT was held in accordance with Terms of Refer ence mutually agreed on the basis of reciprocity. 
The JIT also informed that they were collecting adm issible evidence outside Pakistan under the 
provisions of the CrPC of Pakistan that will legally enable them to use the evidence in prosecution.   
 
3.14.16 The NIA briefed the JIT on investigations c arried out in the Pathankot Airbase terror 
attack.  The Pakistan JIT, in turn, shared with NIA  the results of investigations carried out by them in 
Pakistan so far. The Pakistan JIT assured of their full cooperation and promised to execute the LR, 
which has been received by them.  The case is under  investigation in both the countries.  The 
Government is in touch with the relevant Pakistani Authorities in the matter. The Pakistan JIT was 
informed that a team of NIA officials would like to  visit Pakistan to carry forward the investigation in 
the Pathankot Airbase terror attack.  The details of the visit are yet to be finalized.  
 
 
 

55 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.14.17 The Committee reiterates its further recomm endation given in paras 3.14.6, 3.14.7 
and 3.14.8. 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.14.18 The Committee notes the submission of the M inistry that the NIA is handling the 
investigation of this case and terrorists belonging  to the Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorist outfit based in 
Pakistan have been found to be behind this attack b ut the Committee would like to be apprised what 
made the Government of India to seek help of Pakist an into investigation of this terror attack and 
invite a Joint Investigation Team (JIT) from Pakistan to India. 
(Para 6.4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.14.19 After the issue was raised by the Governmen t of India with the Government of Pakistan, 
an FIR No. 06/16 dated 18 th  February, 2016 was registered at Police Station Co unter-Terrorism 
Department (CTD), Gujranwala under Section 302, 324 ,109 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and 
Sections 7, 21-1 of Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997. The G overnment of Pakistan constituted a Joint 
Investigation Team (JIT) on 25 th  February, 2016 under Section 19(I) of its Anti-Ter rorism Act, 1997, 
to conduct investigation into the attack on Pathankot Air Force base.  
   
3.14.20 The JIT from Pakistan had visited India bet ween 27 
th  March, 2016 to 31 st  March, 2016 
to collect, review and document physical evidences and to interview key witnesses and victims through 
the National Investigation Agency, with regard to t he Pathankot Airbase terror attack. The interaction  
with JIT was held in accordance with Terms of Refer ence mutually agreed on the basis of reciprocity. 
The JIT also informed that they were collecting adm issible evidence outside Pakistan under the 
provisions of the CrPC of Pakistan that will legally enable them to use the evidence in prosecution.   
 
3.14.21 The NIA briefed the JIT on investigations c arried out in the Pathankot Airbase terror 
attack. The Pakistan JIT, in turn, shared with NIA the results of investigations carried out by them i n 
Pakistan so far. The Pakistan JIT assured of their full cooperation and promised to execute the LR, 
which has been received by them. The case is under investigation in both the countries.  The 
Government is in touch with the relevant Pakistani Authorities in the matter.  
 
3.14.22 The Pakistan JIT was informed that a team o f NIA officials would like to visit Pakistan 
to carry forward the investigation in the Pathankot  Airbase terror attack. The details of the visit ar e yet 
to be finalized. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.14.23 
 The Committee reiterates its further recommendation  given in paras 3.14.6, 3.14.7 
and 3.14.8.  
  

56 
 
CHAPTER - IV  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.1.1 The Committee is in agreement with the view s ubmitted by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the 
schemes to be included in the Centrally Sponsored U mbrella Scheme called "National Scheme for 
Modernization of Police and other forces" are of Na tional Security importance and are vital for 
strengthening of internal security architecture in the country and continuation of support of the 
Central Government to these schemes is critical. Th e Committee is hopeful that the proposal of Home 
Ministry for inclusion of SIS, SRE Scheme in umbrel la scheme will be considered as these schemes are 
vital for Left Wing Extremism affected and other troubled regions/states of the country. 
(Para 2.12 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.1.2 With a view to focus on outcomes, to increase  efficiency and to enhance performance in the 
implementation of Expenditure Budget, the Departmen t of Expenditure has initiated the process of 
rationalization of schemes of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). To this end, the Government of 
India has re-organized some of the existing schemes  in the Union Budget 2015-16, by the name 
“National Scheme for modernization of Police and ot her forces” under which the following schemes 
were covered: Crime and Criminal Tracking Network &  System (CCTNS), Special Infrastructure 
Scheme (SIS) of LWE States and Scheme of Modernization of State Police Forces (MPF). 
 
4.1.3 Further, on the advice of Department of Expen diture, MHA has formulated an umbrella scheme 
of “Modernization of Police Forces” with mainly two  verticals/schemes namely, (I) Modernization of 
Police Forces of States and UTs, and (II) Security Related Expenditure for J&K, NE States and LWE 
Areas. Sub-schemes under these verticals include CC TNS, existing MPF scheme, SIS, SRE Scheme, 
etc. Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)/Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) appraised the 
proposals on 20 th  July, 2016 and presently, note for Cabinet Committ ee on Security (CCS) is under 
process. 
 
4.1.4 Out of the sub-schemes, which form part of th e umbrella scheme, no budgetary allocation has 
been provided for SIS Scheme for the current year i .e. 2016-17. Matter in this regard will be taken up  
with Ministry of Finance at RE 2016-17 stage. 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.1.5 The Committee is not ready to buy the argumen t that merely by enhancing the share of the 
States in the net proceeds of Union taxes from 32% to 42%, the Central Government can justify 
delinking the SIS from Central assistance. Besides,  the Committee is of the view that increasing of 
share of the States in the divisible pool of Union taxes to 42 percent from 32percent would not yield 
the desired results, as due to the imposition of va rious types of cesses and surcharges in the BE 2016 -
17, such as Krishi Kalyan Cess, Education Cess, Swa chh Bharat Cess, Clean Energy Cess etc. which 
go directly to the Centre’s coffers and not to the States, States’ share in the divisible pool is likely to go 

57 
 
down instead of 42% as claimed. The Committee accordingly proposes that the decision on modality of 
the implementation of the Umbrella scheme may be de volved to the States in terms of sufficient 
flexibility to conceive and implement scheme/progra mmes suited to their local needs but financial 
support from the Centre should continue as States, particularly backward States have their own social 
sector commitments. 
(Para 2.13 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.1.6 Keeping in view the importance of the Special  Infrastructure Scheme (SIS) and Security 
Related Expenditure (SRE) Scheme, MHA has proposed for continuation of both the Schemes for 
another 4 years, i.e. from 2016-17 to 2019-20 as pa rt of the Umbrella Scheme, “Modernization of 
Police Forces”. The Schemes were approved by the Ex penditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its 
meeting held under the Chairmanship of the Secretar y (Expenditure) on 20.07.2016.  Draft Cabinet 
note of the Umbrella Scheme is under preparation in MHA.  
 
4.2 DELHI POLICE 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee observes that there is drastic reduction in allocation in B.E. 2016-17 under 
plan as well as Non-Plan heads. The Committee also notes the details of negative consequences which 
this reduction may cause in terms of paying the sal aries to deployed forces from outside in Delhi for 
maintaining law and order, procurement of latest ga dgets, weapons and equipment, proper 
maintenance of buildings of Delhi Police, completio n of ongoing and new housing/office building 
projects, purchase of land for new police stations/ housing projects. The Committee understands that 
these are essential components to run and modernize  any Police Force. In view of this, the Committee 
while expressing its deep concern over this drastic  reduction, recommends that this should be 
addressed at RE Stage otherwise this reduction woul d have adverse impact on functioning of Delhi 
Police. 
(Para 4.3.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.2.2 Delhi Police has reported that in view of the  recommendations of the Committee, the shortfall 
will be projected in RE-2016-17 under the appropriate head. 
 
4.3 BORDER MANAGEMENT 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.3.1 The Committee takes serious view of the fact that only Rs. 3777.40 crore has been allocated to 
Border Management Department against its projected demand of Rs. 5045.70 crore for the financial 
year 2016-17. The Committee feels that the Ministry  of Home Affairs should reconsider the allocation 
as the huge deduction of around Rs. 1300 crore expe nditure over border infrastructure and 
management projects may not be advisable. Keeping i n view that the requirement of fencing, flood 
lighting and border roads is of utmost importance t o ensure proper border management and to check 
external security threats, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should 
impress upon Finance Ministry to further enhance allocation at RE stage. 
(Para 4.5.2 ibid) 

58 
 
Action Taken  
 
4.3.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the matter of providing additional 
funds has been taken up with Ministry of Finance vi de DO letter dated 24.06.2016for appropriate 
allocation of funds. 
 
4.4 BORDER AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (BADP) 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.4.1 The Committee notes submission of the Ministr y that Border Area Development Programme 
aims to meet the special developmental needs and we ll-being of the people living in remote and 
inaccessible areas situated near the international border through construction of physical and social 
infrastructure. The Committee, however, is constrai ned to note that over the years the fund allocation  
of the BADP has been grossly inadequate to cater to the needs of the border population and the Centre 
is shirking its responsibility. It is also noted th at the budgetary allocation for BADP for the financ ial 
year (2016-17) is Rs. 990 crore against projected d emand of Rs. 1800.00 crore which is almost half of 
the projection. The Committee is of the strong opinion that the development of border areas should not 
suffer for want of funds and therefore recommends t hat the allocation may be enhanced at RE stage to 
meet the developmental needs of the populace residi ng in border areas to check their migration from 
there. The Committee also recommends that the share  of BSF under the allocation meant for BADP 
should be increased from mere 10% to at least 40% a s they are the people who happen to be well 
versed with the problems faced by populace living i n border areas and moreover they are much 
accessible to the people of border areas. 
(Para 4.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.4.2 Regards increasing the share of BSF sponsored  schemes from 10% to 40%, a meeting of the 
Steering Committee on BADP under the Chairmanship o f Secretary (BM) was convened on 17-06-
2016 where representatives from all 17 states and BGF’s including BSF were present. 
 
4.4.3 Secretary (BM) has emphasized that the scheme s suggested by the BGFs should be given due 
consideration while deciding on BADP schemes and se eking approval. Representatives of BSF stated 
that they are satisfied with the existing arrangements.  
 
4.4.4 The matter of providing additional funds will  be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the time 
of Supplementary Demands for Grants and Revised Estimates Stages. 
 
4.5 MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.5.1 The Committee notes that Rs. 1753.90 crore ha s been allocated in BE 2016-17 which is a steep 
rise as compared with Rs. 662.11 crore as allocated  in RE 2015-16 under this scheme. The Committee 
also notes submission of the Ministry that increase d allocation is on account of consolidation of some  
schemes under the Umbrella Scheme of Modernization of Police Forces. The Committee, however, 
understands that even this increased allocation is not as per requirement of the States. The Committee  
is of the view that the State Governments require l arge sum of allocation to modernize their police 

59 
 
forces, to improve police infrastructure and to lau nch development initiatives in the Left Wing 
Extremist affected areas. In view of the above, the  Committee recommends that big enhancement 
should be made at RE stage and share of Central Gov ernment should be increased on all the projects 
under the scheme "Modernisation of Police Forces". Besides, no allocation has been made under the 
Head "Special Infrastructure Scheme for LWE Areas" which is essentially required for ensuring 
development in Left Wing Extremism affected areas t o check growth of naxalism and recommends that 
policy makers should deliberate upon this issue and  give Special Infrastructure Scheme (SIS) a go 
ahead. 
(Para 4.9.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.5.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the matter of providing additional 
funds will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the time of Supplementary Demands for Grants and 
Revised Estimates Stages 
 
4.6 NATIONAL POLICE ACADEMY AND NORTH EASTERN POLIC E ACADEMY 
(NEPA) 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.6.1  The Committee notes that the fund allocation for Residential Buildings for CAPFs, NSG, Assam 
Rifles and Delhi Police in BE 2016-17 is very low a s compared to what was projected by the Ministry. 
The Committee also notes submission of the Ministry  that this reduction would adversely affect the 
infrastructure projects of CAPFs and further reduce  housing satisfaction level. The Committee 
observes that out of physical target of 4240 under Residential Building (plan) for CAPFs, NSG and 
Assam Rifles only 898 could be achieved due to low allocation during the last financial year. The 
Committee also observes that out of the target of 7 2 projects of Delhi Police during the 12th Plan 
period (2012-17), only 31 projects could be complet ed which is not even half of the target. 
Ramifications of low allocation is already visible in terms of slow pace of construction activities, 
incompletion of targeted projects, delay in land pu rchase, etc. Taking into account the submission of 
Ministry, the Committee strongly recommends that th e Finance Ministry should look into this and an 
increase should be made as per the requirement of C APFs at RE stage. The Committee hopes that 
demand of Rs.12243.25 crore projected by the Minist ry under 12th Plan for capital infrastructure 
would be considered positively. 
(Para 4.11.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.6.2 In 12 
th  Five Year Plan Scheme (2012-17), Delhi Police has taken up 72 Projects. Delhi Police 
has reported that out of 72 Projects, 33 projects h ave been completed; 21 & one part of project (PS 
Dabri) are under construction which will be complet ed during the current financial year 2016-17;9 
projects are at planning stage; and 06 & one part o f Project (DCP/Office & 48 Staff Qtrs. at Dabri), 
which were held-in-abeyance due to paucity of funds , are now being processed for giving a ‘go ahead’ 
since funds over and above the 12 th  Plan outlay have been allocated under Delhi Police  Building 
Programme. 2 Projects relate to Extra-Ordinary Repairs & Land cases. Delhi Police proposes to project 
additional requirement of funds in the Revised Estimate 2016-17. 
 
4.6.3 An amount of Rs.4150.59 crore was projected f or 2016-17 against which an amount of 
Rs.2593.82 crore has been allocated in BE 2016-17. Further, demand of Rs.12243.25 crore has been 

60 
 
projected in the Mid-Term Review of 12 th  Plan for capital infrastructure. This Ministry wil l pursue the 
Finance Ministry for higher allocation at Supplemen tary/Revised Estimates Stage, taking into account 
the requirement and expenditure trend. Against phys ical target of 4240 under Residential Building 
(Plan) for CAPFs, NSG and Assam Rifles, 2505 houses were constructed in the last financial year. 
 
4.6.4 The recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with Ministry of Finance vide 
MHA’s DO letter No. 10/32/2016-Bgt I dated 24.06.20 16 for allocation of additional funds under 
building programmes of CAPF at RE stage. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
 
4.6.5 The Committee desires to be informed of the a llocation made by Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
4.7 UNION TERRITORIES 
 
Demand No. 49 – Transfers to Union Territory Governments with Legislature 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.1 The Committee notes that under Grants and Loa ns to meet Non-Plan gap, UT of Puducherry 
has been allocated approximately half of the amount  projected. The Committee also notes the view of 
Puducherry Government that the allocation sanctione d is not sufficient to meet the increase in non-
plan expenditure over the years. The Committee in v iew of this recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should impress upon Finance Ministry to enh ance allocation to UT of Puducherry under 
Grants and Loans to meet Non-Plan gap as per requirement. 
(Para 5.1.18 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.7.2 The issue for enhancement of allocation under  Grant No. 49 will be taken up with the Ministry 
of Finance at RE Stage after taking into account the inflationary pressure. 
 
 
Demand No. 90 (Andaman & Nicobar Islands) 
 
Fund for PRIs 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.3 The Committee is constrained to note that the Gover nment of India has not accepted the 
Reports of the 3rd as well as 4th Finance Commissio n of UT. The Committee is not ready to buy the 
argument of the government that rigidity of the exp enditure/committed liabilities has made the 
Government unable to allocate the funds to PRIs/Mun icipal Council. The Committee in view of this 
recommends that 4 
th UT Finance Commission Report should be implemented in toto by the Government 
in PRIs/Municipal Council. 
(Para 5.4.2 ibid) 
  

61 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.4 After submission of Report by 4 
th  Finance Commission of UTs, a copy of the report has already 
been circulated among all UTs/ Ministries/ Departme nts etc. for their views/ comments on the 
recommendation of Finance Commission. 
 
4.7.5 Views/ comments of Stake Holders are yet to b e received. After taking views/comments of the 
Stake Holders, Government will take a decision on t he implementation of the report of 4 th  Finance 
Commission of UTs. 
 
Establishment of Navodaya Vidhyalaya 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.6 It was brought to the notice of the Committee  that the proposal of Navodaya Vidhyalaya is 
pending since 2004 and still nothing is visible on ground. The Committee takes serious view of this fact 
and recommends that all procedural technicalities s hould be minimized and opening of the Navodaya 
Vidhyalaya in the South Andaman district should be expedited. 
(Para 5.10.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.7 The Commissioner, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, Noida has been requested to depute a team of 
officers to inspect the site identified for permane nt campus as well as temporary accommodation for 
opening new Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya in South And aman district vide D.O. letter no.1-
6(5)/JNV/Genl/Edn/2010/2017 dated 13.05.2016. 
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
4.7.8 The Committee strongly recommends that the Mi nistry of Home Affairs should expedite 
the opening of Navodaya Vidyalaya in South Andaman District at the earliest by minimizing 
procedural delay.  
 
Inadequate Allocation on Road Sectors 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.9 The Committee takes note of the reply and rec ommends that the Home Ministry should take an 
early decision in regard to implementation of non-l apsable fund policy for the UTs, as in the case of 
North Eastern States, so that the unspent balance is carried forward for the next financial year. 
(Para 5.14.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.10  A proposal in this regard is being initiate d to take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
  

62 
 
DA to the DRMS Working in APWD 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7.11  The Committee notes the reply and recommend s that the Administration should 
consider the proposal of granting DA to DRMs who ha ve been working with APWD for a long time, at 
the earliest. 
(Para 5.16.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.7.12  The proposal for consideration of grant of 1/30th of pay plus DA to DRMs working in 
APWD is under examination. 
 
Demand No. 91 (Chandigarh) 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.13  The Committee notes that there is an increase of Rs . 313.14 crore in BE 2016-17 over 
BE 2015-16. The Committee also notes that the alloc ation is not in sync with what was projected by 
the UT of Chandigarh. While noting the effect of lo w allocation on projects under Plan Schemes, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affa irs in tandem with UT of Chandigarh should 
pursue the Finance Ministry to get increased alloca tion as per requirement of UT at supplementary 
grant stage. The Committee is of the view that the reduced allocation might affect projects of social 
infrastructure such as Education, Health, Municipal Corporation, etc. 
(Para 5.18.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.14  As detailed in para No. 5.18.2 of 197 
th  report of DPRC on Home Affairs (at page no.76-
77of report),an additional amount of Rs. 1022.00 cr . has been projected by the Chandigarh 
Administration which will cover the grant for Healt h, Education, Medical Education and Research, 
Grant to Municipal Corporation, etc. The matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at RE-stage. 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.15  The Committee notes that the budget allocation for the Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh is not as per requirement. The Committee  was apprised that the Municipal Corporation 
has made plans for various development works which will be left incomplete for the want of necessary 
budget allocation for the Municipal body. The UT Ad ministration has got an extra canal from Bhakra 
Nangal duly approved by Punjab and Haryana Governme nts and to get this water to Chandigarh, a 
canal and pipeline from Kajauli water works are to be built at a projected cost of Rs. 250 crores and 
in view of this, the Committee recommends that the Municipal Corporation should be given required 
amount so that the water problems of Chandigarh could be addressed. 
(Para 5.18.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.7.16  The detail has already been given in para N o. 5.18.2 of 197 
th  report of DPRC on Home 
Affairs (at pg. no. 76-77 of report) and an additio nal amount of Rs.1022.00 cr. has been projected 
which will cover the grant for Health Sector. 

63 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
 
4.7.17  The Committee does not appreciate the reply  of the Government and would like to 
know whether an amount of Rs. 250 crore projected f or construction of an extra canal from 
Bhakra Nangal after due approval by Punjab and Hary ana Governments for getting water to 
Chandigarh from Kajauli Water Works, has been alloc ated to the UT Chandigarh 
Administration at the RE stage. 
 
Demand No. 94 (Lakshadweep) 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.18  The Committee notes that the allocation to the UT is not in tune with projections made. 
The Committee also notes that the allocation for He alth and Transport is also very less. In view of th e 
very poor health infrastructure in the UT, where pe ople are forced to visit the State of Kerala during  
emergency health conditions which is also a double blow as this UT has very poor connectivity with 
mainland, the Committee recommends that there shoul d be large enhancement made at RE stage for 
improving health infrastructure and transport (conn ectivity) in the UT. Besides, facility of air 
ambulances may be made at concessional rates for people belonging to UT. 
(Para 5.53.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.19  Under Transport Sector, UT Lakshadweep is f acing deficit of funds, for running & 
maintenance of ships, in Non-Plan side. As such, on  the basis of recommendation of the Committee 
and on assessing the actual requirements, a proposa l will be projected for additional fundsin RE 2016-
17, especially under Transport and Health Sectors, to overcome the deficit in allocation. 
 
4.7.20  As regards the concessional rate for air am bulance, it is submitted that such a system is 
already in operation so that patients and escorts c an travel at concessional rates as compared to norm al 
rates.  For example, normal helicopter fare from Kavaratti to Kochi is Rs.5030/- per passenger whereas 
patients & two escorts are extended this facility with concessional rate of Rs.4060/- per passenger.   
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
4.7.21  The Committee notes that the UT Administrat ion is facing deficit of funds on Non-
Plan side for running and maintenance of ships. The  Committee hopes that the Ministry of 
Finance would look into the issue of requirement of  the UT under transport and health sector 
and approve the projected additional allocation at RE stage.  
 
******  
 
 
 
 

64 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
 Despite the several steps reportedly taken by the Government to strengthen the security 
measures, it has comprehensively failed to prevent recurrence of such attacks that took place at 
Pampore, Uri, Baramula, Handwara and Nagrota. The C ommittee observes that the 
Government has not learnt any lesson from the Patha nkot attack. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that there remains an urgent need to fur ther strengthen the security network and 
plug the serious gaps in security establishment and intelligence gathering/sharing that have come 
to the fore in the recent attacks.  
(Para 3.1.5) 
 
 
 The Committee is displeased to note that the Gover nment is furnishing a vague and 
evasive reply to the serious issue like, refusal of  registration of FIR. The Committee had 
recommended to ensure FIR registration in Police stations without any discrimination so that the 
common people could get justice but the action taken in this regard reflects filing of FIR through 
CCTNS software. Filing of FIR through CCTNS softwar e is entirely secondary issue. The main 
issue is refusal to register FIR by the Police in P olice stations.  The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Government should consider maki ng refusal of registration of FIR by 
Police Personnel, a criminal offence, and action be  taken 
 against such erring Police Personnel. 
Merely issuing an advisory to the States in this regard will not suffice.  
(Para 3.1.9) 
 
 
 The Committee notes with regret that the Integrate d Action Plan (IAP)/ Additional 
Central Assistance (ACA) scheme which was implement ed for a period of 5 years in 88 districts 
in the LWE affected states, was delinked from centr al assistance with effect from 2015-16. The 
action taken note does not say why a scheme that ha s been successfully implemented for 5 years 
and was generally acclaimed was delinked from central assistance.   
(Para 3.1.14) 
 
  The Committee would like to know: 
i. The status of the 22,184 projects that had been taken up but had not been 
completed on account of the delinking. 
ii. Which State Governments have continued IAP/ACA using their own funds and    
which State Governments have discontinued the scheme?  
  iii.     Have the State Governments, which contin ued IAP/ACA schemes, made adequate   
provision for taking up vital infrastructure projec ts in accordance with the 
original objective of IAP/ACA? 
   iv.     What alternative arrangements have been made by the State Governments which   
            have discontinued IAP/ACA altogether to meet the original objective of IAP/ACA? 
 
(Para 3.1.15) 
 
 

65 
 
 Since the Government appears to have reduced the e mphasis on the development 
measures by de-linking IAP/ACA scheme from central assistance, the Committee would like to 
know whether this has been duly compensated by enhanced security measures. 
(Para 3.1.16) 
 
DEMAND NO. 46- MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 The Committee takes into account the assurance of the Government with regard to fast 
pacing of finalization of schemes of DM Division. T he Committee hopes that the construction 
work of the building for NFSC, Nagpur would be comp leted as per schedule. The Committee 
desires that the Central Government should persuade  the State Government of J&K for early 
implementation of the fresh package. 
(Para 3.2.6) 
 
CIVIL DEFENCE 
 
 The Committee does not agree with the decision of the Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affa irs should pursue with Ministry of 
Finance for approval of the proposal for the Scheme  for strengthening of Civil Defence set up in 
the Country.  
(Para 3.3.4)
 
 
RELIEF & REHABILITATION OF MIGRANTS AND REPATRIATES 
 
 The Committee deeply regrets to note that while th e Central and State Governments had 
repeatedly expressed serious concerns about the ret urn and rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants 
but the funds allocated for the purpose have not be en utilised. The responsibility for return and 
rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants rests heavily upon the State Government and the Committee 
is concerned about the approach of the State Govern ment in this regard as it appears to be 
callous.  The Committee desires that the Central Go vernment should prevail upon the State 
Government to take up the matter of return and reha bilitation of Kashmiri migrants with the 
seriousness that it deserves and ensure that the funds allocated for the purpose are fully utilised. 
(Para 3.4.3) 
 
 The Committee takes into account the steps taken i n implementing estimated expenditure 
of Rs. 2000 crore for providing financial assistanc e for additional 3000 State Government jobs to 
the Kashmiri migrants and construction of 6000 tran sit accommodations in the Kashmir Valley. 
The Committee desires that Central Government should persuade the State Government of J&K 
for early implementation of scheme for filling up i dentified/targeted number of posts and 
construction of adequate number of transit accommod ations in a time bound manner for 
actualizing the policy of return and rehabilitation of the Kashmiri migrants. 
(Para 3.4.7) 
 
The Committee takes into account the relief package  to the migrants of the hilly areas of 
Jammu division at par with the Kashmiri migrants i. e. cash relief of Rs. 2500 per head per 
month (maximum Rs. 10000 per family per month) plus  relief for ration/fodder, involving a total 
estimated expenditure of Rs. 13.45 crore per annum and the directions of the State Government 

66 
 
of J&K in implementing the same. The Committee desi res that Central Government should 
persuade the State Government of J&K for early impl ementation at the ground level in a time 
bound manner for adequate and expeditious relief to  the aggrieved individuals. Since complaints 
come about the lack of implementation at ground lev el, the Committee recommends that the 
Government may persuade the State Government to ens ure that the transfer of the cash relief is 
done through Aadhaar linked bank accounts.  
   
(Para 3.4.10) 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the project  concerning development of 
infrastructure must be implemented at an accelerate d pace for effective disaster management in 
the country.   
(Para 3.5.3) 
 
DEMAND NO. 48 – POLICE 
 
 The Committee notes that, according to the action taken note under Border 
Infrastructure and Management, the BE amount for 20 15-16 was largely retained at the RE 
stage. Of this, in the case of the Coastal Security Scheme Phase II, 99.93% of the RE amount was 
actually spent by the end of 2015-16.  If this is t he position, it is not clear why in respect of 
infrastructure for CAPFs, against the projection of  Rs.4150.59 crores, only Rs.2593.82 crores 
was allocated in BE 2016-17.  The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the reasons why the 
projection of the Ministry of Home Affairs was not accepted and what prompted the Ministry of 
Finance to drastically reduce the amount at the sta ge of BE 2016-17. While furnishing their 
answer to this recommendation, the Ministry may pre sent the figures in tabular form showing 
the overall allocation for Border Infrastructure an d Management and the amounts allocated for 
each component under Border Infrastructure and Management. 
(Para 3.6.11) 
 
NATGRID 
 
 The Committee is examining NATGRID separately and will give detailed observations on 
this in that report.  
(Para 3.7.4) 
  
 The Committee is examining NATGRID separately and will give detailed observations on 
this issue in that report.  
(Para 3.7.7) 
  
  The Committee is examining NATGRID separately and  will give detailed 
observations on this in that report.  
(Para 3.7.10) 
 
DELHI POLICE 
 
 The Committee expresses its displeasure that despi te mandatory clearance from local 
bodies on 19 
th  March, 2015, Dheerpur Housing Complex for Delhi Po lice could not be started 

67 
 
due to non achievement of financial closure. The Co mmittee would like to be apprised whether 
financial closure has since been achieved and wheth er the construction of the housing complex 
has started; if so, from which date. If, despite th e passage of 22 months, the construction of the 
housing complex has not yet been started, the Commi ttee would like to be apprised whether 
accountability has been fixed on the persons concer ned. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised whether the role of the concessionaire sho uld be examined and whether there are any 
lapses or defaults on the part of the concessionair e and, if so whether any action has been taken 
against the concessionaire, including its replacement, so that construction of the housing complex 
may start immediately. 
(Para 3.8.9) 
BORDER MANAGEMENT  
 
 The Committee has taken up Border Management for d etailed examination separately 
and accordingly, detailed observations will be made in that report.  
(Para 3.9.3) 
 
 The Committee has taken up Border Management for d etailed examination separately 
and accordingly, detailed observations will be made in that report.  
(Para 3.9.8) 
 
POLICE INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
  The Committee observes that SVPNPA is in urgent n eed of 342 residential 
quarters not only from the point of view of accommo dating its staff but also to ensure adequate 
security of the premises of the academy. A decision  ought to have been taken about the number 
of quarters that can be constructed (within the lim its of land and funds available) and the 
construction work should have been started long ago . However, valuable time was lost in 
debating whether 80 or 112 residential quarters sho uld be constructed because, in either event, 
the number would fall short of the requirement of 342 additional quarters.  
 
(Para 3.10.6) 
 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affa irs should strongly pursue the matter 
of acquisition of additional land with the State Go vernment for construction of additional 
number of residential quarters keeping in mind the security concerns of the Academy. The 
Committee notes that, finally, the Academy has identified 1.25 acres within its own Campus. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of H ome Affairs should immediately approve 
the proposal of construction of 112 residential qua rters on the 1.25 acres of available land and 
should request the State Government for allotment o f additional land for SVPNPA for 
constructing additional quarters. 
(Para 3.10.11) 
 
DEMAND NO. 90 (ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS) 
 
Improvement of Existing Roads 
 
 The Action Taken Note of the Government reveals a dismal state of affairs in the UT of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands in terms of construction of rural roads. The Committee notes that 

68 
 
the Gram Panchayats are not fully utilizing the fun ds allocated to them. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly urges the Ministry of Home Affa irs to impress upon the UT Administration 
to take up the issue with Andaman Public Works Depa rtment and concerned PRIs to complete 
construction of these roads by proper utilisation of allocated funds.  
(Para 3.11.3) 
 
Establishment of Polytechnics 
 
 The Committee is displeased to note that progress so far in the matter of establishing a 
new Polytechnic at North & Middle Andaman District is painstakingly slow to the extent that 
even the DPR has yet not been finalised. The Commit tee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
the Ministry must earnestly pursue the UT Administr ation to expedite the establishment of the 
new Polytechnic. The Committee also desires to be a pprised of the reasons for non-feasibility of 
establishing a Polytechnic in Nicobar District.  
(Para 3.11.7) 
Establishment of Sainik School  
 
 The Committee has noted that while provision has b een made in the Annual Plan 2016-17, 
the issue of making the land available for the Sain ik School has not been sorted out.  As a result, 
no work has started on the proposed school and it i s likely that the provision made in the Annual 
Plan 2016-17 will remain unutilised. The Committee is displeased to note that the whole year has 
been wasted in identifying the land and the proposa l for the Sainik School has not moved 
forward. The Committee urges the Ministry to pay se rious attention to this matter and to ensure 
that the Sainik School begins to function at least from the academic session 2017-18. 
 
(Para 3.11.10) 
Inadequate Allocation on Road Sectors  
 
 The Committee is concerned to note such an inordin ate delay in completion of projects 
like development of roads under PMGSY sanctioned mo re than a decade back. The Committee 
does not accept the argument that slow progress was  because environment and forest clearances 
were not given. The Ministry of Home Affairs should  take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and UT Administration of A& N Islands for completion of road 
projects under PMGSY without further delay. 
 
(Para 3.11.13) 
 
Issues raised in meeting of DRSC on Home Affairs 
 
 The Committee is not happy to note that Administra tor’s Advisory Council (AAC) 
constituted in 2010 meets rarely, once in a year an d after 2014 no such meeting has taken place 
and the Government has simply informed the Committee that it would be held shortly. The same 
is true with Home Minister’s Advisory Committee (HM AC) in respect of UT of A & N Islands 
where no meeting of the HMAC was held after 2006 as  it became defunct. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the Administrator’s Adviso ry Council (AAC) should meet frequently 
and peoples' representatives should be invited. Bes ides, the Ministry should reconstitute the 
HMAC without any further delay. 
(Para 3.11.16) 

69 
 
 
DAMAN & DIU (DEMAND NO. 93)  
 
 The Ministry has not apprised the Committee of the  progress made in respect of the two 
major projects in 2016-17, although the action take n report was furnished in September, 2016.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the current status of the two projects namely: 
(i) Purchase of Catamaran. 
(ii) Dredging of the Daman Ganga river mouth at Dam an and sea mouth at Diu. 
(Para 3.12.3) 
  
The Committee would also like to be apprised whethe r adequate provision was made in 
2016-17 BE and whether the allocated amount has been spent and the projects completed. 
(Para 3.12.4) 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the vague and general answer given in the action 
taken note. The Committee would like to be apprised  specifically on the progress of the issues 
raised by the Member of the Committee representing Daman & Diu in the Lok Sabha. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the issues that have been resolved and the issues that 
remain to be resolved along with the time line, and  which of the pending issues are likely to be 
resolved. 
(Para 3.12.7) 
DEMAND NO. 94 (Lakshadweep)  
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Minis try with regard to its recommendation 
on providing connectivity to the UT of Lakshadweep and desires early finalisation of the 
perspective plan for shipping to ensure timely completion and delivery of ships for expanding the 
horizons of tourism sector in the UT. The tourism policy needs early implementation.     
 
(Para 3.13.4) 
PATHANKOT AIRBASE ATTACK 
 
Operation to Neutralise Terrorists  
 
 The Committee is displeased to note that the inves tigation by the NIA remains incomplete 
even after a period of one year. Unless the investi gation is completed at an early date, it will not 
be possible to answer the grave questions that were  raised following the terrorist attack 
including: 
 
iii) Why was no preventive action taken despite credible  intelligence inputs that were 
received; 
iv) Why was no action taken despite interception of communication between terrorists 
and their handlers? 
(Para 3.14.6) 
 
 While the action taken note indicates the use of S pecial Forces (1 Para), it is not clear 
whether the Special Forces were actually deployed to neutralise the terrorists. 
(Para 3.14.7) 

70 
 
 The Committee would also like to be apprised of th e sequence of events leading to the visit 
of the Joint Investigation Team from Pakistan and i n particular the terms agreed between the 
two countries for promoting such a visit. The Commi ttee would like to be apprised whether it 
was insisted that Pakistan should allow an investig ation team from India to visit Pakistan to 
gather evidence and whether Pakistan agreed to the demand; and, if Pakistan had not agreed to 
the demand, why was the Pakistan team allowed to vi sit India without a commitment to allow a 
reciprocal visit by an Indian Investigation Team. 
(Para 3.14.8) 
 
 The Committee is examining Border Security separat ely and will address this issue in 
detail in that report.  
(Para 3.14.11) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its further recommendatio n given in paras 3.14.6, 3.14.7 and 
3.14.8. 
(Para 3.14.17) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its further recommendation  given in paras 3.14.6, 3.14.7 and 
3.14.8.  
(Para 3.14.23) 
NATIONAL POLICE ACADEMY AND NORTH EASTERN POLICE ACADEMY (NEPA) 
 
 The Committee desires to be informed of the alloca tion made by Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 4.6.5) 
UNION TERRITORIES 
 
Establishment of Navodaya Vidhyalaya 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministr y of Home Affairs should expedite 
the opening of Navodaya Vidyalaya in South Andaman District at the earliest by minimizing 
procedural delay.  
(Para 4.7.8) 
Demand No. 91 (Chandigarh) 
 
 The Committee does not appreciate the reply of the  Government and would like to know 
whether an amount of Rs. 250 crore projected for co nstruction of an extra canal from Bhakra 
Nangal after due approval by Punjab and Haryana Gov ernments for getting water to 
Chandigarh from Kajauli Water Works, has been alloc ated to the UT Chandigarh 
Administration at the RE stage. 
(Para 4.7.17) 
Demand No. 94 (Lakshadweep) 
 The Committee notes that the UT Administration is facing deficit of funds on Non-Plan 
side for running and maintenance of ships. The Comm ittee hopes that the Ministry of Finance 
would look into the issue of requirement of the UT under transport and health sector and 
approve the projected additional allocation at RE stage.  
(Para 4.7.21) 
******  