PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 157
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-306


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—5
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 7—14
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 15— 20
The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011.......................................................................... 17—20

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Rajagopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
*25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
* Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3 January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee
on Rural Development.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fifty-seventh Report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred
♣ the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
(Annexure-I) as introduced on 12 th December, 2011 in the Rajya Sabha and pending therein, to the
Committee on 13 th January, 2012, for examination and report by 31 st March, 2012.
3. The Bill seeks to amend sub-section 3 of Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 by substituting
the words “shall be punishable with death”, with the words “shall be punishable with death or
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine” in the said sub-section.
4. The Committee considered the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011 in its sitting held on
6
th February, 2012, and also heard the presentation of the representatives of the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the Bill. As per practice, senior officers of the Legislative Department and the
Department of Legal Affairs were also present in that sitting to respond to the queries of the
Members.
5. The Committee in its sitting held on 13
th March, 2012 considered and adopted this Report.
6. The report is based on the following documents:–
(i) The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011;
(ii) Detailed background Note on the Bill as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) The Arms Act, 1959;
(iv) Oral evidence tendered by the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Law and
Justice; and
(v) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on the queries raised by the
Members.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13th March,  2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
♣Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 49211 dated 16 th January, 2012.

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1.1 According to the background note furnished by the Ministry of  Home Affairs, the Arms Act,
1959 and the Arms Rules, 1962 contain provisions regarding acquisition, possession, manufacture,
sale, import, export and transfer of  arms and ammunition. The Act also provides, inter-alia, for
the grant of  various types of  licences, powers and procedures, production of  licence, arrest of
persons, punishment for using arms etc.
1.2 According to the Statement of  Objects and Reasons of  the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011,
existing provisions contained in section 7 of  the Arms Act, 1959, inter-alia, prohibits acquisition
or possession, or of  manufacture or sale, of  prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition unless one
has been specially authorised by the Central Government in this regard. It further mentions that
Sub-section (3) of  Section 27 of  the Arms Act, 1959 provides that whoever uses any prohibited
arms or prohibited ammunition or does any act in contravention of  Section 7 and such use or act
results in the death of  any other person, shall be punishable with death. Therefore, the provisions
contained in sub-section (3) of  aforesaid section 27 of  the Arms Act, 1959 provides imposition of
mandatory sentence of  death.
1.3 The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011 seeks to amend sub-section 3 of  Section 27 of  the Arms
Act, 1959 by substituting the words “shall be punishable with death”, with the words “shall be
punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine” in the said sub-
section.
1.4 The Statement of Objects and Reasons further reads as under:
“The constitutional validity of sub-section (3)  of aforesaid section 27  of the Arms
Act, 1 959 has been challenged before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in  the State of Punjab
vs. Dalbir Singh (Criminal Appeal No. 11 7 of 2006) and is pending before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court. Earlier, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mithu vs. State of Punjab (1983/2
Supreme Court Cases 277 ) while adjudicating the constitutional validity of section 303 of
the Indian Penal Code (which provided mandatory punishment of death to a person who
being under sentence of imprisonment for life commits murder) held that imposition of
mandatory sentence of death on commission of murder while undergoing life imprisonment
in jail or outside jail when on parole, without giving any scope for application of judicial
discretion considering facts and circumstances of each case, was, harsh, oppressive and
unjust.”
1.5 In view of the above sub-section (3) of aforesaid section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 is
proposed to be amended.
BACKGROUND
1.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its background note informed the Committee that there
was a case before Supreme Court in which a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Constable had
allegedly used his self-loading rifle to kill a superior officer. During the course of hearing in the
Supreme Court, constitutional validity of Section 27(3) of the Arms Act, 1959 was challenged. The
constable had been convicted by an Additional Session Judge but acquitted by the High Court. It
was further stated that the matter later was brought before the Supreme Court of India in the form
of an appeal by the State of Punjab and the applicability of the Arms Act 27(3) was put in issue

2
because he had been convicted under this provision only. If applied strictly, as per the statute, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court or the High Court have no discretion as per the Act and the only sentence
to be awarded was the death sentence. The Ministry stated that such a provision, according to the
Learned Additional Solicitor General, is unconstitutional and it is not desirable to keep such a
provision in the statute-book.
1.7 The Committee was further informed that a similar provision in the Indian Penal Code (IPC)
has also been declared as unconstitutional by the Supreme Court. Section 303, of IPC provides for
punishment for murder by life-convict which reads as : “Whoever, being under sentence of
[imprisonment for life], commits murder, shall be punished with death”.
1.8 The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Mithu Vs. State of Punjab (1983)2 SCC
277 ruled as under:
“Judged in the light shed by Maneka Gandhi and Bachan Singh, it is impossible to uphold
Section 303 as valid. Section 303 excludes judicial discretion. The scales of justice are
removed from the hands of the Judge so soon as he pronounces the accused guilty of the
offence. So final, so irrevocable and so irrestitutable [sic irresuscitable] is the sentence of
death that no law which provides for it without involvement of the judicial mind can be
said to be fair, just and reasonable. Such a law must necessarily be stigmatised as arbitrary
and oppressive. Section 303 is such a law and it must go the way of all bad laws. I agree
with my Lord Chief Justice that Section 303, Indian Penal Code, must be struck down as
unconstitutional”.
1.9 The Ministry in the background note also stated that the Hon’ble Supreme Court while
commenting on the Statement of Objects and Reasons in Subhash Ramkumar Bind vs. State of
Maharashtra (2003) 1 SCC 506 made following observation:–
“The punishment provided stands to be the severe-most one and under the general law of
the land it is only in the rarest of the rare cases that such a punishment can be inflicted
on to an accused. Obviously, the intent of the legislature as appears from the Statement of
Objects and Reasons cannot possibly be decried by reason of the situation prevalent during
the period in question. In more than one State of the country it was rather a dismal picture.
The use of prohibited arms and deadly weapons turned out to be a regular feature and the
existing State of Law was not in a position to subvert these moves by the anti-national
elements and in the event of incorporation in the statute-book of a legislation which stands
engrafted therein to protect the society from these unruly elements, it is a bounden
obligation of the law courts to attribute its widest- possible amplitude to the words used
in (sic by) the legislature and interpret the legislation in accordance therewith. Question of
there being a restrictive meaning to be attributed thus would not arise.”
1.10 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs during the course of arguments in the Supreme
Court in March, 2011 the Bench also indicated that the Government may consider substituting/
amending Section 27(3) retrospectively so that there is no doubt that the pending cases are
covered. To a specific query the Additional Solicitor General has suggested that the appropriate date
for retrospective amendment would be 27-05-1988 i.e. the date on which the ordnance came into
effect. It was further stated that in this context, the Supreme Court made the following ruling:
“The Hon ‘ble Supreme Court has clarified in ‘State of Punjab Vs. Gian Singh’ (I999)
9 SCC 312  as followed in ‘Superintendent, Narcotics Control Bureau Vs. Parash Singh,
(2008) 13  SCC 499  that if a subsequent legislation downgrades the harshness of the
sentence for the same offence, it would be a salutary principle for administration of
criminal justice to suggest that the said legislative benevolence can be extended to the
accused who awaits judicial verdict regarding sentence” .

3
1.11 With regard to retrospective date for effecting the amendment, the Ministry of Home Affairs
informed the Committee that the Ministry of Law and Justice has furnished the following advice/
opinion:–
“The proposed amendment of Section 27  (3) of the Arms Act, 1959  can be brought into
force from retrospective date as it is does not violate Article 20(1) and is in consonance
with the settled legal position laid down by various Supreme Court’ s judgments”.
PRESENTATION/ORAL EVIDENCE
1.12 The Home Secretary made a presentation on the Bill before the Committee on 6th February,
2012. During the presentation reiterating what is in the background note justified the proposed
amendment by saying that the existing provision was held unconstitutional by Supreme Court on
15th March, 2011 and Supreme Court also suggested the government to amend it.
1.13 Outlining the reasons behind the proposed Bill, the following submissions were made during
the course of presentation:–
• The courts have no discretion as to the sentence to be awarded under section 27(3) as
the only sentence provided is death penalty
• A similar provision of mandatory death penalty under section 303 of the IPC has been
struck down by the Honourable Supreme Court
• Honourable Supreme Court has held, in its judgment dated 01.02.2012 in criminal appeal
no 117 of 2006 i.e. State of Punjab vs. Dalbir Singh that Section 27(3) is ultra-vires
and void as it is repugnant to article 14 and 21 of the constitution
• No single conviction has been finally sustained under this provision during last 23 years
1.14 The Home Secretary further stated that the proposed amendment is meant to incorporate
the option of awarding life imprisonment and fine along with the existing option of awarding death
penalty.
1.15 During the course of presentation, the Members of the Committee raised some issues
pertaining to the provisions and the implications of the proposed amendments in the Bill.
1.16 Some Members sought to know (i) whether Government wants to keep the death sentence
also; (ii) When the Government in principle propose to remove the capital punishment and convert
the capital punishment to life imprisonment; (iii) what is the purpose of keeping capital punishment;
and (iv) whether India is a signatory to the U.N. Covenant against Capital Punishment, and whether
India has not ratified it, but is a signatory to it.
1.17 Responding to the queries, the Home Secretary submitted that he was not aware of India
being signatory to U.N. Covenant against Capital Punishment and he assured the Committee to get
it crosschecked. He further clarified that the Government was not intending to remove the death
penalty. He submitted that the Supreme Court held categorically that providing for a mandatory
death penalty was unconstitutional and that providing for a mandatory death penalty takes away
judicial discretion and therefore, there must be an alternative, either to prescribe death penalty or
life imprisonment, depending upon the circumstances of each case.
1.18 The Home Secretary further added that during the course of the arguments in Supreme
Court in March 2011 the Bench also indicated that the Government may consider substituting/
amending section 27(3) retrospectively so that there is no doubt that the pending cases are covered.
He also submitted that in response to a specific query, the Solicitor General has suggested that
appropriate date for retrospective amendment would be 27.5.1988, that is, the date on which the
Ordinance came into effect. He stated that because of this, the Bill has been brought.

4
1.19 Some Members drew the attention to the options already available in Section 27 of Arms
Act, 1959 which reads as follows:–
(1) whoever uses any arms or ammunition in contravention of section 5  shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable for to fine;
(2) whoever uses any prohibited arms and prohibited ammunition in contravention of section
7 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine; and
(3) whoever uses any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition or does any act in
contravention of section 7  and such an act results in the death of any other person shall
be punishable with death.
1.20 The Home Secretary while replying, made following observations:
“…section 27 (1)  provides for use of arms and ammunition in contravention of section 5.
If you go back to section 5, ‘…any firearms of such class or description as may be
prescribed or any ammunition...’ It means he does not have a licence; he will be punished
with a term not less than three years but which may extend to seven years or be liable to
fine. Clause 2  talks about prohibited arms and ammunition in contravention of section 7.
Whoever uses in any manner any arms or ammunition which is prohibited, the punishment
is slightly higher. Clause 3 deals with using prohibited arms and ammunition to kill
somebody. There the punishment is death.”
1.21 The Special Secretary (Internal Security) further added as under:
“These offences are covered under the Indian Penal Code also. Murder, that is, deliberately
causing death, has a penalty of death or life imprisonment. This option is available in
murder. Then there is a lesser offence under 304, culpable homicide not amounting to
murder in which life imprisonment is provided. But the section 27(3)  does not talk of
murder, does not talk of culpable homicide, it talks of death under any circumstances. So,
the mandatory punishment of death is very harsh. So, there should be some discretion. Even
for murder, if they are giving for discretion, there should be discretion available to the
courts for this also.”
1.22 A Member referring the operative part of sub-clause 2 and 3 of the Section 27 of Arms
Act, 1959, stated that there was no difference. The only difference is in sub-clause 3, which talks
about acts resulting in death. He felt that the terrorists who are behind bars may have used
prohibited arms in contravention of Section 7. If they have killed people and if their sentence is
converted from death to life after 14 years they are set free. They may be already in jail for ten
years or 12 years or 13 years and their sentence can be reduced under commutation. Then, this
section is going to give benefit to a person who has used prohibited arms and ammunitions in
contravention of section 7. He, therefore, felt that his is a fit case to be referred to the Law
Commission for a threadbare discussion and come out with a report as to whether Section 27(3)
should be amended or not.
1.23 Another Member stated that there is a huge demand in the country for taking a decision
to say no to capital punishment. He sought to know that stand of the government on the capital
punishment.
1.24 The Home Secretary replying to the queries stated as under:–
“…Section 27(3)  deals with any use of prohibited arms or ammunitions. The punishment
prescribed is seven years. That means if anybody holds or uses it in any manner he will be

5
punished for seven years. Section 27(3)  is for use which results in death but it is so wide that death
may not be a result of conscious mala fide, planned action. It may be even happening in an
inadvertent fashion. For that reason we believe that there may be circumstances where the courts
may seek fit to impose a death penalty. So, we are not removing the death penalty. We are only
providing an alternative so that the courts can judge whether there are circumstances for not
mandatorily giving death penalty. On the view of the Government as regards the death penalty, Sir,
right now we are not examining any proposal to do away with the death penalty. We are not
examining any proposal at present to remove death penalty.”
1.25 Another Member of the Committee sought to know the effect of the proposed amendment
on the mercy petitions. He referred to the Article 72 of the Indian Constitution which gives powers
to President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.
1.26 He also felt that mercy petitions are first examined in the Union Home Ministry before
submission to the President. The Home Ministry processes the file and the Home Ministry
recommends about fate of mercy petitions. While recommending, they are guided by the law of
the land such as Indian Penal code and CrPc. There are many mercy petitions pending before the
President. He further felt that, if the Bill is passed, it will affect the mercy petitions also.
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.27 The Members, while taking into account the background of the Arms (Amendment)
Bill, 2011 and judgments by High Court and the Supreme Court, were of the unanimous
view that the matter is a fit case to be referred to the Law Commission of India to examine
threadbare on the issue and come out with a report. The Members also unanimously felt
that the Committee should not go ahead with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
The Committee, in view of the above, decided not to go ahead with the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
1.28 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed Bill may be referred to
the Law Commission for detailed examination of the issues involved therein and to give its
report. The Government, after receipt of report, may bring forward the Bill before the
Parliament, if necessary a fresh Bill, in the light of the recommendations of the Law
Commission.

MINUTES

8

9
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 6 th February, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri Ajya Chadha, Special Secretary
3. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
4. Shri G.V .V. Sarma, Joint Secretary
5. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati Rashmi Goel, Joint Secretary
7. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Joint Secretary
9

10
8. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary
9. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
10. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director, IB
11. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
12. Shri J.P.N. Singh, Director
13. Shri A Vinash Mishra, Director
14. Shri R.K. Suman, Director
15. Shri Anuj Sharma, Director
** *
Representatives of Legislative Department. Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3. Shrimati Sharda Jain, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
4. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
5. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
6. Shri Gourav Banerjee, Additional Solicitor General of India
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
2. Shri S.R. Mishra, Deputy Legal Advisor
** *
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. He then
apprised the members about the Agenda of the day which was to hear the presentation of the Home
Secretary on the following Bills:–
(i) * * *
(ii) The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011; and
(iii) * * *
2.1 The Chairman informed the Members that the Law Secretary would not be able to attend
the meeting because of his pre-occupation with an official tour. The Chairman, however, felt that
being mini Parliament, Committee’s business is more important than tour and the Secretary,
therefore, should have taken prior permission before going on the tour. He asked the Joint
Secretary & Legal Adviser of the Department to convey displeasure of the Committee to him.
Declaration of Interest by Members in Subject/Bill undertaken for examination
2.2 The Chairman then read out the following rule 294 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business of Rajya Sabha for information of the Members which says, “Whenever a
member has a personal or specific pecuniary interest (direct or indirect) in a matter being
considered by the Council or a Committee thereof, he shall declare the nature of such interest
notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the Register, and shall not participate in any
debate taking place in the Council or its Committees before making such declaration”.
*** Relate to other matters.

11
3. * * *
[On Arrival of Home Secretary and other officials]
4. The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials to the sitting of the
Committee. * * *
4.1-4.7 * * *
The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
5. The Chairman informed the Members that Hon’ble Chairman has also referred the Arms
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 to the Committee on 13th January, 2012 for examination and report by
31
st March, 2012. The Bill seeks to amend sub-section 3 of Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 by
substituting the words, “shall be punishable with death” with the words “shall be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine” in the said sub-section. The existing
provision was held unconstitutional by the Supreme Court on 15.3.2011. The Supreme Court
suggested the Government to amend it. The Chairman felt that since the Bill only implements
direction given by the Supreme Court, the process of considering the Bill may be completed in the
sitting.
5.1 The Joint Secretary then made a presentation on the Bill. Outlining the reason behind the
proposed Bill, the Home Secretary made the following submissions:–
• The courts have no discretion as to the sentence to be awarded under section 27(3)
as the only sentence provided is death penalty.
• A similar provision of mandatory death penalty under section 303 of the IPC has been
struck down by the Supreme Court.
• The Supreme Court has held, in its judgment dated 01.02.2012 in criminal appeal no.
117 of 2006 i.e. State of Punjab vs. Dalbir Singh that section 27(3) is ultra-vires and
void as it is repugnant to Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
• No single conviction has been finally sustained under this provision during last 23
years.
5.2 The Home Secretary clarified that the proposed amendment is meant to incorporate the
option of awarding life imprisonment and fine along with the awarding of death penalty. He further
added that the Government proposed amending Section 27(3) retrospectively, so that there was no
doubt and the pending cases could also be covered.
ISSUES RAISED BY THE MEMBERS
5.3 During the discussion, meeting, Members of the Committee raised some issues pertaining
to the provisions and the implications of the proposed amendments in the Bill, which are as under:
(i) One Member stated that when the Government is intended to remove the capital
punishment and convert the capital punishment to life imprisonment, what is the purpose
of keeping capital punishment? India is a signatory to the U.N. Covenant against Capital
Punishment, though India has not ratified it.
(ii) There is not much difference in operative part of sub-clause 2 and 3 of the Section
27 of Arms Act, 1959. The only difference is sub-clause 3 talk about acts resulting in
death. The terrorists who are behind bars have used prohibited arms in contravention of
*** Relate to other matters.

12
Section 7. They might have killed people and if their sentence is converted from death to
life and after 14 years they are set free and if they are already in jail for ten years or 12
years or 13 years, their sentence can be reduced under commutation. Then, this amendment
could benefit a person who has used prohibited arms and ammunitions in contravention of
section 7.
(iv) There is a demand to abolish capital punishment and India should take a stand on
capital punishment. There should be judicial discretion but that discretion should not be in
favour of capital punishment. Law Commission should be asked to give its views on this
issue.
(v) The proposed amendment could affect mercy petitions under the Article 72 of the
Indian Constitution which empowers President to grant pardons, etc, and to suspend, remit
or commute sentences in certain cases.
5.4 The Home Secretary and other concerned officers of Ministry of Home Affairs replied to
the other queries of the Members.
5.5 The Members, while taking into account the background of the Arms (Amendment) Bill,
2011 and judgments by High Court and the Supreme Court, were of the unanimous view that the
matter is a fit case to be referred to the Law Commission of India to examine threadbare on the
issue and come out with a report. The Members also unanimously felt that the Committee should
not go ahead with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The Committee, in view of the
above, decided not to go ahead with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
6-6.4 * * *
7.1-7.3 * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

13
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13 th March, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri L.K. Advani
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
9. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
** *
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them about the agenda of
the day which was to adopt two reports namely, the draft 157
th Report on the Arms (Amendment)
Bill, 2011, and the draft 158 th Report on the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill,
2011. After some discussion, both the Reports were adopted with some changes.
13
*** Relate to other matters.

14
2.1. * * *
2.2. * * *
3.0. * * *
4.0. * * *
5.0 * * *
6.0. * * *
7.0 * * *
8.0 * * *
9.0 * * *
9.1 * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. to meet again on 19 th March, 2012.
*** Relate to other matters.

15
ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 120 of 201 1
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:–
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Arms (Amendment) Act,
2011.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th
day of May, 1988.
2. In the Arms Act, 1959 in section 27, in sub-section ( 3),
for the words “shall be punishable with death”, the words “shall be
punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be
liable to fine” shall be substituted.
17
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 27 of
Act 54 of 1959.

18
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Arms Act, 1959 provides for the law relating to arms and
ammunition.
2. Existing provisions contained in  section 7 of the Arms Act, 1959, inler
alia, prohibits acquisition or possession, or of manufacture or sale, of prohibited
arms or prohibited ammunition unless one has been specially authorised by the
Central Government in this behalf. Sub-section (3) of section 27 of the Arms
Act, 1959 provides that whoever uses any prohibited arms or prohibited
ammunition or does any act in contravention of aforesaid section 7 and such use
or act results in the death of any other person, shall be punishable with death.
The provisions contained in sub-section (3) of aforesaid section 27 of the Arms
Act, 1959 provides imposition of mandatory sentence of death.
3. The constitutional validity of sub-section (3) of aforesaid section 27 of
the Arms Act, 1959 has been challenged before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
the State of Punjab vs. Dalbir Singh (Criminal Appeal No. 117 of 2006) and is
pending before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Earlier, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in Mithu vs. State of Punjab (1983/2 Supreme Court Cases 277) while
adjudicating the constitutional validity of section 303 of the Indian Penal Code
(which provided mandatory punishment of death to a person who being under
sentence of imprisonment for life commits murder) held that imposition of
mandatory sentence of death on commission of murder while undergoing life
imprisonment in jail or outside jail when on parole, without giving any scope for
application of judicial discretion considering facts and circumstances of each
case, was, harsh, oppressive and unjust.
4. In view of the foregoing paragraph, it is proposed to amend sub-
section ( 3) of aforesaid section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 to provide that
whoever uses any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition or does any act in
contravention of section 7 and such use or act results in  the death of any other
person, shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be
liable to fine instead of mandatory sentence of death only.
5. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the State through CBI, Delhi vs. Gian
Singh (1999/9 Supreme Court Case 312) held that it is a fundamental right of
every person that he should not be subjected to greater penalty than what the law
prescribes, and no ex post facto legislation is permissible for escalating the severity
of the punishment. But if any subsequent legislation would downgrade the
harshness of the sentence for the same offence, it would be salutary principle for
administration of criminal justice to suggest that the said legislative benevolence
can be extended to the accused who awaits judicial verdict regarding sentence. 1t
is further proposed to give retrospective effect to the amendment proposed in the
preceding paragraph with effect from the 27th May, 1988 so as to cover the
pending Criminal Appeal No.117 of 2006 referred to in paragraph 3 above.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 17th November, 2011.
18

19
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE A RMS A CT, 1959
(54 OF 1959)
** * * *
27. (1)* * * * *
(3) Whoever uses any prohibited arms or prohibited
ammunition or does any act in contravention of section 7 and such
use or act results in the death of any other person, shall be
punishable with death.
** * * * 19
Punishment for
using arms, etc.

20
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.