81
C.S.(H.A.)-350
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY NINTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
137th Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(iii)
2. C OMPOSITION  OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE ............................................................................ (iv)
3. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (v)-(vi)
4. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (vii )
5. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—40
Chapter-I Action Taken notes by the M inistry of Home Affairs on 137 th Report
Committee.... ................................................................................................................. 1—16
Chapter-II .................................. Issues and Recommendation of the Committee 17—40
6. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ..... 41—49
7. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 51—63
8. A NNEXURES ..........................................................................................................................   65— 80
(i) Details of Enhancement of cash relief to Kashmiri Migrants in Jammu
and Delhi ................................................................................................................... 67— 68
(ii) A Status note on the implementation of recommendations of IMT .............. 69—73
(iii) List of the Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs ................................. 74—80

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
†4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
♣5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
† Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy nominated w.e.f. 4th July, 2012 vice Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ceased to be Member consequent upon expiration of term
of membership from Rajya Sabha on 2 nd April, 2012.
♣ Shri Satish Chandra Misra nominated w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 vice Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal who resigned from the membership of Rajya
Sabha w.e.f. 13 th March, 2012.
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012.
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
^2. Vacant
†3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
#8. Vacant
♣9. Vacant
%10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
*16. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the appointment
of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet on 28 th October, 2012 and Shri D. Raja, Member, RS ceased
to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013
† Shri Santiuse Kujur, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the resignation
of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
# Shrimati Kanimozhi ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013
♣ Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries on 28 th October, 2012.
% Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013 and
Dr. V . Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha was re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27 th July, 2013.
* Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, MP , Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the Appointment
of Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary as Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 17 th June, 2013.
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
♣25. Vacant
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
♣ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 30 th September, 2013 in terms
of the provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act , 1951,
he ceases to be a Member of the Committee.
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON ACTION TAKEN ON 137 TH REPORT
ONREHABILITATION OF J&K MIGRANTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
RAJYA SABHA
(1) Shri M. V enkaiah Naidu – Chairman
(2) Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy – Convenor
(3) Shrimati Vandana Chavan
(4) Shri Santiuse Kujur
(5) Shri Satish Chandra Misra
LOK SABHA
(6) Shri Naveen Jindal – Co-convenor
(7) Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
(8) Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
(9) Shri Ramen Deka
(10) Shri Datta Meghe
(11) Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
(12) Shri Rathod Ramesh
(13) Shri Neeraj Shekhar
(14) Shri Ravneet Singh
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 137
th Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants .
2. The then Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs constituted
a Sub-Committee on Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants on 13 th April, 2007 for in-
depth examination of the subject. The Committee gave its 137 th Report on ‘Rehabilitation of J&K
Migrants’ in February, 2009 on which Action Taken Notes were furnished by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations made in the Report. The Action Taken Notes, which were got
updated from time to time were considered the earlier Committee. The Committee was, however,
not satisfied with the replies/explanations offered by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the State
Government of J&K. The subject was again taken up for reconsideration by the present Committee
and updated Action Taken Notes on the recommendations made in 137
th Report of the committee
were sought.
3. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of various organizations of J&K
Migrants in its meeting held on 30 th July, 2013 alongwith the representatives of Ministry of Home
Affairs and State Government of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee heard the following
organizations of J&K migrants in the above said meeting:– (i) Panun Kashmir; (ii) All India Kashmiri
Samaj, Delhi; (iii) All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference; (iv) Kashmiri Samiti, Delhi; (v) Jammu
Kashmir Vichar Manch, Delhi; (vi) All India Kashmir Pandit Conference; (vii) Joint Forum of KP
Organisations; (viii) J&K National Panthers Party; and (ix) Terrorism Victims/Migrants of Jammu
Region.
4. After hearing the views of the representatives of various organizations and replies of the
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and State Government of Jammu and Kashmir, the
Committee considered updated Action Taken Notes submitted by the Government on the
recommendation made in 137
th Report. The Committee was dissatisfied with the Action Taken and
decided to see for itself the ground reality.
5. A Sub-Committee in this regard was constituted to visit migrant camps in Srinagar and
Jammu to take stock of the situation. The Sub-Committee visited several relief camps in Srinagar
and Jammu from 5
th to 7 th November, 2013. It also met various representative organizations of J&K
migrants during the study visit.
6. Keeping in mind the complexity of the issues involved and nature of long pending
grievances of the affected communities, the Committee has decided to treat the subject afresh and
give report.
7. The Committee while finalizing its report, relied on the following:–
(i) 137
th Report of the Committee on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants;
(ii) Updated Action Taken Notes of the Ministry of Home Affairs on recommendations
made in 137 th Report of the Committee on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants;
(iii) Oral-evidence of non-official witnesses and official witnesses;

(iv) Comments by Ministry of Home Affairs on memoranda received from various
organizations
(v) Replies to the queries of members raised during its sittings; and
(vi) Comments of Ministry of Home Affairs on Issues raised by Kashmiri/Jammu migrants
before the Parliamentary Standing Committee during visit of the sub-committee to J&K
from 5
th-7th November, 2013.
8. The Committee in its sitting held on 17 th February, 2014 considered and adopted the present
report.
9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
17th February,  2014 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
(vi)

ACRONYMS
DDA Delhi Development Authority
NoKs Next of Kin
IRP Indian Reserve Police
ANMs Auxiliary Nurse Mid-wifes
MPWs Multipurpose Workers
LOC Line of Control
HRD Human Resource Development
UG Under Graduate
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces
GNCTD Government of Nationl Capital Territory of Delhi
PGT Post Graduate Teacher
TGT Trained Graduate Teacher
MCD Municipal Corporation of Delhi
SPOs Special Police Officers
VDCs V illage Defence Committees
NHRC National Human Right Commission
UTs Union Territories
IMT Inter-Ministerial Team
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs
SRE Security Related Expenditure
CBM Confidence Building Measures
(vii)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
ACTION TAKEN NOTE BY THE MINISTRY OF
HOME AFFAIRS ON 137 TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
1.0 The Committee is moved by the pitiable condition of the Migrants. Over the years the
conditions have only worsened as families have grown and there has been no addition to their
resources. The unhygienic environment in which Migrants live is extremely deplorable. The
Committee is, therefore, of the strong view that the Government should give a serious thought to
the problems of Kashmir displaced person and improves their living conditions.
(Para 4.1 of 137
th Report)
Action Taken
1.1.1 As per information received from State Government, total number of registered families
who have migrated is 59,442 (Jammu 38119, Delhi 19338 and other States 1985).
1.1.2 The concerns about the pitiable conditions of the Migrants have been raised at different fora
including before the Parliamentary Standing Committee. The Government has taken several
measures from time to time to improve the living conditions and resources for sustenance of these
Migrants.
1.1.3 The thrust of the policy of the Government has been to ensure that difficulties and
hardships of the Migrants are minimized and the needy families are provided an amount, enough
for sustenance and support. Accordingly, monthly relief is being provided to the needy families in
Jammu and Delhi which has been enhanced from time to time, as enclosed in the Annexure ‘A’.
The Number of families drawing relief is 20,633 (Jammu – 17248 and Delhi 3385).
1.1.4 The Cash relief given to Migrants in the State of J&K has since been revised w.e.f.
1.7.2012. The revision made during the last financial year, is given as under:–
Jammu Delhi
w.e.f. R1250/-per head per month subject R1250/- per head per month subject to a
1.7.2009 to a ceiling of R5000/- per family ceiling of R5000/- per family per month
per month plus dry ration.
w.e.f. R1650/- per head per month subject R1650/- per head per month subject to a
1.7.2012 to a ceiling of R6600/- per family ceiling of R6600/- per family per month.
per month plus dry ration.
1.1.5 Other States are providing relief as per scales fixed by them from their own budget. In
pursuance of the meeting of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Chief Secretaries of the
concerned States have also been advised by Union Home Secretary, in May, 2012, to consider the
relief to the Kashmiri Migrants at par with J&K rates, as ‘relief’ is a State subject.
1

2
1.1.6 In view of the fact that the most of the Migrants do not have confidence in the conditions
prevailing in J&K, which are not conducive enough, for them to return to the Valley, the
Government, therefore, continues to create better facilities for Migrants in camps. To improve
their accommodation, construction of 5242 two-room tenements announced in Hon’ble PM’s
Package-2004, at Jammu have been completed. Out of these, 4624 flats have already been allotted
to the Kashmiri Migrants. Allotment of remaining flats is in progress.
1.1.7 As a result all the migrant families living in the old camps at Muthi I, Purkhoo Phase I,
II and III, Mishriwala, Nagrota, Batal Ballian, Kathua and semi finished Government buildings
which were generally one-room tenements and mostly without sanitary facilities have now been
shifted to newly constructed two-room tenements with sanitary facilities at Nagrota, Purkhoo and
Muthi at the same site and Jagati, a new site.
1.1.8 In Delhi, 237 migrant families who were staying in camps have been allotted DDA flats at
concessional rate. Presently there is no camp in Delhi.
Recommendation
1.2 The Committee also expresses its deep concern over the pathetic conditions of about 4000
Kashmiri Pandits living in the Kashmir Valley. The Committee feels that there should be special
budgetary provisions for Kashmiri Pandits left behind in the Valley for fulfilling genuine needs of
housing, employment/self-employment and improving living conditions.
(Para 4.2 ibid)
Action Taken
Budget
1.2.1 Relief is a State subject. There is as such no separate budget provided by the State
Government in the budget exclusively for Kashmiri Migrants who are left behind in the Valley. State
Government, however, have covered these Migrants under the housing and employment component
of the PM’s Package announced in 2008.
Housing
1.2.2 W ith the support of Government of India under the package announced in 2004, 200 flats
were completed at Budgam. Out of these, 31 flats have been allotted to local Kashmiri Migrants
displaced in the Valley itself. Remaining flats have been allotted to Migrants on sharing basis, who
have accepted appointment in the Valley under the Employment component of PM’s Package.
1.2.3 The internally displaced families are also eligible to avail most of the assistance under PM’s
Package for Migrants as announced in 2008. The details of housing assistance are as given in
para 4.9.
1.2.4 Under this package, so far only one family has come forward and availed the assistance
for construction of house.
Employment
1.2.5 In order to create employment for Kashmiri Migrants, it has been decided by the
Government of India in 2008, to create such opportunities for 15,000 unemployed migrant youths.
Out of this, 6000 youths are to be accommodated in State Government jobs; 50% posts are to be
created by the State Government from their own resources and the cost of 50% supernumerary
posts is to be borne by the Central Government till they are absorbed against regular posts in the

3
State Government within the specified time period. As regards Government jobs to be created with
Central Government fund, 1446 Migrants have already joined different jobs in the Valley. Five
internally displaced Kashmiri Migrants have also availed the benefit of job. There is Court stay for
1554 posts. However, further selection process is subject to the verdict of Hon’ble High Court. For
remaining 3000 posts, for which the expenditure is to be met by the State Government as per the
package, it still under the consideration of the Government.
1.2.6 9000 unemployed youths are to be facilitated to get financial assistance to come up with
self-employment/business ventures. For this purpose one-time assistance of Rs. 5.00 lakh in each
case will be provided out of which 50% will be grant and 50% as loan. No Migrant, however, has
come forward to avail this facility.
Recommendation
1.3 The Committee notes with concern that in the absence of adequate and comprehensive
policy for rehabilitation, the Kashmiri displaced persons are reportedly being compelled to live in
shanty-like camps set up in places like Udhampur, Nagrota, Jammu and Delhi. The displaced
persons had left behind their properties, household goods, business establishments, agricultural land
and other means of livelihood and continuing to lead their lives in scarcity and insecurity. Neither
the Central Government nor the State Government has adopted a holistic approach to tackle the
problems being faced by the displaced persons. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there
should be clear directions by Central Government to all the State Governments and Union
Territories to provide relief and rehabilitation on a uniform and holistic basis to Kashmiri Displaced
Persons living in those States and UTs. The Committee also feels that all State Governments should
provide land to them for construction of houses under group housing schemes and for construction
of cultural centres. To the extent possible, registration charges and stamp duty should be waived
as per a uniform policy throughout India.
(Para 4.3  ibid )
Action Taken
1.3.1 The Government has taken a holistic view for relief and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants,
which include cash relief for sustenance, accommodation, employment, education to the wards,
protection of the properties, incentives for return to the Valley, etc.
Relief
1.3.2 The Kashmiri Migrants migrated to Jammu, Delhi etc. from the year 1989 onwards. The
expenditure on account of relief and rehabilitation measures (cash and ration) are being borne by
respective State Governments of Delhi and other States, where Kashmiri Migrants are residing.
1.3.3 As far as, Kashmiri Migrants settled in Jammu are concerned, the expenditure on cash/
rations and other relief are being incurred by State Government which are reimbursed by Ministry
of Home Affairs, Government of India, under Security Related Expenditure (Relief and
Rehabilitation). The relief in Jammu and Delhi where maximum number of Migrants are residing
has been increased from time to time from Rs. 250/- per head per month subject to a ceiling of
Rs.1000/- per family per month in 1990 to Rs.1650/- per head per month subject to a ceiling of
Rs.6600/- per family per month in 2012.
1.3.4 This Ministry has written to all the State Governments where Kashmiri Migrants are
residing, to provide every possible assistance to the needy families to minimize their hardships till
they are able to return to the Valley. In pursuance of the meeting of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States have also been advised by Union Home

4
Secretary, in May, 2012, to consider the relief to the Kashmiri Migrants at par with J&K rates,
as ‘relief’ is a State subject.
Accommodation
1.3.5 In Jammu 5242 two room tenements have been constructed for providing accommodation
to Kashmiri Migrants. The Government of Delhi has allotted flats at concessional rates to 237
families of Kashmiri Migrants, who were staying in camps. Similarly, in UT of Chandigarh flats
at concessional rates have been allotted to Kashmiri Migrants who were staying in camps.
Education
1.3.6 In order to mitigate the hardships on educational front for the wards of Kashmiri Migrant,
the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of HRD has issued directions to the Vice-chancellors
of all Universities and Kendriya Vidyalayas to extend them certain concessions which are as under:–
Universities
(i) Relaxation in cut-off percentage upto 10% subject to minimum eligibility requirement.
(ii) Increase in intake capacity upto 5% – course-wise.
(iii) Reservation of at least one seat in merit quota in technical/professional institutions.
(iv) Waiving of domicile requirements.
Kendriya Vidyalayas
(i) Extension of date of admission by 30 days.
(ii) Relaxation in cut-off percentage, so as to be equal to that applicable for SC/ST
students subject to minimum eligibility requirement.
(iii) Admission to be over and above the class strength.
The above concessions are extended on year to year basis.
Protection of properties
1.3.7 In order to protect and restrain the distress sale of properties left behind in the Valley by
the Migrants, Government of J&K enacted two important legislation namely, “ The J&K Migrants
Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997” and
“J&K Migrants (Stay of Proceedings) Act, 1997 ”
Incentives for return to Valley
1.3.8 Under the PM’s Package of 2008, several incentives for return of Kashmiri Migrants have
been announced, which include assistance for construction of house, transit accommodation during
construction of house, continuation of cash relief, assistance for agriculturists/horticulturists,
waiver of interest on loan, etc. The details are outlined in para 4.9.
Allotment of land
1.3.9 The recommendation for allotment of land, etc., to Kashmiri Migrants outside the Valley has
not been envisaged as a matter of policy. The extant policy is to facilitate the return of Kashmiri
Migrants back to the Valley.

5
Recommendation
1.4 The Committee is of the view that recommendations of the high powered inter-ministerial
team appointed by Prime Minister, regarding medical fund, immediate employment of 1000 persons
and construction of two room flats at existing places of dwelling in Jammu based camps should
be implemented without further delay.
(Para 4.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.1 The recommendations of Inter Ministerial Team (IMT) appointed by PM inter alia  included
creation of corpus fund, employment of 1000 persons and construction of two-roomed tenements.
The following is the status in respect of above recommendations:–
1.4.2 Corpus Fund:  A Corpus Fund of R5 crores was to be created and administered by an
Empowered Committee chaired by the Chief Secretary. This fund has since been created and is
under operation. The fund is also to meet the requirements of the medical expenses of the Kashmiri
Migrants. Since March, 2007, 185 cases of Migrants have been settled and expenses to the tune
of R57.14 lakhs have been reimbursed to these patients.
1.4.3 Employment of 1000 persons: Against the target of 400 as Anganwari workers/helpers,
jobs have been provided to 454 Migrants.
1.4.4 Further, MHA while issuing the sanction for raising 5 IRBs in the State of J&K, have
directed the State Government to reserve 4% of posts for Kashmiri Migrants. Against this,
239 Kashmiri Migrants have already been appointed in Indian Reserve Battalion.
1.4.5 Also as a special dispensation, 56 wards of Kashmiri Pandits (those who did not migrate)
have been appointed as teachers under Rehbar-e-Taleem Scheme in Education Department,
Government of J&K.
1.4.6 Another 250 posts of Rehbar-e-Taleem teachers could not be filled up as the Migrants are
not willing to go back to the Valley and take the benefit of the scheme.
1.4.7 For the jobs available in the Health Department of J&K, separate reservation only for Kashmiri
Migrants could not be done due to legal implications and, therefore, the jobs available could not be
earmarked exclusively for them. However, under PM’s package 2008, separate rules for Migrants
were notified. Out of 3000 posts sanctioned out of GOI fund, 86 posts were created in the Health
Sector such as ANMs (Auxillary Nurses and Mid-wifes)/MPWS (Multi-purpose Workers). Against the
total No. of 3000 posts, 1446 Migrants have already been appointed. ( vide para 4.2)
1.4.8 Construction of two room flats: The construction of 5242 two roomed tenements at
Jammu to accommodate all the migrant families presently living in the camps has been completed.
Out of these, 4624 flats have already been allotted to the Migrants. Allotment of remaining flats
is in progress.
Recommendation
1.5 The Committee feels that the Displaced Persons living out side the camps need enhanced
relief commensurating with the cost of living index and to countervail the burden of rent payments
and therefore, desires that the Government should take appropriate steps in that direction
immediately. The Committee also desires that the Government should implement the
recommendations of the Sushma Chodhury Committee Report on Kashmiri Displaced Persons
residing outside the camps for improving their condition of living.
(Para 4.5  ibid )

6
Action Taken
1.5.1 Relief is a State Subject. In Delhi, out of 19,338 registered migrant families, 3385 families
are getting cash relief. This relief is being paid by NCT of Delhi.
1.5.2 In Jammu 17248 families are getting cash relief and ration which is being paid to
all Migrants except Government employees, retired employees who are drawing pension of
R4000/- per month and above.
1.5.3 Keeping the cost of living and inflation in view the Government, w.e.f. 1.7.2012, has
enhanced the quantum of cash relief to R1650/- per person per month, subject to a ceiling of
R6600/- per month per family of four members, from the existing rate of R1250/- per person per
month, subject to a ceiling of R5000/- per month per family of four members. The cash relief for
Migrants staying in Jammu is being reimbursed by Union Government under Security Related
Expenditure. Delhi Government and other State Governments/UTs are meeting the expenditure from
their own budget.   (para 4.1)
1.5.4 As would be evident from the preceding para, that the overarching policy of the
Government has been that the Kashmiri Migrants should be encouraged to return to the Valley, once
they find conditions reasonably conducive for their return. No scheme has been conceived for
Kashmiri Migrants living outside the camps. The Government has addressed almost all the
recommendations of the Sushma Chodhury Committee, which primarily deals with improving
conditions of the camps, construction of two room tenements, Corpus Fund etc. A status note on
the implementation of recommendations of IMT is at Annexure ‘B’.
Recommendation
1.6 The Committee feels that the Displaced Persons should be encouraged to undertake self-
employment and micro and small scale industries. For this they require loans from the banks. The
Committee recommends that the Government should provide the Kashmir displaced persons the
facilities of seeking soft loans from the banks to enable them to take up self employment projects
for earning their livelihood.
(Para 4.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.1 As estimated by State Government, there are about 15,000 unemployed migrant youths.
9000 unemployed youth were to be facilitated for self employment by way of financial assistance
to them. R5 lakh in each case has been envisaged to be provided, out of which 50% will be grant
and 50% as loan.
1.6.2 According to the State Government, the response of the unemployed migrant youths
towards self-employment/business ventures with the above help of grant and loans to the tune of
R5 lakhs has not been encouraging. The State Government has further informed that for organizing
entrepreneurial development programme, the migrant youth were asked to come forward and apply
for the same but there has been no response from them to join this initiative.
Recommendation
1.7 The Committee understands that the purpose of monthly allowance given to Kashmiri
Displaced Person is to ensure that difficulties and hardships faced by them are minimized and the
needy families are provided with a reasonable quantum of sustenance and support. Keeping in view
the requirement for a decent living and the expenditure needed to be incurred; the Committee
recommends that the Government should consider increasing the monthly sustenance allowance

7
from R1000 per month per head to a reasonable amount commensurate to the current cost of
living.
(Para 4.7  ibid )
Action Taken
1.7.1 W ith effect from 1.7.2012 the rate has been revised to R1650/- per head per month subject
to a ceiling of R6600/- per family per month. In Jammu dry ration is also being provided.
Recommendation
1.8 The Committee strongly feels that the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and the Central
Government should take the matter of the health care of Kashmiri Pandits with utmost seriousness
and sanction them a reasonably enhanced medical allowances so that they do not die of any
ailments due to lack of medical attention. It would be appreciated if the Government also make a
provision for providing insurance coverage to Kashmiri Displaced Persons who are leading a
miserable life and many of them suffering from ailments.
(Para 4.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.1 There are four medical centers available in the Migrants’ camps at Jammu. Free treatment
and medicines are provided to the Migrants in the camps at Jammu. In the Jagati camp at Jammu,
40 bedded hospital is presently under construction.
1.8.2 Further a corpus fund of R5 crore established for catering to miscellaneous needs including
medical facilities, has been set up for Migrants. The Scheme is already in operation. So far, cases
of 185 Migrants have been settled and medical expenses to the tune of R57.14 lakhs has been
reimbursed to these patients. Presently 18 cases are under consideration.
Recommendation
1.9 The Committee is of the view that given the complexity of the situation, confidence-building
measures among the displaced persons are necessary which needs utmost attention on the part of
the Government.
(Para 4.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.9.1 The extant policy of the Government in respect of the Kashmiri Migrants is to facilitate
their return to the Valley. Accordingly, the permanent rehabilitation of the Migrants outside the State
has not been envisaged. In order to provide relief and succour to the Migrants, a variety of relief
and sustenance measures have been taken, which include provision of cash assistance, ration relief,
construction of flats at Jammu, allotment of DDA flats in Delhi, etc.
1.9.2 Further in order to boost their confidence and provide incentives for their return,
the Hon’ble PM has announced a comprehensive package amounting to R1618.40 crore in
April, 2008 which are as follows:
(i) Housing
(a) Assistance @ R7.5 lakh per family for fully or partially damaged houses.
(b) R2.00 lakh per family for dilapidated/unused houses.
(c) R7.5 lakh per family for purchase/construction of house in Group Housing Societies
for those who have sold their properties.

8
(ii) T ransit Accommodation
1.9.3 The returnee migrant families will need accommodation during the interim period when they
undertake the reconstruction/repair of their houses. It was therefore, decided to provide fund to
the tune of @ R20.00 crore each for construction of transit accommodation at three sites at total
cost of R60.00 crore.
1.9.4 Alternatively, R1.00 lakh per family towards rental and incidental expenses was also
provided for, to those families who could not be accommodated in transit accommodation at the
cost of R50.00 crore.
(iii) Continuation of Cash Relief
1.9.5 The Migrant families at Jammu and Delhi who are recipients of cash relief and free ration
would continue to receive the same for a period of two years after their return to the Valley.
(iv) S tudents scholarships
1.9.6 The children of migrant families will be provided assistance on the lines of Project
‘ASSIST’ of NFCH and assistance for professional studies under the scheme of Rehabilitation
Council of J&K.
(v) Employment
1.9.7 It has been decided to provide employment opportunities to 15,000 unemployed migrant
youth. Out of which, 6000 youth are to be accommodated in State Government jobs. The Central
Government will bear the cost towards salary against employment of 3000 persons.
1.9.8 The remaining 9000 unemployed youth are to be facilitated to get financial assistance
to come up with self-employment/business ventures. For this purpose one-time assistance of
R5.00 lakh in each case will be provided out of which 50% will be grant and 50% as loan.
(vi) Assistance to Agriculturists/Horticulturists
1.9.9 One-time financial assistance of R1.00 lakh would be provided to those having agriculture
holdings. For restoration of orchards R5,000/- per kanal, would be available subject to a maximum
of R1.5 lakh.
(vii) W aiver of interest on loans
1.9.10 It has also been decided to waive off the interest component of the loans taken by Kashmiri
Pandits before migration from the Valley.
1.9.11 The State Government has, however, proposed revision in the existing package and has
suggested enhancement of financial assistance at higher scales for various components. The same
is under consideration of the Government and would be processed in consultation with the State
Government on receipt of clarifications/financial implications of the revised package.
Recommendation
1.10 The Committee expresses its serious concern about the criminal intent of vested
interests to alter the demography in the State of J&K by not only forcibly ousting the
minorities out of the State but also by changing the property rights in the revenue records, so
that the Migrants are left with no stake to return back to the Valley. The Committee strongly
feels that appropriate and effective action is required to safeguard the right to properties of the

9
Kashmiri Pandits who have been compelled to fled the state their homes and hearths for fear
of their lives and dignity.
(Para 4.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.10.1 In order to protect and restrain the distress sale of properties left behind in the Valley by
the Migrants, the Government of J&K enacted two important pieces of legislation namely the “ J&K
Migrants immovable property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997”
and “J&K Migrants (Stay of Proceedings) Act, 1997 .”
1.10.2 The Act provides that the immovable properties of the Migrants cannot be alienated without
the prior permission of Revenue and Relief Minister or such Officer as may be authorized by him
on his behalf. The District Magistrate concerned shall take over possession of such property within
30 days from the commencement of this Act and it shall be his duty to take all steps for
preservation and protection of such property. Under the Act, the competent authority has been
authorized to take action for eviction of the unauthorized occupants. The properties sold after the
enactment of the Act are not covered for relief under the Act.
1.10.3 For return and rehabilitation of these category of Migrants who have sold their houses as
distress sale between the period December, 1989 to 30.5.1997 (the date when State Government
enacted “ The J&K Migrant Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress
Sales)Act, 1977 on 30.5.1997). The following components towards housing assistance was
announced by Hon’ble PM in 2008:–
(i) Assistance @ R7.5 lakh per family for fully or partially damaged houses.
(ii) R2.00 lakh per family for dilapidated/unused houses.
(iii) R7.5 lakh per family for purchase/construction of house in Group Housing Societies
for those who have sold their properties.
Recommendation
1.11 The Committee was given to understand that an Apex Committee on Relief under the
Chairmanship of the Revenue Minister of the J&K, had assured that within a period of three
months, all encroachments would be got vacated and the details of the Kashmiri Pandits’ properties,
which had been taken over by the Divisional Commissioner of each District, would be posted on
the internet. However, no action appears to have been taken on this front. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the authorities should act forthwith with all seriousness, to
remove the encroachments and instill the much needed confidence in the Migrants by undertaking
suitable action in this regard a time bound manner.
(Para 4.11 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.1 In order to protect the properties of Kashmiri Pandits, the State Government has enacted
two important pieces of legislation namely the “J&K Migrants immovable property (Preservation,
Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997” and “J&K Migrants (Stay of Proceedings)
Act, 1997.”
1.11.2 The Government of J&K has informed that instructions stands issued from time to time for
removal of encroachments on Migrants lands/property, Addl. DCs of all the Districts in the Valley
have been appointed Nodal officers for removal of encroachments.

10
Recommendation
1.12 The Committee recommends that all houses of Kashmiri Pandits lying in dilapidated
condition should be rebuilt by Government or a liberal grant be offered to owners of the properties
to rebuild them.
(Para 4.12  ibid )
Action Taken
1.12.1 In order to address the problems of the Kashmiri Migrants, the PM’s package for return
and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants-2008 provides for assistance @ R7.5 lakh per family
for fully or partially damaged house, R2 lakh per family for dilapidated/unused houses and
R7.5 lakh per family for purchase/construction of a house in Group Housing Societies for those
who have sold their properties.
1.12.2 The State Government has proposed certain enhancement in the financial assistance for
housing component, which is under the consideration of the Government and would be processed
in consultation with the State Government on receipt of clarifications and financial implications of
the revised package.
Recommendation
1.13 The Committee is also of the opinion that the Government should explore the possibility of
declaring all the properties, movable and immovable, sold by the displaced persons after 1989-90,
as “Distress Sales” and declare the sales as null and void and accordingly restore possession of
the properties back to the respective Kashmiri Pandits who were the recorded owners through the
custodian of properties duly constituted.
(Para 4.13  ibid )
Action Taken
1.13.1 As mentioned earlier in para 4.11, in order to preserve, protect and restrain the distress sale
of Migrants’ properties left behind in the Valley, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir has
enacted an important legislation namely, The J&K Migrants Immovable Property (Preservation,
Protection and Restrain of Distress Sales)Act, 1997 . The Act provides that the immovable properties
of the Migrants cannot be alienated without the prior permission of Revenue and Relief Minister
or such Officer as may be authorized by him on his behalf. The District Magistrate concerned shall
take over possession of such property within 30 days from the commencement of this Act and
it shall be his duty to take all steps for preservation and protection of such property. Under the
Act, the competent authority has been authorized to take action for eviction of the unauthorized
occupants. The properties sold after the enactment of the Act are not covered for relief under the
Act.
1.13.2 For return and rehabilitation of these category of Migrants who have sold their houses as
distress sale between the period December, 1989 to 30.5.1997 (the date when State Government
enacted “The J&K Migrant Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress
Sales) Act, 1997” on 30.5.1997), the Hon’ble PM in 2008 has announced the following package
towards housing assistance:–
(i) Assistance @ R7.5 lakh per family for fully or partially damaged houses.
(ii) R2.00 lakh per family for dilapidated/unused houses.
(iii) R7.5 lakh per family for purchase/construction of house in Group Housing

11
Societies for those who have sold their properties.
Recommendation
1.14 The Committee strongly feels that there should be a blanket ban on the acquisition of the
properties of Kashmiri Pandits by the State Government. The Jammu & Kashmir Migrants
Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint on Distressed Sales) Act, 1997 should
be implemented in letter and spirit.
(Para 4.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.14.1 Wherever, acquisition is being made by the State Government, it is done as per the
provisions of Land Acquisition Act for public purpose. A proper notice is issued and objections are
invited before finalizing the proposal. Whenever any migrant has objected to such acquisitions, the
matter is referred to the concerned Deputy Commissioner and on the basis of such objections, the
concerned Deputy Commissioner disposes off the matter on merit.
1.14.2 As per the information received from the State Government, the number of properties
acquired by the Government for public use is not very large. From 2003 onwards, about 101
acquisition of such properties belonging to Migrants have been reported and an amount of R7.72
crores approx. has been sanctioned as compensation to them.
Recommendation
1.15 The Committee is of the considered view that the word ‘migrant’ used in the context of
the Kashmiri Displaced Persons is not an appropriate expression because the affected persons
had been forced to give up their homes and hearths against their own will due to the mayhem
caused by the militants. The Committee is also of the view that those persons cannot wait
endlessly for normalcy to return to the Valley and there is no harm if some such people prefer
to settle outside the Valley for the sake of their lives and livelihood. The Committee therefore
desires that the Government should consider this aspect and announce suitable and appropriate
policy measures.
(Para 4.15 ibid)
Action Taken
1.15.1 The issue of nomenclature whether migrant is ‘displaced person’ in the present context has
been raised at various forum from time to time.
1.15.2 A Kashmiri Pandits Associations had filed a case before the Human Rights Commission of
India on this issue. MHA informed the NHRC that the nomenclature is not a very important
element for protecting their interest. What is material is that whether the Government is doing
its best to mitigate their hardships. The use of the term ‘Migrants’ by no means is coming in
the way of mitigating their hardships. The Government have not come across any instance which
suggests that the word ‘migrant’ has been mistaken or misinterpreted to the disadvantage of the
Migrants.
1.15.3 The term ‘displaced persons’ in the context of J&K has been used for the persons displaced
in 1947 as a result of Partition of the Country or occupation of a part of the J&K State by Pakistan
thereby displacing lakhs of the inhabitants of that area. Such displaced persons have been
rehabilitated.
1.15.4 In case of Migrants, there is no intention of the Government to settle the Kashmiri Migrants
permanently outside the State. It is also important to note that there are still thousands of Kashmiri

12
Hindus living in different parts of the Valley (they have not chosen to migrate out of the Valley).
The term ‘displaced persons’ may seem neutral. However, replacement of the term ‘Migrants’ with
‘displaced persons’ may now give rise to avoidable misgivings. Some Migrants may even raise the
demand for permanent rehabilitation outside the Valley which is against the Government Policy.
1.15.5 NHRC vide their Order, dated 6.5.1996 has decided this matter as given under:
“xxx xxx xxx. We have given anxious consideration to this question and are of the view
that there is no scope for objecting to the term ‘Migrants’ and the apprehension of the
Union Government is not without any basis. Accordingly, we would not like to substitute
the term ‘Migrants’ by ‘internally displaced persons’. ”
1.15.6 As regards, the question of settlement of Kashmiri Pandits outside the Valley, the Policy of
the Government is based on the premise that they would return to the Valley as soon as the
conditions are found by them reasonably conducive enough for their return. Accordingly, the
permanent rehabilitation of the Migrants outside the State is not envisaged.
Recommendation
1.16 W ith the displacement of Kashmiri Pandits from the Valley, they not only lost their homes
but also means of livelihood which aggravated their agonies and miseries. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs to explore all avenues for providing
employment to them under the package announced by Prime Minister in 2004 with a time-bound
programme.    (Para 4.16  ibid )
Action Taken
1.16.1 This has already been explained in para 4.4.
Recommendation
1.17 The Committee was given to understand that the direction of the High Court of Jammu and
Kashmir to provide relief to the Jammu Migrants at par with the Kashmiri Migrants, has not been
implemented either by the central or State Governments. The Committee also notes the order dated
July 12, 2006 of the Supreme Court that the Relief Commissioner may ensure whether Jammu
Migrants were provided with all relief measures to which they were entitled as per the policy and
any arrears to be paid to the Migrants should be made available to them at the earliest. The
Committee expresses its anguish that no step have been taken to provide relief to the Jammu
Migrants. The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be taken to implement the
directions of the Supreme Court.
(Para 4.17  ibid )
Action Taken
1.17.1 The proposal of the State Government for providing relief to 1489 migrant families of
Jammu region (7811 persons) for an expenditure of R21.08 crore was received in this Ministry and
after due consideration, it was felt that the position in respect of the Migrants from the Jammu
region is qualitatively different from that of the Migrants from the Valley, which is not comparable
with isolated cases of migration from the Districts of Jammu Division. Besides, the State
Government would like the Jammu Migrants to return to their villages. It has been impressed upon
the State Government that it would be appropriate that the relief proposed to be given by the State
Government to these Migrants, as per any commitments made by them, may be provided out of
the State Budget.

13
Recommendation
1.18 The services of Kashmir Displaced Persons, who have been appointed as Teachers on
adhoc basis in MCD and Government of NCT of Delhi Schools, should be regularized. The
Committee was given to understand that there are cases where Kashmir teachers have been
working on contract for the last thirteen years. The Committee is of the view that all such cases
should also be regularized a soon as possible.
(Para 4.18  ibid )
Action Taken
1.18.1 As informed by Government of NCTD, Kashmiri migrant teachers were appointed on
contract basis without following the prescribed recruitment procedure. At present these teachers are
given regular extension in their job and also their emoluments are revised periodically. In its
judgement in Civil Appeal No. 3586-3612-1999 (Secretary State of Karnataka Vs. Uma Devi &
Ors.) dated 10.4.2006, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has clearly expressed itself against regularization
of contractual employees. As such, the Education Directorate is not in a position to take any
decision for their regularization. Besides there are other categories of contractual teachers and any
action for regularization of services of Kashmiri migrant teachers would definitely raise similar
demands from the other contractual employees. Therefore, the Government of NCTD is not in a
position to regularize the services of Kashmiri migrant teachers.
Recommendation
1.19 The Committee recommends to the Government to examine the demand made by the
Kashmiri Displaced Persons for providing constitutionally guaranteed schemes for their social,
political and economic upliftment and come out with appropriate measures.
(Para 4.19 ibid)
Action Taken
1.19.1 The policy of the Government in respect of Kashmiri Migrants is based on the premise that
they would return to the Valley as soon as conditions reasonably conducive for their return are
created. Accordingly, the permanent rehabilitation of the Migrants outside the State is not envisaged.
In such a situation, the thrust of the policy has been to ensure that difficulties and hardships of
the Migrants are minimized and the needy families provided a reasonable amount of sustenance and
support. Accordingly, the various measures taken are:–
Food security :
– Monthly cash and ration relief given to eligible Migrants.
– Cash relief has been revised from time to time
Housing security :
– Construction of 5242 tenements at Jammu to accommodate migrant families living
in camps
– Construction of 200 flats at Budgam
– Allotment of DDA flats on concessional rates to 237 families living in camps in
Delhi

14
– Government of J&K has enacted “The J&K Migrant Immovable Property
(Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997 to protect and
restrain the distress sale of properties left behind in the Valley by the Migrants
Health security :
– Provision of medical treatment and free medicines at medical centers in the camps at
Jammu
– Setting up of an Empowered Committee headed by Chief Secretary for administration
of a Corpus Fund of R5 crore for catering to miscellaneous needs of Migrants
including medical needs
Upliftment/employment package :
– Reservation of 4% of posts for Kashmiri Migrants in five India Reserve Battalions
located in the State of J&K
– Providing employment opportunities to 15,000 unemployed migrant youths (6000 in
State Government employment and 9000 self employment with financial assistance of
R5.00 lakh in each case (50% grant and 50% loan)
Education
– Issue of directions by MHRD, Government of India, to the Vice-Chancellors of all
universities to ensure that certain concessions are provided to the Kashmiri migrant
students in the matter of their admissions to the educational institutions in other parts
of the country. The concessions are given below:–
Universities
(i) Relaxation in cut-off percentage upto 10% subject to minimum eligibility
requirement.
(ii) Increase in intake capacity upto 5% – course-wise.
(iii) Reservation of at least one seat in merit quota in technical/professional institutions.
(iv) Waiving of domicile requirements.
Kendriya Vidyalayas
(i) Extension of date of admission by 30 days.
(ii) Relaxation in cut-off percentage, so as to be equal to that applicable for SC/ST
students subject to minimum eligibility requirement.
(iii) Admission to be over and above the class strength.
– State Governments have reserved seats in medical/professional colleges for wards of
Kashmiri Migrants
Grievance redressal mechanism
A grievance redressal mechanism is in place as under-
– Relief Commissioner (Migrants) at Jammu to look after the needs/problems of Migrants
at Jammu

15
– In NCT of Delhi, Divisional Commissioner, Delhi, to look into the problems of
Kashmiri Migrants and suggest solutions.
PM’ s return and rehabilitation package -2008
– Hon’ble PM announced a comprehensive package of R1618.40 crore in April, 2008
for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants providing incentives relating to
housing, transit accommodation, continuation of cash relief, students scholarship,
employment opportunities, assistance to agriculturists/Horticulturists and waiver of
interest on loans.
(Details in para 4.9)
Recommendation
1.20 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the actual expenditure on account of
implementation of rehabilitation programmes for J&K displaced persons during 2006-07 was only
R69.31 crore as against the allocation of R120 crore and against R120 crore kept for 2007-08 in
BE, only R100 crore was provided at RE 2007-08. The Committee once again took serious note
that as enough claims were not received from the Government of Jammu & Kashmir, only R110.00
crore was kept in the BE 2008-09. The Committee in its successive Reports, i.e. 119 th, 126 th and
130th Reports, urged upon the Ministry to impress upon the J&K Government about the necessity
of sending schemes expeditiously and implement them in time so that all the J&K Displaced
Persons are rehabilitated without further delay. Inspite of those recommendations, it is unfortunate
that the Government of J&K has not taken requisite action.
(Para 4.20  ibid )
Action Taken
1.20.1 The concerns expressed by the Committee in its successive reports i.e. 119
th, 126 th and
130th about expenditure on relief and rehabilitation have been noted. Ministry of Home Affairs has
been taking up the issues relating to Relief and Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants with the State
Government from time to time. The State Government was requested to come forward with
schemes in time and implement them without delay so as to ensure full utilization of the expenditure
within the financial year. The issues were also brought to the notice of State Government during
the visits of senior officers of the State Government.
1.20.2 The State Government was requested to ensure that reimbursement claims may be preferred
with due care to enable full utilization of the funds by the end of the financial year and forward
the Utilization Certificates timely. In order to ensure that ongoing project schemes are completed
timely, the State Government introduced double-shift system of working to over-come the limited
working season available in the State. To further facilitate the State Government in improving their
fiscal management, a special audit of SRE related expenditure has been undertaken. There is no
financial constraint for reimbursement of expenditure incurred by the State Government towards
relief and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants.
Recommendation
1.21 At the same time, the role and responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs do not end
by merely requesting and advising the State Government. It has to play a proactive role in the
matter and vigorously pursue with the Government of J&K at the highest level so as to convince
the latter the need for formulating rehabilitation schemes and sending them on time to the Central
Government for further action.
(Para 4.21  ibid )

16
Action Taken
1.21.1 MHA has been taking up the issues relating to relief and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants
with the State Government from time to time. The Hon’ble Prime Minister had started the process
of a comprehensive internal dialogue with different sections/segments of the people in the State.
For developing wide-ranging Confidence Building Measures and for reaching a consensus on all
contentious issues, a measure was initiated in 2005 in the form of the Round Table Conference
on Jammu & Kashmir. The first Round Table Conference was held in New Delhi
on February 25, 2006. Pursuant to the Second Round Table Conference held in Srinagar on
May 24-25, 2006, five Working Groups were constituted to examine various aspects of the
situation in the State.
1.21.2 W orking Group I on Confidence Building Measures (CBM) across the segments of society
recommended inter-alia  a package for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants. The
recommendation was endorsed by the Third Round Table Conference. In pursuance of the
recommendation a proposal was obtained from the State Government and a comprehensive package
of R1618 crore was announced by Hon’ble PM on 25
th April, 2008 for return and rehabilitation of
Kashmiri Pandits.
1.21.3 The main components of the package are assistance towards housing, transit
accommodation, continuation of cash relief to Migrants, students scholarship, employment
opportunists, assistance to agriculturists/horticulturists and waiver of interest on loans. The details
are already given in para 4.9.
1.21.4 The Central Government has already released a sum of R104.52 crore (till May, 2013 in
the current financial year) to the State Government from security related expenditure (Relief &
Rehabilitation).

17
CHAPTER-II
ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.1.1 The Committee was informed that the disturbed condition existing in the Kashmir Valley
in the 1990’s due to the onset of militancy led to the exodus of Kashmiri Pandits, Sikhs, Muslims
and Punjabi Hindus to the Jammu province, Delhi and some other States/Union Territories. It is
estimated that more than 56,000 families migrated out of the Valley.
2.1.2 According to the representatives of J&K Migrants, the primary cause for the migration
of Kashmiri Pandits and other Minorities from the valley in the 1990’s was “insecurity of life and
honour” due to the total collapse of the structure of governance and the anarchy that prevailed in
the face of pro-Pakistani movement led by some sections of the people with covert support from
Pakistan in terms of indoctrination, training, arms and trained manpower. The pattern and manner
of killing of politicians, officials and common people reflected the tactics of creating terror among
the minorities by making a public exhibition of brutalized killings to paralyze the structures of
authority.
2.1.3 The Committee after presentation of the Report on the subject, considered the Action
Taken Notes of the Government on a number of times. Being dissatisfied every time with the reply,
the Committee sought updated replies on issues. The Committee in this connection also heard the
views of various representative organizations of the Migrants along with the views of Ministry of
Home Af fairs. The Committee after those meetings felt that conditions at the grass root level had
not been improved and on various counts, action on the part of the State Government was wanting
and the Union Ministry of Home Affairs was not in a position to intervene except to suggest the
State Government to take necessary action or look into the matter. The Committee in its meeting
held on 30
th July, 2013, directed the Union Home Secretary to hold a meeting with the
representatives of the affected Migrant people and report back to the Committee of the possible
solutions to their long pending grievances. The Union Home Secretary convened a meeting on
19th September, 2013 in this regard and furnished the details of the issues culled out of the
deliberations and action proposed. The Committee noted that a majority of the issues pertained to
the State Government. The Committee also decided to gauge for itself the ground reality and,
therefore, sent its Sub-Committee to visit various Migrant camps in Srinagar and Jammu. The sub-
Committee visited the Migrants’ camps of Vessu, Purkhu, Jagti etc. It heard several organizations
and received their memoranda. The present chapter is based on the Committee’s deliberations with
the migrant organizations and its sub-committee’s meetings with the Migrants held during the study
visit.
2.1.4 The following paragraphs contain issues raised in the above said meetings, comments of
the Ministry on the same followed by the recommendations of the Committee in bold.
Definition of Migrant
2.1.5 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, as per the State Government of J&K, any
person who has left the Valley due to onset of militancy in 1990s has been defined as a Migrant.
All such families were given option of getting themselves registered with Relief Commissioner at
Jammu.
17

18
Demand for Replacement of the Word ‘Migrants’ with ‘Displaced’
2.1.6 On being asked about the demand of certain organizations of the Migrants to replace the
word ‘Migrants’ with ‘Displaced’ for Kashmiri Migrants, the Ministry has expressed the view that
nomenclature is not an important element for protecting the interests of the Kashmiri Migrants.
What is material is that whether the Government is doing its best to mitigate the hardships. The
use of term ‘Migrants’ by no means is coming in the way of mitigating their hardships. The
replacement of the term ‘Migrants’ with ‘Displaced Persons’ at this stage may give rise to
avoidable misgivings. Some of the Migrants may even raise the demand for permanent rehabilitation
outside the Valley, which is against the Government Policy.
Declaration of Kashmiri Migrants as Internally Displaced persons
2.1.7 Some of the representatives of the Migrants aspire for ‘Internally Displaced Persons’
status and strongly demanded that the Government should be advised to think on this front
positively. Some of the Migrant groups were also of the opinion that Migrants should be
permanently rehabilitated outside the State.
2.1.8 The Ministry has informed that the issue has already been decided by NHRC. NHRC is
of the view that there is no scope for objecting to the term ‘Migrant’. Accordingly, it was decided
not to substitute the term ‘Migrant’ with ‘Internally Displaced Persons’. However, presently the
issue is pending before the Supreme Court.
2.1.9 The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that Migrants be provided
all the facilities for rehabilitation as are provided to a displaced community.
Conducive Environment for Return to the Valley
2.1.10 As per the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs, most of the
Migrants do not have confidence in the conditions prevailing in J&K. They do not find them
conducive enough for return to the Valley. The Ministry has explained that for permanent return
and settlement, various Migrant organizations lack consensus. Most of the organizations are unable
to firm up their decision. They have also failed to provide any workable plan for permanent
rehabilitation. However, Government will ensure to provide all support and assistance to such
Migrant families who would like to return to the Valley. The Migrants, however, cannot be forced
to return to the Valley though the extant policy of the Government in respect of Kashmiri Migrants
is to facilitate their return to the Valley. The Committee also notes that some of the representatives
of Migrants’ associations alleged that the silent exodus of minorities from J&K has remained
unabated. However, when asked to respond on the issue, the Ministry has informed that after 1989-
90, no migration has been reported by the State Government.
2.1.11 The Committee is of the view that after so many years since the exodus took place
and especially after declaration of ambitious packages for the return of Migrants,
improvement on the ground has been scanty and just one family has returned to the Valley
since the announcement of the package. There can be two explanations for such an
extremely poor response from the community: either (i) the package is not attractive
enough; or (ii) the environment is not safe for them to return. The Committee also notes
that other components of the PM’s Package except the employment and transit
accommodation component, could not be initiated as they can come into force only after the
Migrant families return to the Valley. This has resulted in a strange situation where the
families refuse to return as the environment is not conducive enough while the Government
refuses to pass the benefits to them as return is a precondition for availing the benefits.
The Committee also refuses to buy the Ministry’s explanation that lack of consensus among

19
various Migrant organizations for permanent return and settlement is the main reason
behind non-return of Migrants to the Valley. While there may be difference of opinion
between the organizations, the perception in the community is that the situation on the
ground is not at all conducive for return which is the main reason for the failure of the
plan rather than lack of consensus among the organizations. The Committee is therefore
of the opinion that some more components of the PM’s package should be opened up for
the Migrants without the conditionality of their return. This, in the view of the Committee,
will serve as a confidence building measure encouraging the families to return to the Valley.
2.1.12 The Ministry has informed that in order to provide relief and succor to the Migrants, a
variety of relief and sustenance measures have been taken, which include provision of cash
assistance, ration relief, construction of flats in Jammu, allotment of DDA Flats in Delhi etc. In
order to boost their confidence and provide incentives for their return, PM has announced a
comprehensive package amounting to R1618.40 crore in April, 2008, which includes assistance
towards housing, transit accommodation, continuation of cash relief, student scholarship,
employment, assistance to agriculturist/horticulturist, and waiver of interest on loans. The State
Government has, however, proposed revision in the existing package and has suggested
enhancement of financial assistance for various components. The same is under examination.
2.1.13 The Committee feels that the decision in the matter brooks no delay. The
Committee recommends that revision in the package may be sympathetically considered for
early implementation.
2.1.14 It has been alleged by the representatives of several organizations that there has been no
serious effort on the part of either the Central Government or the State Government to resettle the
community back in the Valley. The People continue to face apartheid and threat of life. They cited
the recent case happened at Tulmulla, Khir Bhawani, in Kashmir where mobs attacked and seized
yatris. Responding to the allegation, the Ministry clarified that as reported by the State Government,
no untoward incident happened at Tulmulla, Khir Bhawani recently. However, due to some law and
order problem in Ganderbal, the yatries visiting Khir Bhawani were asked to either change the route
or wait for the improvement in the situation.
2.1.15 On the issue of resettlement, the Ministry has contested the criticism by stating that the
announcement of PM’s package in April, 2008 for Return and Rehabilitation of the Kashmiri
Migrants is a result of the efforts made by the Central Government and the State Government for
resettlement of the community back in the Valley. In this direction, construction of 200 flats at
Budgam was also approved by the Central Government. These flats have been completed and are
being used on sharing basis by the Migrants who have joined the State Government jobs under the
employment component of the PM’s package. Already 1446 Migrants have joined the Valley under
the employment component. Construction of another 505 units of transit accommodation has been
completed.
2.1.16 The Committee is saddened by the plight of Migrant families of Budgam who have
been forced by the circumstances beyond their control to live in resettlement camp in their
home State. The Committee, therefore, feels that the least the Government can do, is to
provide them enough housing units for settlement. The Committee therefore impresses
upon the Government that 505 units of transit accommodation may be allotted to them on
priority basis.
2.1.17 Representatives of some organisations expressed concern before the Committee that
under the New Surrender Policy, militants are coming after more than 20 years training from
Muzaffarabad with their families. They could be entering without proper verification. The Ministry
of Home Affairs has informed that the matter is under consideration.

20
2.1.18 The Committee advises the Government to be extremely cautious in clearing the
names of militants for surrender. Militants who have shown signs of change of heart may
only be accommodated.
2.1.19 Regarding FIRs and action against those who are responsible for killing of Kashmiris and
looting and burning their properties, the Ministry has informed that FIRs in most of the cases have
already been filed. In case any migrant feels that some of the incidents have not been registered,
action can be taken if the same are identified.
2.1.20 The Committee is of the opinion that strict action should be taken against
perpetrators. The Government should also send a message to the affected persons with
assurance that if their cases had not been filed, they should come forward to lodge their
cases without any fear. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of filed
cases along with conviction of perpetrators.
Condition of Pandits Living in the Valley
2.1.21 The Committee was apprised that a large number of Kashmiri Pandits were living in
Kashmir Valley in pathetic conditions. When enquired about the present number of Kashmiri Pandits
living in Kashmir Valley, the Ministry has replied that as per State Government, there are around
641 Kashmiri Pandit families consisting of 2595 souls, who had not migrated from the Valley along
with other Kashmiri Pandit families in the year 1990. Most of these families continue to stay at
their native places. However, around 31 families who had to be shifted in late 1990s from a village
in District Budgam, due to security reason, have been provided accommodation in a transit camp
constructed for Migrants at Budgam. The unemployed youth of such families have also been
considered for providing jobs.
2.1.22 The Committee notes that more than 600 families are still residing in the Valley.
The Committee also notes that about 31 families had to be shifted to a transit camp due
to security reasons. The Committee in view of the prevailing conditions, desires that the
courage of such Kashmiri Pandit families still residing in the Valley should be appreciated
and they should be provided appropriate security. They may also be provided other facilities
as may be required.
Grant of minority status
2.1.23 Several representative organizations of the Migrants have demanded that they should be
given minority status in the State. The Ministry has replied that, as informed by the State
Government, the Kashmiri pandits belong to Hindu religion and as such do not qualify for grant
of minority status. Moreover, The National Commission for Minorities Act, 1972 has not been
extended to the State as yet. As informed by the State Government, Jammu and Kashmir is a multi
cultural and home to different communities. The issue of granting minority status needs to be
examined by the State Government from all angles.
2.1.24 The Committee notes that according to the State Government, the Kashmiri
pandits belong to Hindu religion and as such do not qualify for grant of minority status.
However the State Government feels that the issue of granting minority status needs to be
examined by the State Government from all angles. The Committee feels that the State of
J&K has a special status in Indian Constitution. The government of J&K should look into
the demand of the Kashmiri Pandit for confering on them minority status keeping in mind
their pitiable condition.

21
The role of Ministry of Home Affairs
2.1.25 Representatives of the Migrants’ organizations have alleged that the role of Ministry of
Home Affairs, Government of India is always found wanting. The Ministry in its reply stated that
the Government of India has taken, and is committed to take all possible measures to minimize the
sufferings of the Kashmiri Migrants. The various steps taken in this regard include payment of cash
relief, enactment of legislation for Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales Act,
ex-gratia relief to NoKs of the victims of militancy for death and to the victims in the case of
injury as per the existing norms, compensation for the property damaged in the militancy,
concessions to the Kashmiri Migrants students for admissions in Universities, construction of two
room tenement at Jammu, construction of 200 flats at Budgam, grant of Rs.10 crore to State
Government for the reconstruction and renovation of houses and shrines at Mattan, etc
2.1.26 The Committee is of the view that the situation of Migrants still remains
neglected several years after the exodus started. It may be due to extreme difficulty in
resettlement or wrong policies, but whatever may be the case the situation on the ground
remains grim. The Ministry of Home Affairs being the nodal agency cannot shirk away its
responsibility for not being able to improve the situation on the ground. The Committee
exhorts the Ministry to look for different solutions if the previous policies have not worked.
Implementation of Recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Team.
2.1.27 On being enquired about non-implementation or partial implementation of the
recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial team, the Ministry has claimed that almost all the
recommendations have been implemented. However, with regard to specific issue of providing of
1000 jobs, it is submitted that already 693 jobs have been provided at Anganwari Centres and IRP.
The jobs identified under Rehbar-e-Taleem and ANMs and MPWs could not be filled up due to legal
complications.
2.1.28 The Committee recommends that the remaining posts may be filled soon so that
the approved benefits are not unduly delayed.
White Paper on Exodus of Migrants
2.1.29 A demand has been made that a White Paper on exodus of Migrants be brought out
by the Central Government. The Ministry has observed that the causes of militancy and terrorism
that have taken place in the State are well documented and are matters of record. The whole
phenomenon of what has happened in J&K since 1989 is an example of ‘Proxy War’ and cross
border terrorism. The Central Government has strenuously and consistently voiced its stand on
this issue at various international fora. The matter has also been pursued by the Central
Government at various diplomatic and political levels. In the circumstances, there is no cause,
for any apprehension or grievance or need for any White Paper or constitution of a commission
of inquiry.
2.1.30 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Committee however feels that though all information on militancy in J&K may have been
well documented, but all the facts should be brought out in the form of a White Paper
covering all the developments in the matter in a single document for public information.
Unregistered families
2.1.31 Representatives of various organizations of the Migrants have alleged that a large number
of families still remain unregistered within and outside the State. The Ministry of Home Affairs has
informed that as per State Government, all families who had migrated from Kashmir Valley and

22
settled in Jammu or other places were registered. Even after 1990, the process continued. At
present in Jammu region, there seems to be hardly any such family, which has not been registered.
It has further informed that in pursuance of the Court orders, 1054 families belonging to various
Districts of Jammu province were registered after carrying out proper verification by CID
authorities. From October 2007, these families are receiving monthly cash assistance and free ration
continuously. Also good number of families settled in Delhi and other States were registered with
the respective States. In J&K, approximately 40857 no of families consisting of 149937 number
of souls are registered.
2.1.32 The Committee notes that several Migrants’ associations have complained that
there are a large number of families of the Migrant community who remain unregistered.
Though the Ministry has claimed that all families which fulfil the criteria have been
registered, the Committee is of the view that since there are complaints of organizations
of non registration of a large number of families, the Ministry of Home Affairs should
examine the complaints in this regard and draw up a mechanism whereby families fulfilling
the criteria be registered without much hassle.
2.1.33 There is also a demand made by some Migrant organizations for establishment of
provincial authority in the Valley for issue of State Subject Certificates and other relevant
certificates to local Migrants who have moved from rural areas to urban areas so as to avoid
harassment. The Ministry has replied by stating that there is no provision to create such
authority at Provincial level. They can have the certificates issued from the Districts to which
they belong.
2.1.34 The Committee feels that keeping in mind the practical difficulties being faced by
the Migrants, the demand may be looked into.
Reasons for Failure of Schemes
2.1.35 When enquired as to reasons for failure of various rehabilitation schemes announced so
far, the Ministry has informed that only one person under Prime Ministers Package for Return and
Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants has availed the benefit under the housing component. The
response from the Migrants for resettlement in the Valley, however, has been very poor.
2.1.36 According to the Ministry, in the meeting chaired by Home Secretary in October, 2012,
Relief Commissioner (Migrants) was requested to keep regular interaction with the Migrants. It was
emphasized that the return and rehabilitation of the Migrants would require a personalized
approach – allaying the apprehensions of the Migrants and building bridges with the host company.
2.1.37 When enquired as to how many such interactions have taken place so far, the Ministry
has replied that as informed by the State Government, a series of meetings with the Migrants have
been held by the Relief Commissioner in different camps. Several meetings with the Migrants, who
expressed their desire to return to the Valley, have also been held for allaying their fears and
apprehensions regarding their security. The Government has also constituted an Apex Level
Advisory Committee under the Chairmanship of Revenue Minister of the Government of J&K to
discuss the issues pertaining to Migrants and take necessary remedial measures. More than 40
Migrants have been nominated as members to the Committee. The Chief Minister has also chaired
two meetings of the Apex Level Advisory Committee.
2.1.38 The Committee strongly recommends that interaction with the representatives of
the Migrant groups should be frequently conducted in order to get the relevant feedback.
In the light of dismal response to the schemes, such feedback would be of immense
importance for focused implementation and course correction of the policy.

23
PM’s Package
2.1.39 The Committee was informed that the Government of India had sanctioned a package for
Return and Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants to Kashmir Valley during the year 2008. State
Government initiated the process for implementation of the Package. Initially a large number of
families expressed their willingness in writing for returning to the Valley but till date the response
has been almost negligible and just only one family has returned to the Valley.
2.1.40 There are a number of components available under the Prime Minister Package for
Return and Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants to Kashmir Valley. Since the response has been very
less, not much progress was made in implementation of the Package except in respect of two
components of the scheme i.e.  providing of employment and construction of transit
accommodation.
Employment under PM’s Package
2.1.41 It was stated that 6000 jobs were to be provided to the Migrants out of which 3000
were to be funded by Government of India and remaining by State Government. 3000 posts to be
funded by GOI were created during 2009-10. Initially the State Government faced problem in
making selection against these posts exclusively from Migrants as per existing rules and in order
to overcome this difficulty, separate rules were notified for making recruitment among Migrants
only against the created posts. Already selection has been made against 2158 posts, out of which
1446 candidates have already joined and are serving in the Valley.
2.1.42 The Ministry has further informed that the process of filling up of the remaining posts
has got delayed as there were some court directions. These directions have now been vacated and
the process of selection has been initiated again. With regard to remaining 3000 posts, which were
to be provided by the State Government, it was observed that in view of the rule position it will
not be possible to fill up these available vacancies from Migrant candidates only. Secondly in order
to avoid any resentment from the local population the State Government has already made a request
to the Government of India to bring these 3000 posts also as part of the Package so that funds
are provided by the Central Government for these posts. The request of the State Government has
not been acceded to and the State Government has been requested to fill these posts, as per the
provisions of the PM’s Package.
2.1.43 The Committee is disappointed to note that even the 3000 posts provided by the
Central Government are still to be filled, leave aside the other 3000 to be provided by the
State Government. The situation looks even more disappointing when seen in the light of
the fact that the other components of the PMs Package have not even taken off. Out of
the two components, i.e.  employment and accommodation, the targets of employment
component have not been even half met.
2.1.44 The Committee is also extremely disappointed by the response of the State
Government. It is the responsibility of the State Government to fulfil its share of the
promise. Amending the rule position and convincing the majority community about the need
for minority welfare schemes is in line with the welfare objective of the Government.
Hence, the State Government should move ahead and take positive steps by filling 3000
posts from Kashmiri Migrants.
2.1.45 It was also submitted that the PM’s Package for employment has been politicized and it
has created a serious social tension in the community by attaching inhuman conditions to the
package i.e. mandatory return to the Valley and stringent conditions causing hardships to women
employees. The Ministry has responded by stating that the issue of a condition laid down by the

24
State Government for Government jobs in the Valley under the employment component of the PM’s
package was also raised before the NHRC in its meeting held on 20.07.2010. The NHRC decided
that “it is a part of the Rehabilitation Scheme-as a measure to rehabilitate them in the Kashmir
Valley- and it is a condition of the Scheme. It is not proper on our part to change that condition.
Moreover, it is told in advance that these candidates will have to work in the Valley”. The Ministry
further submitted that there was nothing to suggest that lady staff have been put to work in very
disgusting conditions in the Valley. On the demand of making jobs pensionable, the Ministry has
informed that pension would be admissible as per the State Government policy. The sub-Committee
of this committee during its visit to various Migrant camps in Jammu and Srinagar found that there
was a demand for Jobs to be made transferable to any part of the State and not confined to the
Valley only. The Ministry commenting on the issue has replied that transfers of the Migrant
employees can be considered as per their service conditions. During the visit of the sub-Committee
to Srinagar and Jammu a demand was raised for posting of migrant couples working in the Valley
at the same place. The Ministry commented thereon by stating that there are 21 requests by
employees appointed under the PM’s package for inter-district transfer. The matter is under active
consideration of the State Government. The sub-Committee also received a request that the female
employees should not be posted in remote militancy infested areas like Shopian, Pulwama, Kupwara
and other border areas near LOC. The Ministry has responded by stating that all Migrants
employees appointed under PM’s package including female employees have been posted at safer
places in consultation with the Distt. Administration.
2.1.46 The Committee is of the opinion that the State Government’s approach should be
flexible enough to consider transfer requests on compassionate grounds from any part of
the State to any other part of the State especially in the case of female employees. As far
as possible, female employees should be posted in areas close to the areas of their
husbands’ posting. The Committee is further of the opinion that the 21 requests of inter-
district transfers of female employees, close to their husbands’ workplace may be considered
positively on priority basis.
2.1.47 The Committee is of the view that though the objective of the Government to help
Migrants return to the Valley may be very noble, but the results on the ground have been
dismal. There can be no other reason than the security threats which looms large over them
for their not returning to their native places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Government should show more flexibility in implementing the Package for better
results.
Slow implementation of PM’s package
2.1.48 The Committee received complaints of slow implementation of Prime Minister’s Package.
In response, the Ministry commented that the Government of J&K has set up an Apex Committee
for implementation of the PM’s package. The funds to the State Government are reimbursed by
the Ministry of Home Affairs under Security Related Expenditure (Relief and rehabilitation), based
on the claims received from the State Government. The Ministry also informed that the Jammu and
Kashmir Government has been impressed that relief proposed to be given by the State Government
to Migrants as per commitments made by the Government be provided out of the State Budget.
When asked about the comment of the State Government on the issue and the commitments made
by the State Government, the Ministry has replied that presently the expenditure for relief package
for Kashmiri Migrants is being met out of Security Related Expenditure. As reported by the State
Government, so far there has been no problem in claiming the reimbursement on the above said
Scheme.

25
2.1.49 When enquired about the fact that the Government has released only Rs. 104.52 crore
till May, 2013 to the State Government from Security Related Expenditure under the PM’s Package
and since 2009 only four meetings of the Apex Committee have been held which is indicative of
the State Government’s sincerity for implementation of the Package, the Ministry viewed that
merely holding of Apex Committee Meetings is not the gauge to assess the sincerity of the State
Government for implementation of the Package. Although the State Government is the implementing
authority of the PM’s Package, the Package was finalized by the Central and the State Government
jointly.
2.1.50 Regarding the demand for approval of the revised PM’s package by the Union
Government, the Ministry has informed that the revised package is under consideration of the
Government and that in order to make the Package more attractive some modification is under
active consideration of the Government.
2.1.51 The Committee feels that the required modifications in the PMs Package may be
carried out on priority basis so as to make the Package more attractive for the Migrant
community. The Committee is, however, not convinced by the reply of the Government, as
against a comprehensive package of Prime Minister amounting to R1618.40 crore in
April, 2008, only R104.52 crore till May, 2013 has been expended by the State Government
and since 2009 only four meetings of the Apex Committee have been held. In view of the
Committee, these open facts do not reflect committed, sincere and sympathetic approach
and course of action on the part of a responsive Government towards an aggrieved group
of people of the State.
Neglect of Jammu Region in PM Package
2.1.52 On a complaint received by the Committee that announcement of rehabilitation packages
for terrorism affected people, development etc was only for the Valley and no such package has
been announced for Jammu, the Ministry has clarified that since ‘Relief’ is a State subject, it is
for the State Government to provide relief and package for Jammu Migrants. The matter is under
the consideration of the State Government.
2.1.53 The Committee is of the opinion the compensation should be given where it is due
and no discrimination in this regard should be made. The State Government should look
into the issue so that the grievances of the affected people from outside the Valley may also
be suitably addressed.
Protection of Migrants’ Properties
2.1.54 A representative of the Migrants raised the issue that the Government records claim that
displaced families have left behind total 11,639 houses, but the number of families living prior to
their displacement was much higher. The Ministry has explained that as reported by the State
Government, the number has been worked out on the basis of the survey carried out by the
Divisional Administration. There were two to three families living in the same house. However, after
migration each migrant family got themselves registered separately.
2.1.55 To protect the migrant’s properties and to prevent distress sale, Government of J&K has
enacted the J&K Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales)
Act, 1997. When enquired about how many such cases of distress sales have so far been detected
and what relief has been given to the victims in this regard, the Ministry has informed that as
reported by the State Government, the objective of the Act was to stop the illegal and distress
sales. However, despite the existence of the Act, more than 5300 sales have taken since 1997.
While granting permission, the designated authority ensures that the seller i.e. Migrants gets proper

26
market value for the property. All the sales whether after enactment of law or before have been
executed as per the existing norms. However, as reported by the State Government, wherever there
are any complaints of encroachments, same are being taken care of by the Deputy Commissioners
of the concerned Districts who are also the custodian of the Migrant properties as per the Act.
2.1.56 The Committee also received complaints that in spite of J&K Immovable Property
(Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997, people have actually done
benami transactions and these have been accepted by the Government of J&K. The representatives
demand that all such transactions should be canceled and the property should be returned to the
owner. On this the Ministry explained that the complaints received about illegal encroachments/
occupations are forwarded to the concerned Deputy Commissioners who have been designated as
custodians of the Migrant property under the ‘J&K Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection
and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997’ and have the authority to remove encroachments under
the provisions of the Act. The Ministry also submitted that in case these organization specifies such
cases where encroachment has taken place and action has not been taken, then only reply can be
submitted.
2.1.57 Representative of the Panther Party complained that most of the Jammu Migrants residing
in Talwara and other areas have lost their houses and their land has been illegally occupied at the
instance of the State Government in different areas of Poonch, Rajouri, Doda, Udhampur and other
areas. The Revenue Officers have changed the mutation to some stranger’s name. The Ministry has
explained that as informed by the State Government, the Deputy Commissioners have been asked
to address the problems of such families. So far, no complaints have been received in this regard.
2.1.58 When asked about the record of complaints received about illegal encroachment of the
individual and community property of the minority Hindu Community of Kashmir and the number
of such complaints and in how many cases the encroachment cleared, the Ministry has explained
that the complaints received are being processed by the Office of Relief Commissioner and
subsequently referred to concerned Deputy Commissioners for taking necessary action. In most of
the cases, however, it has been observed that complaints are not based on facts. Regarding a
complaint about conversion of cremation grounds in the Valley into a Bus Stand, the Ministry has
replied that as per the State Government, this is a generalized observation and no mention of any
specific location of cremation ground has been made which could be replied after ascertaining the
ground reality.
2.1.59 Attention of the Committee was also drawn to the acquisition of properties of Migrants
as well as their community properties in certain cases. The representatives of Migrants’
Associations in this regard cited some cases of acquisition made by the State Government. When
asked to clarify, the Ministry explained that the State Government has informed that from 2003
onwards, about 101 acquisitions of properties belonging to the Migrants have been reported and
an amount of R7.72 crore has been sanctioned as compensation to the affected. When enquired
as to how many Migrants were affected and how many Migrants were covered under the
compensation scheme, the Ministry has replied that as reported by the State Government, in every
case of acquisition of properties, compensation under the provisions of Land Compensation Act is
sanctioned, by the respective Districts in the name of recorded owners of the property. The
sanctioned amount of compensation is distributed to the recorded land owners as per their share.
So far, 148 Migrants were affected and equal number of Migrants have been provided
compensation. The Ministry further submitted that the Collectors have been asked during 2010-11
to try to avoid acquiring the land belonging to Migrants wherever possible. However, where the
land coming in the alignment of some project is to be acquired and is unavoidable, due process
for acquisition of the land is followed and appropriate compensation is paid to its owner under the
Land Compensation Act.

27
2.1.60 The Committee is not satisfied with the evasive reply of the Government. The
Ministry of Home Affairs or the State Government have evaded the reply to the number of
complaints received and attended. The Ministry may discuss the matter with the
representatives of Migrants, get the details from them and get them verified from the State
Government.
2.1.61 Regarding the demand for setting up of Special Commission to assess the loss suffered
by the people of hilly region of Jammu and provide compensation commensurate with actual
requirement, the Ministry has informed that there is no such proposal with the State Government
at present. However, for permanent rehabilitation of such Migrants, package for an amount of
Rs.91.56 crores has been prepared and submitted to Government of India for providing funds.
2.1.62 The Committee recommends that the Central Government should look into the
proposal submitted by the State Government on priority basis so that the Migrants of the
hilly regions of Jammu may be adequately compensated. An early decision may be taken in
the matter.
Encroachment of Temple and Shrines
2.1.63 Representatives of Panun Kashmir complained that encroachment of Hindu temples and
properties, school buildings etc. is common in the Valley. Land mafias are active in the Valley and
have an eye upon the last remaining left-over properties of the Pandits. Even Government is taking
over these properties for their use without permission and compensation.
2.1.64 Regarding the passage of Temples and Shrine Bill for administering the shrines and
temples situated in the Valley, the Ministry has informed that a Bill has already been introduced in
the Legislature, which stands referred to the Select Committee. The decision of the Select
Committee shall be debated on the Floor of the House. As per the State Government, the temples
and their properties are protected in terms of the J&K Migrants Proprieties Act. Regarding the
allegation that Bessu village which had around 50 Kashmiri Pandit families and had four temples
and the temples there are no longer there, the State Government claimed that they have renovated
temples. As per the State Government, the temples existing as in 1990 in Kashmir Valley were 430,
out of which 260 were intact and 170 temples damaged. Out of these damaged temples, only 80
temples have been renovated at an amount of R33 Lacs. At most of the places, these temples have
remained unattended and abandoned, and as such, have suffered losses during these years. The
Ministry has informed that the Government wants to protect these shrines and temples in the Valley
and has accordingly introduced a Bill in the Legislature, which is presently under consideration of
the Select Committee.
2.1.65 Representative of Jammu Kashmir Vichar Manch alleged that 2 km. from Bessu on the
National Highway four pandit families were living within a radius of 6 km. None of them is residing
there anymore. The shamshan bhoomi has been converted into a graveyard. As per the State
Government, most of the Kashmiri pandit families have migrated to Jammu and other places in
1990. With regard to conversion of shamshan bhoomi, the Ministry has informed that the matter
will be verified, if specific complaints are received. Regarding temples in Anantnag the Ministry has
informed that as per the State Government, in Anantnag, the total number of temples have been
reported to be around 95.
2.1.66 Regarding complaints about encroachment of temple land in Manihal in District Shopian
and Kherman Ganesh (Wanpoh) in Anantnag, the Ministry has advised to provide the list of the
properties encroached so that further action could be taken .There was also a complaint made by
a representative organization of the Migrants that names of some places had been changed, for
example, Shankracharya Hill Top to Takht-e-Suleman, Hari Parvat to Kohi-Maran, Anantnag to

28
Islamabad. The Committee was informed that as per the State Government, no notification/order
has been issued regarding the change of names of religious places of Kashmiri Migrants in the
Valley.
2.1.67 The Committee hopes that the Temples and Shrine Bill would address the
grievances of the Hindu community in the State. Efforts should be made to get the Bill
passed in the State Assembly at the earliest. It also recommends that the State Government
should seriously look into specific cases of grievances so that the confidence of the Migrants
could be won back. Migrant organizations may be asked to give details of specific cases.
Educational Concessions to the Wards of Kashmiri Migrants
2.1.68 The Committee was informed that to overcome hardships on educational requirement of
the wards of Kashmiri Migrants, the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of HRD has issued
direction to the Vice-Chancellors of the Universities and Kendriya Vidhalayas to extend certain
concessions. On being asked about the number of students given admission in Universities and
Kendriya Vidhalayas, it was informed by the Ministry of HRD that the data in this regard was not
being maintained centrally. However, with reference to a FAX message issued to State Governments
in this regard, so far response had been received from Government of Gujarat and Delhi University
only. It has been reported that in Gujarat during 2013-14, as against 271 students who applied for
admission in engineering and pharmacy courses, 63 students have been admitted. In Delhi
University out of 174 applications received, admission to 126 students was offered to various UG
Courses. As per inputs received from Kendriya Vidhalaya Sangathan, the number of Kashmiri
Migrants’ children admitted in different KVs across the country and abroad (Kathmandu, Tehran
and Moscow) is 159 during 2012-13 and 230 during 2013-14.
2.1.69 When enquired about the grant of special package and reservation in educational
institutions, the Ministry has informed that since ‘Relief’ is a State subject, it is for the State
Government to grant special package to the Jammu Migrants. Reservation in Educational
Institutions is permitted only as per the existing policy of the Government.
2.1.70 A complaint was received that the scheme of scholarships to minorities mainly benefits
Muslim students of the State of J&K. Responding to this, the Ministry commented that suggestion
for extending the scholarship scheme to Kashmiri Migrants is being considered by Ministry of
HRD.
2.1.71 Regarding the demand of Migrants for reservation of seats in engineering colleges,
medical colleges, etc. in their home State, the Ministry has stated that as informed by the State
Government, reservation has already been provided in various professional colleges for Kashmiri
Migrants outside the State and there is no need to provide such reservation in the colleges within
the State. Also the number of professional colleges within the State is very less and further
reservation for Migrants at this stage will not be possible. Regarding the demand for reservation
for Jammu Migrants, the Ministry has informed that there is no provision in the existing rules and
regulations regarding reservation of 10% jobs in the State and Central Government and 10%
medical seats in medical colleges.
2.1.72 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of HRD should make an effort to
keep centralised data of the students belonging to the Kashmiri Migrants for better
implementation of its policies and keeping track of benefits reaching the wards of the
Migrants. The Committee understands that there is no special package to the Jammu
Migrants and it is for the State Government to grant the same. The Committee also notes
that scheme of scholarships to minorities is not being extended to Kashmiri Migrants and
the suggestion for extending the scholarship scheme to Kashmiri Migrants is being

29
considered by the Ministry of HRD. The Committee feels that the Migrants who have been
displaced due to hostile environment are not only religious minority in the State but also
have been economically deprived. Education is the only means that can improve the lot of
their future generations. The Committee therefore recommends that the suitable
scholarship scheme for such deprived J&K Migrants may also be evolved and extended to
the affected Migrants in J&K, while extending the present scheme.
Financial Assistance for Unemployed Youths
2.1.73 As per the PM’S Package, 9000 unemployed youths were to be facilitated to get financial
assistance to come up with self employment/business ventures. When enquired about the number
of beneficiaries that got the assistance under the scheme, the Ministry has replied that as per State
Government, this facility was to be provided once the Migrants would return to Valley. Since only
one family has so far returned to the Valley, as such, the scheme could not be implemented.
However the Migrant youths who were putting up at Jammu and other places are otherwise entitled
for seeking assistance under self employment schemes being implemented by the Government and
the youths have been availing this facility at the places where they are settled at present. However,
it has been observed that the youth have preference for Government Jobs rather than setting up
of income generating units. Regarding the demand for financial assistance of Rs.25 lakhs for
business and survival of unemployed youths, the Ministry has informed that PM’s package already
provides for one time assistance of Rs.5 lacs in each case, out of which 50% will be grant and
50% loan. Regarding the demand of package for age group of 40 plus years of Migrants, the
Ministry has informed that the Package announced by PM is available to Kashmiri Migrants
irrespective of any age group. On the demand for one time compensation of R50 Lakhs to
unemployed over aged youth, The Ministry has replied that over aged unemployed youth have been
asked to avail the facilities available under various Government schemes of self employment.
2.1.74 The Committee is disappointed to note the fact that there are no takers for the
self employment package of the Government. First, the conditionalities attached are
stringent. Secondly, the amount is not sufficient for starting an enterprise. The Committee
is also of the opinion that in today’s world it may not be possible for the Government to
create jobs for everyone. The youth should therefore look for self employment avenues. The
Committee feels that since the offtake of the scheme is very little, the option of increasing
the funds per individual for self-employment may be explored. This may be done to make
the scheme more attractive. The Government should be more realistic in its approach if it
does not want to remain satisfied with schemes just on paper.
2.1.75 Certain demands like one time compensation of R10 lakhs to damaged industrial units,
waiving of interest on loans, Government guarantee for raising fresh loans, waiving of electricity
bills and ground rent of the industrial units after 1990 and extending lease period to 99 years were
made before the Committee and Sub- Committee. The Committee took up the matter with the
Government. The Ministry in response informed that this can be decided on case to case basis for
which such unit holders shall have to approach the Office of Relief Commissioner with their
proposal.
2.1.76 The Committee recommends that the State Government should formulate a policy
instead of considering their cases on case to case basis, to assist the militancy affected
entrepreneurs to revive industrial activity among the affected community.
Displaced State Employees
2.1.77 When enquired about the number of employees of the State who were displaced in
1989-90; number of them retired; and those are still on payrolls; and whether all the retirement

30
benefits including the leave benefits being provided to the retired displaced employees, the following
information was provided by the Ministry:
(i) State Government employees : 11376 including PSUs as on 01-01-90
(ii) Central Government employees : 6500
including PSUs/banks/
Insurance companies (as on 01-01-90)
2.1.78 The Ministry further informed that the maximum numbers of migrant employees, both of
State and Central Government have retired and all the pensionery benefits are provided to them on
their superannuation.
2.1.79 Regarding the demand of treating Migrant employees on duty instead of on leave for
pension benefits, the Committee has been informed that the Migrants are entitled for pension
benefits except in respect of leave salary. In normal course the leave salary is payable for ten
months whereas the Migrants who don’t perform any duty are entitled for leave salary only for
eight months.
Employment in Central Government Services
2.1.80 The Ministry has informed that the Central Government had issued a notification in 1997
regulating the relaxation of age limit in favour of the residents of the State of J&K for appointment
to Central Services and posts. Under the said notification, relaxation in the upper age limit of 5
years shall be admissible to all persons who had ordinarily been in domicile in the State of J&K
during the period 01.01.1980 to 31.12.1989. The time limit has since been extended till
31
st December, 2013.
2.1.81 The Ministry further informed that recruitment of constable in CAPFs is being conducted
as per scheme, in which 60% of vacancies are being allotted amongst all States on the basis of
population ratio, 20% vacancies are allotted to border districts falling within the area of
responsibility of Border Guarding Forces and 20% vacancies in Border Guarding Forces are allotted
to the militancy affected areas including J&K, as notified from time to time. Regarding the demand
that one job may be given to one family of Migrants, the Ministry has informed that the demand
has been raised for the first time. There is no such proposal with the State Government. Regarding
the demand for creation of 1000 class-IV posts for unemployed Migrant youths who could not
study beyond matriculation, the Ministry has stated that it may be considered on receipt of a
proposal from the State Government.
2.1.82 The Committee recommends that the feasibility of the proposal of one job per
Migrant family may be looked into and an early decision may be taken. The Committee
recommends that the proposal of creating 1000 class-IV posts for unemployed Migrant
youths, who could not study beyond matriculation, may be sympathetically considered for
early implementation.
Issues related to teachers
2.1.83 Regarding the complaint that 221 teachers have been deprived of employment due to
overage, the Ministry has informed that as per the State Government, the process of filling up the
remaining post is going on. The matter of 221 teachers shall be dealt with as per guidelines and
norms.
2.1.84 The Committee recommends that the cases of 221 teachers who have been
deprived of employment due to overage may be sympathetically looked into as the people

31
from the Migrant community are suffering from various handicaps and therefore deserve
sympathy for the same.
Regularization of Contractual Teachers in Delhi
2.1.85 On the issue of regularization of contractual teachers in Delhi, the Ministry has informed
that the Directorate of Education, Government of Delhi has intimated that it is not in a position
to regularize the contractual teachers. However, it has allowed relaxation in upper age limit for
Kashmiri migrant teachers for appearing in examination conducted by Delhi Subordinate Services
Selection Board for recruitment of teachers to facilitate their appointment. It has further informed
that the High Court has dismissed the writ petition(C) No. 2574/2010 filed by the contractual
employees Vs. GNCTD vide order dated 5.4.2013 saying that the Constitution Bench of Supreme
Court in Uma Devi’s (Supra) case has clearly said that there can be no regularization of contractual
employees.
2.1.86 Regarding the demand for financial benefits to contractual teachers at par with other
teachers in Delhi, the Ministry has informed that as per information received from the GNCTD,
the Directorate of Education has enhanced the monthly emoluments paid to TGT teachers from
R11,140/- to 20,989/- and PGT teachers from R13,160/- to R21,291/- vide order, dated 11.07.11.
The three municipal corporations of Delhi are also paying the remuneration on the same pattern.
2.1.87 The Committee is saddened by the fact that after long years of services in the
teaching profession, teachers still have to go through the ordeal of appearing in
examinations, though with age relaxation, and are bereft of social security benefits
admissible to regular teachers till they are appointed on regular basis. In view of the
Committee, this seems to be a inhumane approach on the part of the Government, whether
it be a State or Union. The Committee recommends that these teachers being from the
displaced Migrant community, may be given some extra points as may be decided, along with
age relaxation during the recruitment process of Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board
for recruitment of teachers.
Relief to Migrants at Par with J&K rates
2.1.88 There was a demand from the Migrants for being treated at par with J&K rates, the
Ministry has replied that this issue has already been decided by the Supreme Court in a Writ
Petition (Civil) No.498/2001. In its order dated 25.11.2002, the Court has directed that the State
Government should release the same amount of relief which is granted to the Border Migrants. The
Kashmiri Migrants registered with Relief organization are entitled for facilities as per laid down
norms and there is no discrimination between any sections of the Kashmiri Migrants.
2.1.89 The Committee was also informed that in pursuance of the directions of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Chief Secretaries of concerned States have been advised by
the Union Home Secretary in May, 2012 to consider relief to the Kashmiri Migrants at par with
J&K rates. When enquired as to how many States have agreed to give relief at par with J&K rates,
the Ministry has informed that after the meeting of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
30
th July, 2013, in continuation of the advisory issued by the Home Secretary, a FAX message was
issued to the concerned Secretaries for indicating the status in this regard. Response from the State
Governments is awaited. However, Delhi Government informed that the cash relief is being paid
by them to Migrants at par with the Jammu rates. Ration relief to Migrants in Delhi was given
only to those Migrants who were living in camps and they got less monthly relief than to non
campers. Now all the 237 camper families have been allotted DDA flats.

32
2.1.90 The Committee recommends that all States should provide relief to J&K Migrants
at par with J&K State so that they do not feel disadvantaged or discriminated.
Problems of Migrant Shopkeepers in INA Market, New Delhi
2.1.91 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that shopkeepers who were allotted some
shops in INA had been removed. When the matter was taken up with the Government, the Ministry
informed that as informed by GNCTD, 36 Kashmiri Migrants who were removed from INA Super
Bazar due to construction of elevated road over Barapulla Nallah had requested for rehabilitation to
alternate Tehbazari sites of 7ftx8ft size. Commissioner, MCD has approved the same by relaxing
the rules/policy in the matter. After the draw to assign stall number, Kashmiri Migrants were asked
to submit the requisite documents for processing the matter further. Kashmiri Samiti had submitted
documents in respect of 30 Migrants only.
2.1.92 The Committee desires that action in regard to rehabilitation of displaced
shopkeepers from the migrant community in INA market, New Delhi may be taken on
priority basis. People from the migrant community who have left their native places due to
conditions beyond their control should not face undue delays in the allotment of Stalls.
2.1.93 There was also a complaint made by the representative of an organization that shops in
INA market are not being allotted on the pretext that Kashmiri Migrants are not Indian. Electricity
and water facilities are also not being provided. The Ministry has informed that as informed by
GNCTD, the matter was discussed in the Nodal Cell Meeting held on 30.08.2013 and the status
report in the matter is being sought from the concerned agencies.
2.1.94 The Committee is of the opinion that the pretext given that Kashmiri Migrants are
not Indians for not allocating shops in INA market is highly objectionable. The complaint
may be looked into and action may be initiated against people involved in such blatant
discrimination.
Reimbursment of medical expenses
2.1.95 The Committee was informed that the Government of J&K created a corpus fund of
Rs. 5 crore for the welfare of the Migrants for reimbursing their medical expenses. The fund was
created in 2007 and since then only about Rs.57 lakh has been reimbursed. When enquired about
the number of claims received and those settled, the Ministry has informed that the main objective
for creation of corpus fund was to provide facilities to Migrants mainly to meet the expenses on
account of health care. Out of this fund the Migrant patients are reimbursed medical expenses
incurred by them. So far reimbursement has been made in favour of 185 Migrants to the tune of
R57.54 Lakh and 18 cases are in the pipeline. The Government has notified rules for reimbursement
of medical expenses in favour of Migrants. The State Government has been requested to consider
favorably amending the procedure for including the provision for advance payment for medical
assistance in the emergent cases out of the corpus fund to the Migrants including those staying
in Delhi also.
2.1.96 The Committee is surprised to note that out of a corpus fund of R5 crore for the
welfare of the Migrants for reimbursing medical expenses, the reimbursement has been
made to the tune of only R57.14 lakh since its creation i.e. 2007 and only around 200 claims
had been received. This looks unbelievable considering the fact that the Migrants are living
in poor financial conditions. The Committee is of the opinion that surely there are many
more genuine members of the community who are in need of medical aid. The Committee
recommends that the Government should look into the reasons for limited coverage of the
scheme. It is also of the opinion that when the money is available, it must be cobwebs of

33
rules and procedures as well as formalities which are behind such limited coverage. The
Committee recommends that the procedure should be simplified by removing bottlenecks so
that maximum bonafide beneficiaries can take the advantage of this fund.
2.1.97 Regarding the issue of strengthening health facilities- supply of medicines, provision of
ambulance, medical claim insurance, grant of funds from corpus funds for serious ailments i.e.
cancer, kidney failure, etc., the Ministry has informed that the matter is under consideration of the
State Government and additional facilities will be provided in the health centers established in the
camps. Also efforts are being made to provide health insurance cover to Migrants for which R8.00
crores has been earmarked in the budget of the State Government.
2.1.98 The sub-committee, during the visit to different Migrant camps in Srinagar and
Jammu learnt that several members of the affected community were suffering from deadly
diseases like cancer, kidney failure, etc. and need immediate help. The Committee strongly
recommends that the Ministry should provide additional facilities in the health centers
established in the camps for treating such deadly diseases. It also hopes that the Ministry
would also provide health insurance cover to Migrants for which budget has already been
earmarked.
Cash Relief
2.1.99 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that in Delhi, out of 19338 registered
Migrant families only 3385 families are getting cash relief from GNCT of Delhi. When enquired
about the status of remaining Migrants; about the condition of Migrants living outside camps; and
reasons for not formulating any scheme for Migrants living outside camps, the Ministry has
informed that as informed by GNCTD, in 1995, Government of NCT of Delhi decided that those
J&K Migrant families with monthly income of R5000/- or less will be eligible for ad-hoc monthly
relief. The J&K Migrants are required to file an affidavit to this effect. At present, as per the latest
information received from the Delhi Government, 3418 families are registered as eligible and 3224
families are drawing ad-hoc monthly relief as remaining 194 families have not filed the mandatory
affidavit. As soon as the affidavits from these families are received, the relief amount will be
disbursed. Delhi Government has further informed that no complaint/representation has been
received in Revenue Department from any of the remaining J&K Migrants regarding non inclusion
of their name in the list of eligible persons for ad-hoc monthly relief.
2.1.100 The Ministry also informed that presently there is no family residing in the camp in the
NCT of Delhi. All the 237 families that were residing in the camps have been allotted flats by the
DDA and as on date, no camp is in existence.
2.1.101 The Committee was informed that though there had been a State Government Cabinet
recommendation for enhancement of the relief to R.10000 per family, a meager enhancement of
R400 only per soul was announced by the Government. The Ministry has responded by stating that
the thrust of the policy of the Government has been to ensure that the difficulties and hardships
of the Migrants are minimized and the needy families are provided an amount, enough for
sustenance and support. Accordingly, monthly relief is being provided to the needy families. In
Jammu and Delhi, the rate of relief prior to 01.02.1994 was R250/-per head per month subject to
a ceiling of R1000/- per family per month. Since 1994 the rate of cash relief for Kashmiri Migrants
has been revised from time to time. Presently, the rate of cash relief is R1650/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of R6600/- per family per month.
2.1.102 The Committee is extremely dissatisfied by the logic given by the Ministry for
limiting enhancement of the relief by R400 per soul. The Committee notes the claim of the
Government that the thrust of its policy has been to ensure that the difficulties and

34
hardships of the Migrants are minimized and the needy families are provided an amount,
enough for sustenance and support. The Committee in this background fails to understand
how a meager enhancement of R400 per soul would be able to fight the inflationary
pressures in a big city like Delhi. The Ministry’s decision to totally disregard State
Government’s recommendation for enhancement of the relief to R10000 per family is
unfortunate. It, therefore, recommends that the recommendation of the State Government
may be accepted.
Problems and Delay in Verifications
2.1.103 Regarding problems of verifications in Delhi for cash relief, the Ministry has informed
that as per Delhi Government, the matter was discussed in the Nodal Cell meeting and the
directions in this regard are being issued so that the concerned D.Cs (Revenue) may ensure to
release AMR till 10
th of every month to the eligible J&K Migrants.
2.1.104 The Committee recommends that all issues related to the verification process may
be resolved at the earliest so that request for cash relief made by genuine claimants may
be addressed.
Housing Assistance
2.1.105 Under PM’s package, 2004, to improve accommodation of Migrants, 5242 two room
tenements were constructed but only 4624 flats had been allotted to Kashmiri Migrants. When
enquired as to why there is so much delay in allotment of remaining flats, the Ministry has replied
that construction of 5242 two room tenements started in 2005 has been completed. As per State
Government, all the Migrants living in old camps have been shifted to newly constructed
accommodation. Some flats remained available after shifting of all the Migrants. It has been decided
to allot these flats to families who are living in a rented accommodation. The process, however,
got delayed as some Migrants had approached Court and the Court had directed to maintain status
quo. The directions have been vacated and the process of verification is on.
2.1.106 The Committee recommends that the verification process for allotment of
remaining dwelling units may be conducted soon so that they can be allotted soon as there
has already been considerable delay in allotment.
2.1.107 When enquired about the number of J&K Migrants that have been covered towards
housing assistance under PM’s Package of 2008, the Ministry informed that so far only one family
has returned and has availed R5.00 Lakh under Housing component of the PM’s package for return
and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants. However, the Committee noted that there has been a
suggestion from certain organizations that building reconstruction grant should match the
requirements and should not be a static quantity. It should be on actual cost of construction and
should vary from case to case.
2.1.108 The Committee was also informed that the State Government has proposed certain
enhancement in the financial assistance for housing component, which is under the consideration
of the Government. When enquired about the amount of time that would be required to implement
the component of the revised package, the Ministry skirted the issue by stating that the State
Government has proposed revision in the existing package and has suggested enhancement of
financial assistance for various components. The same is under examination. On the issue of
resettlement, the Ministry has contested the criticism by stating that the announcement of the PM’s
package in April, 2008 for Return and Rehabilitation of the Kashmiri Migrants is a result of the
efforts made by the Central Government and the State Government for resettlement of the
community back in the Valley. In this direction, construction of 200 flats at Budgam was also

35
approved by the Central Government. These flats have been completed and are being used on
sharing basis by the Migrants who have joined the State Government jobs under the employment
component of the PM’s package. Already 1446 Migrants have joined the Valley under the
employment component. Construction of 505 units was taken up at four places, out of which 405
units have been completed and remaining are to be completed shortly. Regarding the demand for
provision of one unit of transit accommodation in the Valley on acceptance of employment , the
Ministry has informed that the matter is under active consideration.
2.1.109 The Committee is of the opinion that housing assistance under PM’s Package for
the Migrants has remained a non-starter as just one family has availed it. This again
highlights the fact that the most of the PM’s Package has not even taken off. Since the
Government is pinning its hopes for rehabilitation of Migrants on the PM’s Package, the
outcome has been extremely disappointing to say the least. The Committee feels that there
is a need for serious rethink on the policy. The Committee in this connection would like
to suggest that the demand of certain organizations that building reconstruction grant
should not be a static quantity and it should be on actual cost of construction and should
vary from case to case may be looked into.
2.1.110 The Committee also feels that the Package also needs financial revision so that
the few components of the Package which have been availed could be made more attractive.
2.1.111 The Committee recommends that the construction of the rest of the
accommodations may be completed soon. If needed, more such units with proper amenities
and connectivity may be created in proportion to the number of people from the Migrant
community joining the work force in the State as presently these units are being shared by
the employees in a very congested manner.
2.1.112 The Committee also recommends that the Government should positively consider
the demand for provision of one unit of transit accommodation in the Valley on acceptance
of employment. It is of the opinion that this would serve as a strong incentive for the
Migrant youths to take up jobs in the Valley.
Satellite Towns and Cluster Accommodation
2.1.113 Some of the representatives of the organizations of the Migrants were of the opinion that
return to Kashmir can take place only if satellite city for the entire community is established with
self sufficient infrastructure, economic avenues, adequate land, decent accommodation, educational
institutions, medical care, recreation centres, commercial establishments, etc. There was also a
suggestion that Government should allot pieces of land to individuals and cooperatives of individuals
in order to enable construction of individual houses or flats in a multi storey building complex.
During interaction with the Migrants, the Committee also observed that the Migrants are insecure
about returning to the Valley and want to settle in clusters for which they want that Government
should arrange land.
2.1.114 The Ministry has responded that the Housing Component of PM’s Package has a
provision for purchase/construction of house in Group Housing Societies. The Ministry also
informed that as per the initial proposal, the Migrants had to settle down at their own places from
where they had migrated but at this stage nearly 65% of the families have already sold their
immovable properties and are without any land in the Valley. Such families would feel difficulty in
settling down in the Valley in case they return and accordingly the State Government recently in
a meeting of the Apex Advisory Committee which was chaired by the Chief Minister of J&K
decided to identify land in each District in the Valley where Migrants can construct their houses
in clusters and can resettle which can give them sense of security as well. The Ministry has further

36
informed that State Government has already decided to acquire the land. Process is being initiated.
Land for cluster accommodation shall have to be acquired for which Government of India shall be
requested to allot funds.
2.1.115 The Committee welcomes the idea of creating cluster accommodations for the
Migrants in different districts. Keeping in mind the fact that the PM’s package in the
present form has not found many takers, innovative ideas like creating cluster
accommodation can fulfill the twin needs of the Migrants: (i) returning to their native
place; and (ii) returning in a safe environment. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that suitable land may be identified and acquired for the purpose and the scheme be
implemented in a reasonable time frame so that the objective of Migrant’s return does not
remain on paper but sees light of the day.
Construction of Additional Two-Room Tenements at Jammu
2.1.116 Regarding the demand for construction of additional two-room tenements at Jammu, the
Ministry has informed that already 5242 two room tenements have been constructed and allotted
to the deserving Migrant families. Further construction of such tenements at Jammu will not be
in consonance with the policy of making Migrants to return to the Valley.
2.1.117 The Committee is of the opinion that since the number of families that have
shown interest in returning to the Valley in present circumstances has remained negligible,
the demand for construction of additional two-room tenements at Jammu may be looked
into if a substantial number of families are interested in staying at Jammu so that the
rehabilitation process could be taken forward in due course of time.
Problems of Jagti
2.1.118 The sub-Committee of the DRPSC on Home Affairs visited the satellite town of Jagti to
have a first hand account of the living conditions of the Migrant residents. During its interaction
with the residents it was informed that the town suffers from several infrastructural bottlenecks
as well as lack of basic facilities like health services. The residents particularly highlighted the
problem of frequent power cuts.
2.1.119 The Ministry has explained that in Jagti township the Power Development Department
has made arrangement for providing power supply. However, the Migrants are not ready to enter
into an agreement with the Power Development Department to become consumers. Already
Government have announced some concessions by providing free electricity of 100 units per month
to the Migrants, but they are resisting and want to consume electricity without registering
themselves with the Power Development Department. It was stated that the Government can
consider by giving some more concessions but in any case they have to get themselves registered
as consumers as per the existing law.
2.1.120 The Committee is of the opinion that while there are no free lunches, and all
resources have a cost, the Government should look into the purchasing capacity of the
residents. Since they are displaced people who need Government help they should be made
to pay according to their capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that electricity
may be provided to them at a price they can pay.
2.1.121 The Jagati Township has been designed for a population of 25000 souls. When enquired
about the number of souls that have shifted to the township and about the provision for elected
local body like Notified Area Committee to look after issues like civic amenities, the Ministry
informed that Sanitation at various locations of two room tenements is ensured after inviting

37
tenders and getting it done through the lowest tenderers. The matter regarding notified area
committee to look after the issues of civic amenities has been taken up by the State Government.
2.1.122 The Committee recommends that the State Government should look into the
feasibility of setting up of Notified Area Committee for providing civic amenities in Jagti.
2.1.123 When the issue of completion of allotment process for remaining two-room tenements at
Jagti was flagged, the Ministry informed that the process of verification of applications/allotment
of the remaining flats will be completed very soon.The Ministry has also informed that hospital
building at Jagti is near completion and is expected to be completed within two to three months.
The Sub-Committee of the Committee during its visit to Jagti was informed by its residents that
they face a lot of difficulty in getting medical aid, especially during emergency situations, as there
is no hospital nearby.
2.1.124 The Committee recommends that the medical facilities in the upcoming hospital
may be started as soon as possible so that the hardships faced by the residents are
mitigated.
2.1.125 The Committee recommends that allotment of the remaining flats in Jagti may be
done on priority basis and the verification process for the same may be completed as soon
as possible.
Improvement of Living Conditions in Transit Accommodation in the Valley
2.1.126 The Sub-Committee during its visit met with widespread demand for improvement of
infrastructure facilities at camps i.e. , water, electricity, ration, education, repairing of flats,
stoppage of leakages, 40 bedded hospital, sports stadium, drainage system, and medical facilities.
It was also demanded for separate accommodation to each employee and bifurcated families.
2.1.127 The Ministry submitted that necessary infrastructure required in the camps has already
been created and continuous efforts are made to improve the living conditions of inmates living in
various transit accommodations in the Valley. According to the Ministry it would not be possible
at the moment to provide separate quarter to each employee. Regarding the allotment of
accommodation for bifurcated families living in rented accommodation, the Ministry informed that
the flats numbering 5242 were constructed for shifting of Migrants from old camps and it would
not be possible to accommodate bifurcated families in these flats at this stage.
2.1.128 Attention of the Sub-Committee was also drawn to poor and unsafe conditions at
Migrants’ camp at Talwara, which is prone to damage due to earthquake. The Ministry submitted
by stating that the matter is under the consideration of the State Government.
2.1.129 The Committee feels that the grievances of the Migrant people residing in Jagati
and Talwara are quite genuine. The Committee strongly recommends that the State
Government should take all necessary steps required to improve the living conditions in the
Migrant camps at Jagati and Talwara.
Political Empowerment
2.1.130 The Committee and its sub-Committee during its interactions with representative
organisations felt that there is a very strong demand of the Migrants for Political empowerment of
the community by way of institutionalization of reservation of adequate number of seats for the
community in the Local Bodies, State Assembly and Parliament. However, on this issue, the
Ministry is of the view that there is no constitutional provision for such reservation for Kashmiri
Migrants.

38
2.1.131 Regarding the demand for Grant of District Council status to all the Districts of Jammu
Province on the pattern of Ladakh and Kargil Autonomous Hill Development Councils, the Ministry
has informed that no such proposal is under consideration at present.
2.1.132 Regarding the demand for Reconstitution of Apex Committee to give representation to all
Districts of Kashmir, the Ministry has informed that more than 30 members have already been
nominated in the Apex Committee who belong to various Districts of the Valley.
2..1.133 The Committee is of the view that migration of a large number of people had been
an extraordinary incident in a democratic country, whose Constitution guarantees every
citizen to live at the place of his desire. Hence, this unprecedented incident deserves
appropriate political empowerment of this community by taking recourse to suitable steps
by the Central Government as well as State Government of J&K. The Committee hopes
that its suggestion will be taken in right perspective with positive approach.
Updation of Voters List of The Migrants and Issue of Photo I-Cards
2.1.134 Several representatives raised the issue of updation of voters list of the Migrants and the
issue of photo identity cards for which forms have already been filled. It was also alleged that in
the revised voter list more than 50% names were deleted. It was also suggested that for
simplification of the voting procedure, list of Migrants maintained by RC (M) may be forwarded
to the Election Commission for inclusion in the voters list.
2.1.135 Responding to the issues and suggestions, the Ministry commented that updation of
voter-list of Migrants and issue of photo identity cards is being done by the office of Chief
Electoral Officer, J&K. The process is going on. Regarding the simplification of the voting
procedure by forwarding list of Migrants maintained by RC(M) to the Election Commission for
inclusion in the voters list, the representatives of the Migrants submitted that there is a very
cumbersome process for voting for Migrants. The process is completed in several rounds: first
they indicate their intention for voting; then on receipt of form, attestation by two gazetted officers
is required; form is then required to be sent; after this they get a permission for voting; and finally,
on the day of voting they are required to go with family and if the name appears in the list only
then voting is allowed. There are three types of voter lists with the Election Commission and Relief
Department for the Migrants. They have alleged that the cumbersome procedure is simply to
discourage Kashmiri Pandits from voting.
2.1.136 The Ministry informed that the Election Commissioner has been requested to consider
simplifying the procedure. It has further informed that as per the State Government, the Government
has made special arrangements for Kashmiri Migrants to either get enrolled in the voter list for
participating in the electoral process outside the area/constituency to which they belong. This
arrangement has been made for ensuring participation of Migrants in the electoral process, despite
living outside the constituency to which they belong. On the allegation that in the revised voter list
more than 50% names were deleted, the Ministry has informed that as per the State Government,
the Migrants can get themselves enrolled in the electoral Rolls in case they feel that their names have
been deleted. In the recent exercise for updation of electoral rolls, more than 8000 Migrants got
themselves enrolled. The Ministry has further informed that as per the information received from the
Office of the Chief Electoral Officer, J&K, the final electoral roll published w.r.t. 1
st January, 2013,
as the qualifying date, the Kashmiri Migrants (Pandits) are existing in that roll and there is no question
of deleing the names of Kashmir Migrants from the roll.
2.1.137 The Committee recommends that the issues of updation of voter lists and
simplification of voting procedures for the Migrants may be appropriately taken up with the
Election Commission so that the Migrants are not made bereft of their voting rights as
citizens of the State.

39
2.1.138 The Committee is surprised by the cumbersome nature of the electoral process
designed for the Migrants. No wonder that they allege the whole system has been instituted
to discourage them. While that may not be the case, simplification of the process is
obviously required. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may take
up the matter with Election Commission so that the Migrants can rightfully take part in
the electoral process like rest of their fellow citizens.
2.1.139 Many Migrants also complained about obtaining legal proof for Kashmiri residency –
V oter ID card, Passport, Migrant Ration Card or State Subject Certificate. The process, according
to them, is very cumbersome and it needs to be simplified. They have also suggested that
facilitation for the same may be provided at Delhi. It has also been alleged that attempts are being
made to discourage people from getting these documents so that they do not claim their property.
2.1.140 The Ministry has informed that as per the State Government, the Relief Commissioner
has been authorized to issue various documents including Permanent Resident Certificates required
for seeking appointments, admission in various institutions, etc. These documents otherwise are
being issued by the Tehsildars. However, for Migrants special arrangements have been made for
issue of these documents at Jammu. The Ministry has further informed that as per the State
Government, the legal documents, to establish identity of the Migrants, are issued invariably by the
Department, to the Migrants within the shortest possible time, after receipt of applications.
2.1.141 The Committee during its deliberations with the Migrants was informed by several
representatives that they face tremendous difficulties in getting various certificates for
establishing identity, residency etc. The Committee is of the opinion that since the
representatives have complained about the cumbersomeness of the process, the same may
be simplified and made Migrant friendly. The entire procedure may be re-looked.
Issues related to Special Police Officers (SPOs)
2.1.142 Regarding the issue of regular appointment and regularization of SPOs, the Ministry has
informed that the matter is under the consideration of the Government. On the issue of
enhancement of honorarium for SPOs from the present rate of Rs.3000/- per month, the Ministry
has informed that the proposal for enhancement of honorarium to SPOs is under consideration of
the Government. The Ministry has further informed that State Government has formulated a
comprehensive policy in 2009 for absorption/conversion of SPOs as Constables/Followers (With
minimum three years of continuous engagement).
2.1.143 The Committee is of the opinion that the honorarium for SPOs may be increased
from Rs.3000/- per month as the sum is too meager. Keeping in mind the tough nature of
their job, and in order to keep them motivated, the demand for increase may be
sympathetically considered. The Committee also recommends that the policy for absorption/
conversion of SPOs as Constables/Followers may also be implemented so that it may serve
as an incentive for SPOs and keep them motivated.
Appointment on Compassionate Ground
2.1.144 Attention of the Sub-Committee was drawn towards appointment under SRO 43. The
Committee was given to understand that SRO 43 relates to appointment on compassionate ground
of a family member of a Government employee and civilian who dies as a result of militancy
related action or due to enemy action on the Line of Actual Control/International Border within the
State of Jammu and Kashmir and is not involved in militancy related activities. A condition of total
income of the family from all sources not exceeding R5000/-per month, as assessed by the
Revenue Officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner, is prescribed in case of death

40
of a civilian. Appointment on compassionate ground is extended to a member of the Armed Forces
not above the rank of Junior Commissioned Officer or a member of Paramilitary Forces of
equivalent rank who is a permanent resident of State and is killed while discharging duties in
connection with law and order in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or as a result of enemy action
on the Line of Actual Control/International Border. The Sub-Committee was informed that there
were a number of pending cases under SRO 43. When asked, the Ministry has informed that the
SRO 43 cases are being processed as per the laid down procedures and various SRO cases during
last five years have been settled in Jammu province.
2.1.145 The Committee is not satisfied with the routine reply given on a significant issue
of giving employment to a family member of a Government employees/civilian/member of
an armed Forces or para military forces, who dies as a result of militancy related action
or due to enemy action on the Line of Actual Control/International Border within the State
of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee strongly feels that such cases deserve due attention
and disposal on priority. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all cases of
appointment on compassionate grounds should be decided at the earliest in a time bound
manner, with proper monitoring at higher level.
Issues related to Village Defence Committees (VDCs)
2.1.146 The Committee was briefed that the purpose behind constitution of the Village Defence
Committees (VDCs) was to organize a small group of volunteer armed civilians in the identified
villages for providing security to the villages along the borders as well as in the deep areas of
Jammu Division, infrastructural installations in and around them, as also to supplement the ongoing
efforts of the security to improve their working and effectiveness. V olunteers working in the VDCs
have been provided with weapons. Elementary training courses are being organized for SPOs/
volunteers working in the VDCs, so as to enhance their musketry skills and sharpen their
capabilities to enable them to retaliate and repulse any attack from the militants/terrorists. Regarding
the demand for grant of honorarium to VDCs, the Ministry has informed that there is no such
proposal under consideration of the Government.
2.1.147 The Committee is of the opinion that keeping in mind the strategic nature of role
being played by the VDCs to thwart terrorist acts and despite the volunteer nature of the job,
the Government may look into the feasibility of paying honorarium to further motivate them.
Non-payment to Migrants
2.1.148 The Committee has received complaints regarding non-payment to Migrants to the tune
of R21 crore. Some of the organizations alleged that orders passed by the Supreme Court and High
Court have not been implemented by the Government of J&K. The Ministry has clarified that in
pursuance of the Court orders, 1054 families belonging to various districts of Jammu province
were registered after carrying out proper verification by CID authorities. From October, 2007 these
families are receiving monthly cash assistance and free ration continuously. However, the arrears
from 2004 to 2007 are still unpaid and the matter will be settled very soon.
2.1.149 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact brought before it. The Committee
is of the firm view that decisions of Courts should be honored without delay, if not appealed
in higher Court or for review by the same Court. The Committee therefore strongly
recommends that the all the issues related to payment as well as arrears thereof may be
cleared/ settled at the earliest, keeping in mind their challenged financial condition. The
Committee desires that status in this regard should be monitored at the appropriate level
in the Union Ministry of Home Affairs.

41
41
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMETTEE — AT A GLANCE
Declaration of Kashmiri Migrants as Internally Displaced persons
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that Migrants be provided all
the facilities for rehabilitation as are provided to a displaced community. (Para 2.1.9)
Conducive Environment for Return to the Valley
The Committee is of the view that after so many years since the exodus took place
and especially after declaration of ambitious packages for the return of Migrants,
improvement on the ground has been scanty and just one family has returned to the Valley
since the announcement of the package. There can be two explanations for such an
extremely poor response from the community: either (i) the package is not attractive
enough; or (ii) the environment is not safe for them to return. The Committee also notes
that other components of the PM’s Package except the employment and transit
accommodation component, could not be initiated as they can come into force only after the
Migrant families return to the Valley. This has resulted in a strange situation where the
families refuse to return as the environment is not conducive enough while the government
refuses to pass the benefits to them as return is a precondition for availing the benefits.
The Committee also refuses to buy the Ministry’s explanation that lack of consensus among
various Migrant organizations for permanent return and settlement is the main reason
behind non-return of Migrants to the Valley. While there may be difference of opinion
between the organizations, the perception in the community is that the situation on the
ground is not at all conducive for return which is the main reason for the failure of the
plan rather than lack of consensus among the organizations. The Committee is therefore
of the opinion that some more components of the PM’s package should be opened up for
the Migrants without the conditionality of their return. This, in the view of the Committee,
will serve as a confidence building measure encouraging the families to return to the Valley.
(Para 2.1.11)
The Committee feels that the decision in the matter brooks no delay. The Committee
recommends that revision in the package may be sympathetically considered for early
implementation. (Para 2.1.13)
The Committee is saddened by the plight of Migrant families of Budgam who have
been forced by the circumstances beyond their control to live in resettlement camp in their
home State. The Committee, therefore, feels that the least the government can do is to
provide them enough housing units for settlement. The Committee therefore impresses
upon the Government that 505 units of transit accommodation may be allotted to them on
priority basis. (Para 2.1.16)
The Committee advises the Government to be extremely cautious in clearing the
names of militants for surrender. Militants who have shown signs of change of heart may
only be accommodated. (Para 2.1.18)
The Committee is of the opinion that strict action should be taken against
perpetrators. The Government should also send a message to the affected persons with

42
assurance that if their cases had not been filed, they should come forward to lodge their
cases without any fear. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of filed
cases along with conviction of perpetrators. (Para 2.1.20)
Condition of Pandits Living in the Valley
The Committee notes that more than 600 families are still residing in the Valley.
The Committee also notes that about 31 families had to be shifted to a transit camp due
to security reasons. The Committee in view of the prevailing conditions, desires that the
courage of such Kashmiri Pandit families still residing in the Valley should be appreciated
and they should be provided appropriate security. They may also be provided other facilities
as may be required. (Para 2.1.22)
Grant of minority status
The Committee notes that according to the State Government, the Kashmiri pandits
belong to Hindu religion and as such do not qualify for grant of minority status. However
the State Government feels that the issue of granting minority status needs to be examined
by the State Government from all angles. The Committee feels that the State of J&K has
a special status in Indian Constitution. The government of J&K should look into the
demand of the Kashmiri Pandit for confering on them minority status keeping in mind their
pitiable condition. (Para 2.1.24)
The role of Ministry of Home Affairs
The Committee is of the view that the situation of Migrants still remains neglected
several years after the exodus started. It may be due to extreme difficulty in resettlement
or wrong policies, but whatever may be the case the situation on the ground remains grim.
The Ministry of Home Affairs being the nodal agency cannot shirk away its responsibility
for not being able to improve the situation on the ground. The Committee exhorts the
Ministry to look for different solutions if the previous policies have not worked.
Implementation of Recommendations of the Inter-ministerial Team. (Para 2.1.26)
The Committee recommends that the remaining posts may be filled soon so that the
approved benefits are not unduly delayed. (Para 2.1.28)
White Paper on Exodus of Migrants
The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Committee however feels that though all information on militancy in J&K may have been
well documented, but all the facts should be brought out in the form of a White Paper
covering all the developments in the matter in a single document for public information.
Unregistered families (Para 2.1.30)
The Committee notes that several Migrants’ associations have complained that there are a
large number of families of the Migrant community who remain unregistered. Though the
Ministry has claimed that all families which fulfil the criteria have been registered, the
Committee is of the view that since there are complaints of organizations of non
registration of a large number of families, the Ministry of Home Affairs should examine the
complaints in this regard and draw up a mechanism whereby families fulfilling the criteria
be registered without much hassle. (Para 2.1.32)

43
The Committee feels that keeping in mind the practical difficulties being faced by the
Migrants, the demand may be looked into. (Para 2.1.34)
Reasons for Failure of Schemes
The Committee strongly recommends that interaction with the representatives of the
Migrant groups should be frequently conducted in order to get the relevant feedback. In the
light of dismal response to the schemes, such feedback would be of immense importance for
focused implementation and course correction of the policy. (Para 2.1.38)
PM’s Package
The Committee is disappointed to note that even the 3000 posts provided by the
Central government are still to be filled, leave aside the other 3000 to be provided by the
State Government. The situation looks even more disappointing when seen in the light of
the fact that the other components of the PMs Package have not even taken off. Out of
the two components, i.e.  employment and accommodation, the targets of employment
component have not been even half met. (Para 2.1.43)
The Committee is also extremely disappointed by the response of the State
Government. It is the responsibility of the State Government to fulfil its share of the
promise. Amending the rule position and convincing the majority community about the need
for minority welfare schemes is in line with the welfare objective of the Government.
Hence, the State Government should move ahead and take positive steps by filling 3000
posts from Kashmiri Migrants. (Para 2.1.44)
The Committee is of the opinion that the State Government’s approach should be
flexible enough to consider transfer requests on compassionate grounds from any part of
the State to any other part of the State especially in the case of female employees. As far
as possible, female employees should be posted in areas close to the areas of their
husbands’ posting. The Committee is further of the opinion that the 21 requests of inter-
district transfers of female employees, close to their husbands’ workplace may be considered
positively on priority basis. (Para 2.1.46)
The Committee is of the view that though the objective of the Government to help
Migrants return to the Valley may be very noble, but the results on the ground have been
dismal. There can be no other reason than the security threats which looms large over them
for their not returning to their native places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Government should show more flexibility in implementing the Package for better
results. (Para 2.1.47)
Slow implementation of PM’s package
The Committee feels that the required modifications in the PMs Package may be
carried out on priority basis so as to make the Package more attractive for the Migrant
community. The Committee is, however, not convinced by the reply of the Government, as
against a comprehensive package of Prime Minister amounting to R1618.40 crore in
April, 2008, only R104.52 crore till May, 2013 has been expended by the State Government
and since 2009 only four meetings of the Apex Committee have been held. In view of the
Committee, these open facts do not reflect committed, sincere and sympathetic approach
and course of action on the part of a responsive Government towards an aggrieved group
of people of the State. (Para 2.1.51)

44
Neglect of Jammu Region in PM Package
The Committee is of the opinion the compensation should be given where it is due
and no discrimination in this regard should be made. The State Government should look
into the issue so that the grievances of the affected people from outside the Valley may also
be suitably addressed. (Para 2.1.53)
Protection of Migrants’ Properties
The Committee is not satisfied with the evasive reply of the Government. The
Ministry of Home Affairs or the State Government have evaded the reply to the number of
complaints received and attended. The Ministry may discuss the matter with the
representatives of Migrants, get the details from them and get them verified from the State
Government. (Para 2.1.60)
The Committee recommends that the Central Government should look into the
proposal submitted by the State Government on priority basis so that the Migrants of the
hilly regions of Jammu may be adequately compensated. An early decision may be taken in
the matter. (Para 2.1.62)
Encroachment of Temple and Shrines
The Committee hopes that the Temples and Shrine Bill would address the grievances
of the Hindu community in the State. Efforts should be made to get the Bill passed in the
State Assembly at the earliest. It also recommends that the State Government should
seriously look into specific cases of grievances so that the confidence of the Migrants could
be won back. Migrant organizations may be asked to give details of specific cases.
(Para 2.1.67)
Educational Concessions to the Wards of Kashmiri Migrants
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of HRD should make an effort to
keep centralised data of the students belonging to the Kashmiri Migrants for better
implementation of its policies and keeping track of benefits reaching the wards of the
Migrants. The Committee understands that there is no special package to the Jammu
Migrants and it is for the State Government to grant the same. The Committee also notes
that scheme of scholarships to minorities is not being extended to Kashmiri Migrants and
the suggestion for extending the scholarship scheme to Kashmiri Migrants is being
considered by the Ministry of HRD. The Committee feels that the Migrants who have been
displaced due to hostile environment are not only religious minority in the State but also
have been economically deprived. Education is the only means that can improve the lot of
their future generations. The Committee therefore recommends that the suitable
scholarship scheme for such deprived J&K Migrants may also be evolved and extended to
the affected Migrants in J&K, while extending the present scheme. (Para 2.1.72)
Financial Assistance for Unemployed Youths
The Committee is disappointed to note the fact that there are no takers for the self
employment package of the Government. First, the conditionalities attached are stringent.
Secondly, the amount is not sufficient for starting an enterprise. The Committee is also of
the opinion that in today’s world it may not be possible for the Government to create jobs
for everyone. The youth should therefore look for self employment avenues. The
Committee feels that since the offtake of the scheme is very little, the option of increasing

45
the funds per individual for self-employment may be explored. This may be done to make
the scheme more attractive. The Government should be more realistic in its approach if it
does not want to remain satisfied with schemes just on paper. (Para 2.1.74)
The Committee recommends that the State Government should formulate a policy
instead of considering their cases on case to case basis, to assist the militancy affected
entrepreneurs to revive industrial activity among the affected community. (Para 2.1.76)
Employment in Central Government Services
The Committee recommends that the feasibility of the proposal of one job per
Migrant family may be looked into and an early decision may be taken. The Committee
recommends that the proposal of creating 1000 class-IV posts for unemployed Migrant
youths, who could not study beyond matriculation, may be sympathetically considered for
early implementation. (Para 2.1.82)
Issues related to teachers
The Committee recommends that the cases of 221 teachers who have been deprived
of employment due to overage may be sympathetically looked into as the people from the
Migrant community are suffering from various handicaps and therefore deserve sympathy
for the same. (Para 2.1.84)
Regularization of Contractual Teachers in Delhi
The Committee is saddened by the fact that after long years of services in the
teaching profession, teachers still have to go through the ordeal of appearing in
examinations, though with age relaxation, and are bereft of social security benefits
admissible to regular teachers till they are appointed on regular basis. In view of the
Committee, this seems to be a inhumane approach on the part of the government, whether
it be a State or Union. The Committee recommends that these teachers being from the
displaced Migrant community, may be given some extra points as may be decided, along with
age relaxation during the recruitment process of Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board
for recruitment of teachers. (Para 2.1.87)
Relief to Migrants at Par with J&K rates
The Committee recommends that all States should provide relief to J&K Migrants at
par with J&K State so that they do not feel disadvantaged or discriminated. (Para 2.1.90)
Problems of Migrant Shopkeepers in INA Market, New Delhi
The Committee desires that action in regard to rehabilitation of displaced
shopkeepers from the migrant community in INA market, New Delhi may be taken on
priority basis. People from the migrant community who have left their native places due to
conditions beyond their control should not face undue delays in the allotment of Stalls.
(Para 2.1.92)
The Committee is of the opinion that the pretext given that Kashmiri Migrants are
not Indians for not allocating shops in INA market is highly objectionable. The complaint
may be looked into and action may be initiated against people involved in such blatant
discrimination. (Para 2.1.94)

46
Reimbursment of medical expenses
The Committee is surprised to note that out of a corpus fund of R5 crore for the
welfare of the Migrants for reimbursing medical expenses, the reimbursement has been
made to the tune of only R57.14 lakh since its creation i.e. 2007 and only around 200 claims
had been received. This looks unbelievable considering the fact that the Migrants are living
in poor financial conditions. The Committee is of the opinion that surely there are many
more genuine members of the community who are in need of medical aid. The Committee
recommends that the government should look into the reasons for limited coverage of the
scheme. It is also of the opinion that when the money is available, it must be cobwebs of
rules and procedures as well as formalities which are behind such limited coverage. The
Committee recommends that the procedure should be simplified by removing bottlenecks so
that maximum bonafide beneficiaries can take the advantage of this fund.
(Para 2.1.96)
The Sub-committee, during the visit to different Migrant camps in Srinagar and
Jammu learnt that several members of the affected community were suffering from deadly
diseases like cancer, kidney failure, etc. and need immediate help. The Committee strongly
recommends that the Ministry should provide additional facilities in the health centers
established in the camps for treating such deadly diseases. It also hopes that the Ministry
would also provide health insurance cover to Migrants for which budget has already been
earmarked. (Para 2.1.98)
Cash Relief
The Committee is extremely dissatisfied by the logic given by the Ministry for
limiting enhancement of the relief by Rs.400 per soul. The Committee notes the claim of
the Government that the thrust of its policy has been to ensure that the difficulties and
hardships of the Migrants are minimized and the needy families are provided an amount,
enough for sustenance and support. The Committee in this background fails to understand
how a meager enhancement of R400 per soul would be able to fight the inflationary
pressures in a big city like Delhi. The Ministry’s decision to totally disregard State
Government’s recommendation for enhancement of the relief to R10000 per family is
unfortunate. It, therefore, recommends that the recommendation of the State Government
may be accepted. (Para 2.1.102)
Problems and Delay in Verifications
The Committee recommends that all issues related to the verification process may
be resolved at the earliest so that request for cash relief made by genuine claimants may
be addressed. (Para 2.1.104)
Housing Assistance
The Committee recommends that the verification process for allotment of remaining
dwelling units may be conducted soon so that they can be allotted soon as there has already
been considerable delay in allotment. (Para 2.1.106)
The Committee is of the opinion that housing assistance under PM’s Package for the
Migrants has remained a non-starter as just one family has availed it. This again highlights
the fact that the most of the PM’s Package has not even taken off. Since the Government
is pinning its hopes for rehabilitation of Migrants on the PM’s Package, the outcome has
been extremely disappointing to say the least. The Committee feels that there is a need for

47
serious rethink on the policy. The Committee in this connection would like to suggest that
the demand of certain organizations that building reconstruction grant should not be a static
quantity and it should be on actual cost of construction and should vary from case to case
may be looked into. (Para 2.1.109)
The Committee also feels that the Package also needs financial revision so that the
few components of the Package which have been availed could be made more attractive.
(Para 2.1.110)
The Committee recommends that the construction of the rest of the accommodations
may be completed soon. If needed, more such units with proper amenities and connectivity
may be created in proportion to the number of people from the Migrant community joining
the work force in the State as presently these units are being shared by the employees in
a very congested manner. (Para 2.1.111)
The Committee also recommends that the Government should positively consider the
demand for provision of one unit of transit accommodation in the Valley on acceptance  of
employment. It is of the opinion that this would serve as a strong incentive for the Migrant
youths to take up jobs in the Valley. (Para 2.1.112)
Satellite Towns and Cluster Accommodation
The Committee welcomes the idea of creating cluster accommodations for the
Migrants in different districts. Keeping in mind the fact that the PM’s package in the
present form has not found many takers, innovative ideas like creating cluster
accommodation can fulfill the twin needs of the Migrants: (i) returning to their native
place; and (ii) returning in a safe environment. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that suitable land may be identified and acquired for the purpose and the scheme be
implemented in a reasonable time frame so that the objective of Migrant’s return does not
remain on paper but sees light of the day. (Para 2.1.115)
Construction of Additional Two-Room Tenements at Jammu
The Committee is of the opinion that since the number of families that have shown
interest in returning to the Valley in present circumstances has remained negligible, the
demand for construction of additional two-room tenements at Jammu may be looked into
if a substantial number of families are interested in staying at Jammu so that the
rehabilitation process could be taken forward in due course of time. (Para 2.1.117)
Problems of Jagti
The Committee is of the opinion that while there are no free lunches, and all
resources have a cost, the Government should look into the purchasing capacity of the
residents. Since they are displaced people who need Government help they should be made
to pay according to their capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that electricity
may be provided to them at a price they can pay. (Para 2.1.120)
The Committee recommends that the State Government should look into the
feasibility of setting up of Notified Area Committee for providing civic amenities in Jagti.
(Para 2.1.122)
The Committee recommends that the medical facilities in the upcoming hospital may
be started as soon as possible so that the hardships faced by the residents are mitigated.
(Para 2.1.124)

48
The Committee recommends that allotment of the remaining flats in Jagti may be
done on priority basis and the verification process for the same may be completed as soon
as possible. (Para 2.1.125)
Improvement of Living Conditions in Transit Accommodation in the Valley
The Committee feels that the grievances of the Migrant people residing in Jagati and
Talwara are quite genuine. The Committee strongly recommends that the State Government
should take all necessary steps required to improve the living conditions in the Migrant
camps at Jagati and Talwara. (Para 2.1.129)
Political Empowerment
The Committee is of the view that migration of a large number of people had been
an extraordinary incident in a democratic country, whose Constitution guarantees every
citizen to live at the place of his desire. Hence, this unprecedented incident deserves
appropriate political empowerment of this community by taking recourse to suitable steps
by the Central Government as well as State Government of J&K. The Committee
hopes that its suggestion will be taken in right perspective with positive approach.
(Para 2.1.133)
Updation of Voters List of The Migrants and Issue of Photo I-Cards
The Committee recommends that the issues of updation of voter lists and
simplification of voting procedures for the Migrants may be appropriately taken up with the
Election Commission so that the Migrants are not made bereft of their voting rights as
citizens of the State. (Para 2.1.137)
The Committee is surprised by the cumbersome nature of the electoral process
designed for the Migrants. No wonder that they allege the whole system has been instituted
to discourage them. While that may not be the case, simplification of the process is
obviously required. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may take
up the matter with Election Commission so that the Migrants can rightfully take part in
the electoral process like rest of their fellow citizens. (Para 2.1.138)
The Committee during its deliberations with the Migrants was informed by several
representatives that they face tremendous difficulties in getting various certificates for
establishing identity, residency etc. The Committee is of the opinion that since the
representatives have complained about the cumbersomeness of the process, the same may
be simplified and made Migrant friendly. The entire procedure may be re-looked.
(Para 2.1.141)
Issues related to Special Police Officers (SPOs)
The Committee is of the opinion that the honorarium for SPOs may be increased
from R3000/- per month as the sum is too meager. Keeping in mind the tough nature of
their job, and in order to keep them motivated, the demand for increase may be
sympathetically considered. The Committee also recommends that the policy for absorption/
conversion of SPOs as Constables/Followers may also be implemented so that it may serve
as an incentive for SPOs and keep them motivated. (Para 2.1143)
Appointment on Compassionate Ground
The Committee is not satisfied with the routine reply given on a significant issue of

49
giving employment to a family member of a Government employees/civilian/member of an
armed Forces or para military forces, who dies as a result of militancy related action or due
to enemy action on the Line of Actual Control/International Border within the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee strongly feels that such cases deserve due attention
and disposal on priority. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all cases of
appointment on compassionate grounds should be decided at the earliest in a time bound
manner, with proper monitoring at higher level. (Para 2.1.145)
Issues related to Village Defence Committees (VDCs)
The Committee is of the opinion that keeping in mind the strategic nature of role
being played by the VDCs to thwart terrorist acts and despite the volunteer nature of the
job, the Government may look into the feasibility of paying honorarium to further motivate
them. (Para 2.1.47)
Non-payment to Migrants
The Committee takes a serious note of the fact brought before it. The Committee
is of the firm view that decisions of Courts should be honored without delay, if not appealed
in higher Court or for review by the same Court. The Committee therefore strongly
recommends that the all the issues related to payment as well as arrears thereof may be
cleared/settled at the earliest, keeping in mind their challenged financial condition. The
Committee desires that status in this regard should be monitored at the appropriate level
in the Union Ministry of Home Affairs. (Para 2.1.149)

MINUTES

XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th July, 2013 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Sahfiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Shri Lalu Prasad
11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Home Secretary
2. Shri K. Skandan, Additional Secretary (CS&K)
3. Shri R.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary (K)
4. Dr. Sanjay Roy, Director
5. Shri Bhopal Singh, Director (K)
6. Shri P.P. Singh, Deputy Secretary
7. Mrs. Sulekha, Deputy Secretary
53

54
Representatives of Government of J&K
1. Shri R.K. Pandita, Relief Commissioner (Migrants)
2. Shri Vinod Kaul, Revenue Secretary
Representatives of Panun Kashmir
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar Chrungoo, President
2. Shri Pulkit Chrungoo, Software Supporter & Activist
Representatives of All India Kashmiri Samaj, Delhi
1. Shri Moti Kaul, President
2. Shri M.L. Malla, Vice-President
3. Colonel Tej Kumar Tikoo, Vice-President
4. Dr. Romesh Raina, General Secretary
Representative of All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference
Shri H.L. Chatta, President
Representatives of Kashmiri Samiti, Delhi
1. Shri Rakesh Kaul, President
2. Shri Rakesh Razdan, Members
Representative of Sikh Displaced Forum, Jammu
Sardar Prem Singh Raina, President
Representative of Jammu Kashmir Vichar Manch, Delhi
Shri T.N. Razdan, President
Representative of All India Kashmiri Pandit Conference
Shri H.N. Jattu, President
Representatives of Joint Forum of KP Organisations
Shri Virender Kumar Raina, Official Spokes Person
Representatives of J&K National Panthers Party
1. Prof. Bhim Singh, Chairman
2. Shri Balwant Singh, MLA
Representatives of West Pakistan Refugees
1. Shri Laba Ram Gandhi
2. Shri Sukhdev Singh
Representative of Pakistan Occupied Jammu Kashmir Refugees
Pt. Ashok Khajuria
Representatives of POJK (Chamb)
1. Shri Rashpal Singh Chib, President
2. Shri Shyam Singh, Sr. Vice President
3. Shri Ajit Singh, Vice President
4. Shrimati Krishna Chib, Vice President

55
Representatives of Terrorism Victims/Migrants of Jammu Region
Advocate Vibodh Gupta
Representatives of Displaced Kashmiri Hindus
1. Shri Ajey Bharti
2. Shri Sanjay Ganjoo
3. Shri Ashok Braroo
Representatives of Displaced Kashmiri Hindus
Shri K.K. Khosa
Individual
1. Shri M.K. Kaw, Former President, All India Kashmir Samaj and retired IAS
2. Prof. Narinder Singh
3. Shri Bali Bhagat (Ex-MLA)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. taking up consideration of the Action Taken Note
submitted by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 137
th Report of the
Committee on Rehabilitation of Jammu and Kashmir migrants and he stated that for the purpose,
the Home Secretary was invited to take into account the implementation of the recommendations
of the Committee and the Prime Minister’s package for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri
migrants and their related issues. He further informed the Members that representatives of various
Associations were also invited to discuss the issues.
2.1 The Chairman, then, welcomed Dr. V . Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha who was re-nominated
to the Committee and he appreciated the contribution and interest of Dr. Maitreyan in the
proceedings of the Committee as a Member of the Committee.
{At this stage, witnesses were called in}
3.0 The Chairman, then, welcomed the Home Secretary and his team of officers to the meeting
of the Committee. He also welcomed the Revenue Secretary, Government of J&K and the Revenue
Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi and other officials who appeared before the Committee.
He apprised the Committee Members and the officials that the representatives from various
segments were invited who were affected by terrorism and then migrated; some people were
displaced in the Chamb V alley; some people from West Pakistan, also appeared before the
Committee. The Chairman directed the officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs to take down
points raised by representatives of Associations and issues raised by Members for detailed
discussions in Committee’s subsequent meeting.
3.1 The Chairman, thereafter, invited the representative of Terrorism Victims/Migrants of Jammu
region and asked them to apprise the Committee about the problems being faced by migrants of
Jammu and Kashmir as well as the package announced by the Prime Minister and its
implementation. He made them acquainted about the confidentiality of the proceedings of the
Committee till the Report is submitted to Parliament.
3.2 The representative of Terrorism Affected People’s Front apprised the Committee that his
association was a constituent of Tahreek-e-Insaaf. He further made the following submissions:-
(i) J&K consists of two provinces - Jammu Province has 10 Administrative Districts while
Kashmir Province including the Ladakh area contains 12 Administrative Districts.
Terrorism erupted in 1992 in Jammu province wherein eight districts, namely Kishtwar,

56
Ramban, Doda, Riyasi, Udhampur, Kathua, Punch and Rajouri were badly affected due
to massacres.
(ii) Most of the rehabilitation programmes and development activities were concentrated in
valley areas and people of Jammu province felt neglected. According to him,
Government figures indicated that during a period of ten years from 5
th January, 1996
to 1 st May, 2006, 30 massacres occurred in Jammu province wherein 403 innocent
people were killed while in valley nine massacres took place wherein 188 civilians were
killed. Despite the fact that Jammu province was worsely affected, the province
remained deprived of development package.
(iii) There had been large scale exodus with increasing terrorism which aimed at compelling
the minority community to migrate from the area. About 12000 families were affected
in Jammu province. Since literacy rate was very low, the main source of livelihood of
the people was collection of fire wood, forest products like Bunafsa and Black
Mushroom from hilly forests. Y outh persons used to do labour work in forests. Now
all the people are deprived of the sources and people are forced to flee at the time of
harvesting. A special rehabilitation and development package at par with the Kashmiri
migrants should be given. The Supreme Court had given a ruling to give relief to
migrants of Jammu region at par with Kashmiri migrants but the State Government had
not implemented it. Besides, special recruitment drive on the lines of recruitment drive
launched for the youths of Kashmir region, should also be undertaken.
(iv) Not only Hindus, Muslims had also migrated due to frivolous complaints of supporting
terrorism and subsequent interrogations by forces. Those persons who have settled in
towns in Jammu region by getting constructed small house are not being registered for
relief as the State Government views their migration voluntary. Those migrants
numbering about 12000 should be registered and given relief.
(v) About 400 SPOs and 147 persons of Village Defence Committees had been killed. The
Government intends to disband the VDCs, while VDCs had been helpful. SPOs are paid
only R3500, hence honorarium to them needs to be enhanced. VDCs members in
Doda, Bhandarwah and Kistwar are paid but VDC members in Rajouri and Poonch are
paid nothing.
(vi) Dependants of the killed persons numbering about 1000, in Jammu Region face severe
difficulties in getting jobs on compassionate ground and their files are gethering dust
at diffetent levels and the affected persons have to go from post to pillers to complete
the formalities. The procedure in this regard should be simplified. Ex-gratia payment
of one lakh rupees only to the family of killed person is also not sufficient.
(vii) People are interested in returning to their home villages, but their properties have been
occupied by other persons.
3.3. The representatives of West Pakistan Refugees  submitted the following:
● There were about 21 thousand families consisting of fourth generation in three districts
of the State and they have no voting rights for Assembly and Panchayat elections since
independence in 1947, though they can vote in Parliamentary elections. They came to
India in 1947 even before enforcement of Article 370 and were asked to remain in the
Border Villages on the advice of Jawahar Lal Nehru and Sheikh Abdullah. However,
they are not considered eligible for Government jobs, even under the Central
Government as the jobs are made in the name of State Government, which did not
treat them state subjects. In the recruitments for army and para military forces,

57
domicile certificates are asked, which they do not have. People are living at the land
which was given by compassionate basis. However, they are now not permitted to get
repaired the diapilated houses. They are not getting benefits under Indira Awas Yojana
and Anganwadi schemes.
● Majority of families belong to Scheduled Caste, but the constitutional benefits are being
denied to them. State Government has stopped issuing SC and OBC certificates to
them and children are facing difficulties in getting admissions in the schools and
colleges. PM package is not being implemented and correspondence with the State
Government has not yielded any result.
● They should be given voting rights so that their generations can live properly and if
it is not possible, they may be rehabilitated somewhere else in the vast country.
3.4 The representatives of the Pakistan Occupied Jammu Kashmir Refugees mentioned
that PoK’ is a misnomer and It should be ‘PoJK’ as it has very less part namely Muzzarafabad
of Kashmir; Gilgit, Baltistan formed apart of Leh-Laddakh. At the time of partition, migrated people
from Muzzarafabad and Poonch were not allowed to stay in Kashmir and were directed to go to
Jammu. They were told that after resolving of PoK issues, they would be sent back. They however
have voting rights and eligible for Government jobs. In 1960 they were given relief of
R3500 however R2500 were deducted in lieu of land provided. The relief was given subject to the
conditions i.e. (i) person must be staying in the camps not with relatives (ii) head of the family
also should have migrated and (iii) migration should be within September, 1947 and December,
1950. Families whose head of the family was killed during migration and migrated after December,
1950 were left. The Petitions Committee of Rajya Sabha in 32
nd Report recommended for
rehabilitation and compensation, which was not implemented. Recommendations of the Wadhwa
Committee set up by the State Government in 2007 were also not implemented.
3.5 The representatives of POJK (CHAMB)  made the following points:–
● The migrants should be registered. 31600 families were registered while 9500 families
were not registered as they could not fulfill the condition. The properties which were
lost have not been compensated. One third of the population of POJK migrated to
Jammu. They should be provided with political rights in exile as they spread to the
whole country. Children of such families should be provided reservation in professional
courses.
● Refugee Development Board should be constituted to look after the development needs
of such migrants. Out of the ex-gratia payment of 3500 rupees 2500 was deducted
against provision of land which was never given even after 65 years. Now the
Government is giving 1,50,000 rupees on account of non-grant of land promised.
3.6 The following are the main points raised by different individuals and other representative
groups of the Kashmiri migrants:
Individual
Shri M. K. Kaw, Former President, All India Kashmiri Samaj
● It is old canard that Kashmiri Pandits are disunited and do not have a single unified
plan for their rehabilitation. Kashmiri Pandits have single organization called the All
Indian Kashmiri Samaj to which all 70-odd associations are affiliated.
● Though all the Kashmiri Migrants are united on the issue of return to Kashmir, there
are differences among the Kashmiri groups regarding the strategy of return; while

58
some want to return to their erstwhile homes, others suggest returning to compact
townships or to a single Home Land with a Union Territory Status. A mix of such
strategies is advisable.
● The Home Ministry has not made any progress as they believe that there is no
unanimity on the process of return. This is a convenient alibi not to make any progress
on the ground.
● The Prime Minister package which was supposed to give 6000 jobs has remained a
non starter as the jobs were either low paid, not matching qualifications or they were
located in the valley with the condition that the seekers will not be transferred to
outside.
Pt. Ashok Braroo
● It has been 23 years since Kashmiri Pandits have been thrown out of the valley and
30% of them have died since 1990.
● Apartheid is being practiced against minorities’ communities in the valley both by the
State and Central Governments. Reservation in professional courses has been provided
to the community by other States but not the State in which they were born, even to
the people who have decided to stay against all odds.
Panun Kashmir
● The silent exodus of minorities continues unabated with the larger design to change the
demographics of the region.
● Encroachments of Hindu Temples and buildings and school buildings etc. continues
with the land mafia having an eye upon the last remaining left over of the properties
of the pandits in the valley. Even the Government is taking over these properties for
the use without permission or compensation.
● The group aspires for the internally displaced persons status.
J&K National Panthers Party
● Migrants are not just from Kashmir Valley and Jammu Region. After 1996 migrants
from Poonch, Rajori, Udham Pur and Doda came to Jammu. Jammu Migrants came
mainly from Doda. Jammu Migrants should be treated at par with Kashmir
Migrants as per, Jammu and Kashmir High Court direction. 2009 judgement of the
Jammu and Kashmir High Court providing relief within 45 days has not yet been
implemented.
● Jammu migrants have no reservation any where in the country like Kashmiri Migrants.
Joint Forum of KP Organisations
● The Prime Minister’s return and rehabilitation package has remained absolutely
unimplemented.
● Whatever funds are available should be provided immediately without the condition of
return to the valley.

59
All India Kashmiri Pandits Conference
The situation is not right for Pandits to return to the valley.
Jammu Kashmir Vichar Manch
● The report regarding temple renovation is wrong. There are no temple which have been
renovated.
● The living conditions of the Kashmiri Migrants are deplorable. They have to share a
single bathroom among several families.
● Properties sold under duress by the Migrants continues.
Sikh Displaced Forum
● Sikh migrants wish to return to valley but the situation of Hindu minorities in the valley
is extremely bad and it is impossible for Sikh minority to return in present
circumstances.
● Sikh should be given minority status like Buddhist and Muslims in India.
● 1750 families of Sikh minority have been registered by Relief Commissioner with the
population of 60,000 of which 30,000 have migrated to Jammu.
● Government has made no arrangements for these refugees and they live on their own
in rented accommodation.
● Out of the 6,000 jobs, 4600 jobs are still to be filled and should be provided to Sikh
migrants before they get over aged.
● Protection should be provided to Sikh population residing in Kashmir valley.
Kashmir Samiti, Delhi
● The Prime Minister’s package puts stringent conditions for its implementation. It has
no provision for youths who had to migrate in the 90’s and have now become
overaged and are still to get relief.
● Properties belonging to the Kashmiri Pandit community have been overtaken by the
Government for its purposes like cremation grounds for making bus stands etc.
● Heritage symbols of the Pandit community in Kashmir like the Shankracharya Hill top,
Hariparvat, etc. have been renamed so that all cultural heritage of the community is
erased and State Government itself is complicit. Such changes might not get reflected
on the Government papers and therefore the Government can take the alibi of
documentation, but what matters is the reality on the ground.
● Kashmiri pandits are under going a severe identity crisis: detached from their roots in
Kashmir, they neither belong to Kashmir nor to the rest of India and thereby hang
midway.
● No Commission was appointed by the Government to find out the reasons for
migration of Kashmiri Pandits from the valley.
● Even after 23 years of migration the question of address verification of Kashmiri
Pandits in the valley for becoming eligible to get migrants status is still not complete.

60
In the absence of such verifications, pandit community neither can claim any benefits
nor apply for jobs in the valley.
● People who were massacred are still to get justice as their murderers roam scot free.
No FIRs have been registered so far.
● There is no representation of kashmiri pandit migrants in the State Secretariat.
● Names of the migrants are deleted from the electoral list though the Election
Commission has provided voting rights for State Assembly elections and Parliamentary
constituency in the state to migrants living outside Jammu and Kashmir.
Displaced Kashmiri Hindus
● Migrants have to take an elaborate five steps exercise before they can cast their votes
outside J&K. This discourages the voters casting their votes.
● Out of registered 58000 families, only 5200 have been given shelters.
● In the 2001 Census, it was said that the population of Kashmiri Pandit Migrants
comprises of 90,000 males and only 10,000 females.
● In the year 2000, it was stated that properties of Kashmiri Pandits which have been
encroached upon are being cleared. No progress has taken place on the ground.
● Kashmiri Migrants face difficulties in getting legal proofs of their being displaced
Kashmiri. Obtaining of legal proofs such as V oter ID card, passport, migrant ration
card or State Subject Certificate is a cumbersome process, which needs to be
streamlined and facilitated in such a way that a person sitting in Delhi could also
get hold of it easily. An attempt is being made in such a way that people are
discouraged from getting those documents so that they may not have any claim on
the land.
● If this generation is not able to solve this problem, next generation may not be able
to go there because they will not have the documents.
All India Kashmiri Samaj
● The Supreme Court has reprimanded both the State and Central Governments because
of which the Prime Minister’s Package was announced but has not been implemented
properly.
● It does not matter what is the total figure of the Prime Minister’s Package, what
matters is how many individuals and families get when it is distributed.
● There is no programme or blueprint prepared by the Government to take the
community back to the valley where they can live with dignity and without fear.
● The exodus is nothing short of ethnic cleansing and the Prime Minister’s Package is
only a piece of paper for the migrants.
● Though the Home Ministry listens patiently the representatives of the Migrants, they
are not able to overcome the resistance of the State Government when it comes to
implementing the policy of rehabilitation.

61
Kashmiri Pandit Sabha (Shri K.K. Khosa)
● Regarding the Prime Minister’s Package, which was announced in 2008, till date, out
of the eight or nine components which it constituted, only one component, and that
too partially, has been implemented.
● The Package had infirmities from the very beginning. The State Government has
formed an Apex Committee to oversee the implementation of the Prime Minister’s
Package. The Apex Committee was constituted in September, 2009. Forty members
were included in that Committee. In the last four years, only four formal meetings with
proper agenda and proper minutes recorded were held. The State Government states
that the entire Package was implemented under the guidance and advice of the Apex
Committee which they have formed. This shows that there was not much seriousness
in the effort which the Government made towards the implementation of the Prime
Minister’s Package.
● Out of the 6,000 posts which were announced for the Kashmiri displaced community,
only 1,500 have actually been given to them. The rest, the Government says, have not
been appointed because the community went to the court in litigation, therefore, things
were stalled. But that litigation was not putting any hindrance in the employment to be
provided to the rest of the people. The community had to go to the court as there was
a waiting list which was pending with the Government and there was a Cabinet
decision that they should be immediately employed before the next lot of children were
considered for employment.
● People of Jagti township have been facing tremendous difficulties because of 16-18
hours power cut that is being forced upon them.
4.0 The Chairman then directed the Home Secretary to go through the Supreme Court
judgement which Mr. Bhim Singh had referred to and the earlier High Court judgement along with
the Wadhwa Commission’s recommendations and Sushma Committee’s recommendations and,
based on these recommendations, to get back to the Committee with the progress made so far, vis-
a-vis the State Government and the views of the Central Government with regard to these findings
and recommendations. He also asked him to send the Committee the response of the Ministry to
the issues raised by the representatives from various associations in the meeting.
4.1 He also then proposed to hold meeting with the representatives and the Ministry in the light
of Action Taken by the Government. He also proposed to hold meeting with the Jammu and
Kashmir Government and the representatives together. The Chairman also proposed that the Sub-
Committee would visit Jammu and Kashmir to see the ground situation.
5.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

62
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Monday, the 17 th February, 2014 in Room No. 67,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Adsul
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Rathod Ramesh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the sitting of the
Committee and apprised them agenda of the day which was to consider and adopt the following
three draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) 178
th Report on Disaster Management in the Country;
(ii) 179 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 137 th Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants; and
(iii) 180 th Report on Administration of Union Territories (Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman &
Diu, and Chandigarh).
2.1 The Chairman informed the Members that the respective sub-Committees had adopted the
draft 179 th Report and draft l80 th Report on 13 th February, 2014.
62

63
3. * * *
3.1 The Committee then took up the draft 179 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations contained in the 137 th Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
for consideration. After a brief discussion, the report was adopted with some minor changes.
3.2 * * *
3.3 The Chairman and Committee Members then appreciated the work done by Committee
Secretariat in terms of drafting comprehensive and quality reports within stipulated time-frame.
4.0 The Chairman also informed the Members that two Reports, namely, 176 th Report on
Functioning of Delhi Police and 177 th Report on Coastal Security Management were considered and
adopted by the Committee in its sitting held on 7 th January, 2014. He stated that these two Reports
alongwith the above three adopted Reports would be presented/laid in the current session on
19
th February, 2014.
5.0 The Committee then nominated its Chairman and in his absence Shri D. Raja, M.P., Rajya
Sabha and Shri Santiuse Kujur, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the 176 th 177 th, 178 th, 179 th and 180 th
Reports to the Rajya Sabha on 19 th February, 2014. The Committee also nominated Shri Naveen
Jindal, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq, M.P., Lok Sabha to lay five
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

ANNEXURES

67
ANNEXURE -I
DETAILS OF ENHANCEMENT OF CASH RELIEF TO
KASHMIRI MIGRANTS IN JAMMU AND DELHI
Effected
from
Jammu
Camp Non-camp
Delhi
Camp Non-camp
12 3 4 5
Prior to
1.2.1994
1.2.1994
1.6.1996
1.4.1999
1.6.2002
1.7.2003
1.7.2006
R250/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R 1000/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R375/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R1500/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R450/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R1800/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R600/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R2400/- per family per
month plus dry ration
Ceiling of R2400/- per
family raised to R3000/-
R750/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R3000/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R1000/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R4000/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R250/- per head per month subject to a ceiling of
R1000/- per family per month
R250/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R1000/- per family per
month plus ration
R300/- per head per
month sujbect to a ceiling
of R1200/- per family per
month plus ration
R400/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R1600/- per family per
month plus ration
–
R600/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R2400/- per family per
month plus ration
R375/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R1500/- per family per
month
R450/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R1800/- per family per
month
R600/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R2400/- per family per
month
R800/- per head per
month subject to a ceiling
of R3200/- per family per
month
R1000/- per head per month subject to a ceiling of
R4000/- per family per month

68
12 3 4 5
1.7.2009
1.7.2012
R1250/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R5000/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R1650/- per head per month
subject to a ceiling of
R6600/- per family per
month plus dry ration
R1250/- per head per month subject to a ceiling of
R5000/- per family per month
R1650/- per head per month subject to a ceiling of
R6600/- per family per month

69
69
ANNEXURE -II
STATUS NOTE ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF IMT
Item
No.
1
Recommendation in brief
2
Status of Action Taken
3
01.
02.
03.
04.
Remodelling and construction of two-roomed
tenements at Jammu in place of the existing
one-roomed tenements involving an
expenditure of R127.00 crore, out of which
an amount of R117.00 crore is to be
provided as Additional Central Assistance
(ACA). This would help in improving the
living environment in the camps and also
imparting a degree of dignity and privacy to
the inmates, the womenfolk in particular.
Construction and remodelling of tenements
at Udhampur and Kathua involving an
expenditure of R10.00 crore to be provided
as Additional Central Assistance.
Creation of Empowered Committee headed
by the State Chief Secretary for
administration of a corpus of R5.00 crore to
be established for catering to miscellaneous
development needs of the Migrants viz.
health, education, vocational skill building,
library facilities, sports facilities, etc. R.4.50
crore to be provided as Additional Central
Assistance and R0.50 crore to be met by the
State Government. Such a funding
mechanism will have the added advantage of
being geared to the existing ground realities
and evolve a need-based strategy to meet the
emerging development needs of the
Migrants.
The construction of 200 two-room flats at
Sheikhpora, District Budgam at an
expenditure of R20.00 crore to be provided
under Security Related Expenditure of the
Construction of all the 5242 two room
tenements started in 2005 has been
completed, out of which 4624 flats have
already been allotted to migrant families. The
process for allotment of remaining flats is in
progress. The expenditure as on date is
R322.26 crores.
The camps at Batal Ballian, Udhampur and
Kathua have already been closed and the
migrants have been shifted to newly
constructed two room tenements with total
estimated expenditure of R385 crores.
Government of J&K created a Corpus Fund
of R5 crores ( R4.5 crores as additional
central assistance and R0.50 crores State
Government’s contribution) for the welfare
of migrants. So far 185 migrants have been
reimbursed medical expenses to the tune of
R57.14 lakhs and 18 cases are under
consideration.
The project cost was revised to R22.90
crores. Construction of 200 flats completed.
Flats allotted to 31 local Kashmiri Migrant
families who had not migrated from the

70
12 3
Ministry of Home Affairs. This initiative if
successful would constitute a major policy
breakthrough. The State Government will
have to embark on a strategic approach to
motivate the Migrants to return through a
mix of economic and employment linked
incentives. This would require placing in
position concurrently a very strong
neighbourhood network by involving the
local people in the initiative. This process of
social assimilation needs to include efforts to
improve the existing facilities and amenities
in the neighbourhood so that the present
residents view the cluster as an extension of
their own development and not an isolated
oasis, where the returning Migrants are
given preferential treatment.
R100 crore out of ACA for the improvement/
provision of infrastructure in the Kashmir
Valley for facilitating the return of the
Migrants
Compensation for the houses damaged due
to -natural calamities as per the norms of
the Calamity Relief Fund for R.l.40 crore.
There are reportedly 1365 houses damaged
due to natural calamities.
R0.35 crore out of ACA for the provision of
medical equipment and sports facilities for
camps
A verification of relief cases receiving cash
doles to weed out ineligible recipients
Preparation of the health profiles of the
camp Migrants and provision of specialized
health care out of the corpus fund. This is
to assist the Migrants suffering from serious
Valley and migrants on sharing basis who
have joined in the Valley under Employment
component of PM’s Package.
PM’s Package provides for funds for
infrastructural development, such as
housing, transit accommodation, etc., as
well.
No separate funds are allocated under this
Head. Cases are being settled by the respective
District Development Commissioner as per
applicable norms. No complaint/reference has
been received from any quarter about non-
settlement of claims in this regard, in the
recent past.
The State Government provided X-ray plant,
ultrasound machine and pathological
laboratory in camps.
Registration of more than 5000 families have
been cancelled during the year 2005. The
process of weeding out ineligible receipts is
on, as and when any such case is reported,
after enquiry the relief benefits in respect of
such family are stopped and their registrations
cancelled.
As intimated by the State Government
migrants who need specialized health care
are being provided assistance. So far an
amount of R57.14 lakhs stands provided to
05.
06.
07.
08.
09.

71
12 3
ailments like kidney failure, diabetes, cancer,
etc. who are unable to afford any specialized
medical treatment and are not receiving any
financial support for dealing with serious
ailments.
Creation of 1000 job opportunities for the
Migrants as follows –
(a) Teachers
250 posts of teachers be provided by
way of addition to the number of 8099
teachers to be supported out of Central
Funds.
(b) Anganwadi workers and helpers
Out of 6817 Anganwadi centres
recently approved for the State, 200
centres accounting for 400 positions of
Anganwadi workers and helpers be
earmarked for Migrant locations or to
absorb Migrants.
(c) ANMs and MPWs
100 posts of ANMs and 50 posts of
MPWs may be supported additionally
by the Ministry of Health, Government
of India to augment grassroots level
health services in the State.
185 patients and 18 cases are in the
pipeline.
Migrants who need specialized health care
have also been asked to submit their
applications so that the same are placed
before the Empowered Committee for
providing relief out the Corpus Fund.
Teachers
As a special dispensation of J&K
Government, 56 wards of Kashmiri Pundits
(those who did not migrate) have been
appointed as teachers under Rehbar-e Taleem
Scheme in Education Department,
Government of J&K. 250 posts of Rehbar-e
Taleem could not be filled up as migrants are
not falling in the scheme. The posts can be
filled up once migrants return to their native
places. Due consideration is given to
Kashmiri migrants who are residing in a
village and fulfill the eligibility criteria where
the posts are created. Appointments made
under PM’s Package also include teachers
and 1018 teachers have already joined.
Anganwadi workers and helpers
Already 227 Anganwadi centres have been
sanctioned where employment has been
provided to 454 migrants as works/helpers.
ANMs (Auxillary  nurses and mid-wifes)
and MPWs (Multi-Purpose Workers)
No authorization was required from Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare for creation of
posts exclusively for the Migrants. As
informed by the State Government it was
10.

72
12 3
(d) India Reserve Battalion
Out of 5000 posts envisaged for raising
5 India Reserve Police Battalion in the
State, at least 200 posts at various
levels can be earmarked for the
Migrants.
Establishment of Self-Help Women’s Groups.
This forum will be utilized for skill
endowment, vocational training, micro
credit, etc. The idea is to involve the camp
dwellers, especially the women in productive
economic activity and also, to remove and
alleviate their drudgery.
Entrepreneurial Development Programmes
and setting up of 1000 cottage/small scale
industries. This would help to promote self-
employment initiatives amongst the Migrants.
Provision of soft loans to the Migrants.
Upgradation of Migrant schools as resource
centres at an expenditure of R0.20 crore to
not possible to provide separate reservations
for migrants in Health Department for
appointments against the existing vacancies.
Providing employment to migrants against
existing vacancies may invite legal
complications. For the posts created under
PM’s Package, separate rules were notified.
86 posts have been created in Health
Department, under the PM’s Package which
includes ANMs/MPWs.
India Reserve Battalion
239 Kashmiri Pundits have already been
provided jobs in India Reserve Battalion. 4%
reservation has been made for the migrants
for employment in IRB.
No response is reportedly received from
migrants.
As informed by the State Government, the
migrants unemployed youths are not
interested in setting up of income generating
units. Efforts were made for organizing
Entrepreneurial Development Programmes
(EDPs), but there was poor response.
As informed by the State Government, since
the migrant youths are not interested in
setting up of income generating units, no
such scheme was framed.
However, in the PM’s package announced in
April, 2008, there is a provision for one time
financial assistance of R5 lakhs in each case
(50% grant and 50% loan) for self
employment and business ventures for
unemployed youths.
As intimated by the State Government of
J&K, migrant schools have been provided
11.
12.
13.
14.

73
12 3
be provided as Additional Central Assistance.
This would help to rejuvenate the teachers
and make these institutions more worthwhile
and relevant for the Migrant students.
Special educational dispensations for the
Migrant students in more States for
admission in engineering/medical colleges.
This would provide invaluable support to the
Migrant students by affording them
opportunities of acquiring academic/
professional capabilities with assured
employability
Payment of HRA and CCA to Migrant
Government employees at an estimated
expenditure of R6.00 crore.
with additional facilities by way of labs,
computer labs, etc. out of the available
resources.
Seats for the migrant students in different
States are every year reserved for migrant
students in professional colleges and on the
basis of the migration certificates issued by
the Relief Organizations admissions in
professional and other colleges are provided
to the migrant students on the basis of these
certificates, against seats reserved for
Kashmiri migrants.
More than 3000 students have been issued
migration certificates by Relief Organisation
during last two years which facilitated them
to seek admission in professional colleges
outside states where separate seats were
reserved for migrant students.
The facility of HRA and CCA is presently
being provided to migrant employees in
terms of Court Order.
15.
16.

74
74
ANNEXURE -III
LIST OF REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
Report Title of the Report
No.
12
1
st On Demand Nos. 42 and 44 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs
for the year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
12th The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment Bill, 1995
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994

75
12
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill, 1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
29th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
30
th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
31
st The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32
nd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill, 1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill, 1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998

76
12
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi
High Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
68
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixtieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
69
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
70
th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999

77
12
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
& Kashmir
92
nd The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme
97th The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Home Affairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill, 2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003

78
12
109th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
111th Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third
Report of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of ‘Administration’ of Union Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
125th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
126
th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in One
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Home Affairs
133rd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of Indo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants

79
12
138th The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in One
Hundred Thirty-second Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-third Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration
143rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Home Affairs
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
149th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the
country
153rd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects along Indo-
Pak Borders
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-second Report on Implementations of Central Scheme of Modernisation of
Prison Administration
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Home Affairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o  DoNER
163rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth Amendment) Bill, 2012

80
12
165th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Sixty-first Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Home Affairs
166
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its One
Hundred and Sixty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
167
th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Sixty-third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy, Hyderabads
173
rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
175
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176
th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
l77th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union Territories (Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli
and Chandigarh)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.