Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
204
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th July, )18 2017
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th July, )18 2017
Administration and Development of Union
Territory of Lakshadweep
TWO HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT
July, 2017/Ashadha, 1939 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT
Administration and Development of Union
Territory of Lakshadweep
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 18th July, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2017/Ashadha, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 400

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv )
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (v)-(vii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-25
Chapter I Introduction ............................................................................................... 1-2
Chapter II Administrative and Developmental Issues................................................. 3-25
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ......................................................... 26-33
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 5-45
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 47-80
Annexure-I (2030 Vision Statement for the Lakshadweep Islands) ..................... 49-75
Annexure-II (Detailed List of V acancies in Various Departments
of UT of Lakshadweep) ........................................................................ 76-80

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st September, 2016)
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Dr. V. Maitreyan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
5. Shri Majeed Memon
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri R.K. Sinha
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar
21. Shri P. Nagarajan
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
23. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
24. Shri Dilip Patel
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
29. Shri Bishnupada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Secretary
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred Fourth Report on Administration and Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep.
2.0 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its sitting held on
28th September, 2016, identified inter-alia the subject 1 ‘Administration and Development of UT of
Lakshadweep’ for detailed examination.
3.0 The Committee, in its sitting held on 16th January, 2017 heard the presentation and views of
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, UT Administration of Lakshadweep and the officials concerned
of the Ministries of Shipping, Health & Family Welfare, Electronics & Information Technology, Civil Aviation,
Communications, Drinking Water & Sanitation, Earth Sciences and Tourism on various aspects of
administration and development of UT of Lakshadweep.
4.0 The Committee also undertook its study visit to UT of Lakshadweep from 25th to 27th April,
2017 to have the first hand information on administrative and developmental issues of Lakshadweep
Islands. During the study visit, the Committee held discussions with the various stakeholders viz.
Union Ministries of Home Affairs, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Earth Sciences, Coast Guard and UT
Administration;
5.0 The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:-
(i) Background Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Presentation made by representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs during the meeting of the
Committee held on 16th January, 2017;
(iii) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and Administration of UT of Lakshadweep
to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the Committee’s meeting
held on 16th January, 2017;
(iv) Replies furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questionnaire prepared by the
Secretariat on the background note on the subject; and
(v) Representations received by the Committee from various stakeholders viz. Androth Island
Persioners’ welfare Association; Lakshadweep Disabled Welfare Association; Al-Jazeera Society
for Socio-economic & Education Development and Shri A. Kunhikoya Thangal, President
cum Chief Counsellor of Lakshadweep District Panchayat during its study visit and replies of
the Ministry thereon;
(vi) Coral Paradise - India Lakshadweep - Vision 2030
6.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 29th May, 2017 considered and adopted the Draft Report.
(iii)
1 Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 55853 dated 30 September, 2016

7.0 The observations and recommendations of the Committee have been given at respective narrative
part of the Report in bold letters. However, for the sake of convenience, the observations and recommendations
of the Committee at a glance have also been given at the end of the report.
P. CHIDAMBARAM
NEW D ELHI; Chairman
May 29th, 2017 Department-related Parliamentary
Jyaistha 8, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha
(iv)

ACRONYMS
A TR – Aerei da Trasporto Regionale (in French)/Regional Air Transport (in English)
AAI – Airport Authority of India
AOC – Air Operator’s Certificate
A TF – Aviation Turbine Fuel
BSNL – Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
CAR – Civil Aviation Requitement
CHC – Community Health Centre
CSR – Corporate Social Responsibility
CDB – Coconut Development Board
CPIS – Coco nut Palm Insurance Scheme
DGCA – Director General Civil Aviation
DIET – District Institute of Educational Training
DG – Diesel Generator
DRDO – Defence Research Development Organisation
DPR – Detailed Project Report
DTTDC – Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation
ESDM – Electronic System Design and Manufacturing
EoI – Expression of Interest
GoI – Government of India
GH – Government Hospital
HPCL – Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
HSD – High Speed Diesal
ICS&MS – Island Co-operative Supply & Marketing Societies
IFR – Instrument Flight Rules
IGH – Indira Gandhi Hospital
IHM – Institute of Hotel Management
IOC – Indian Oil Corporation
KWH – kilowatt-hour
(v)

(vi)
KTDC – Kerala Tourism Development Corporation
LEDA – Lakshadweep Energy Development Agency
LPG – Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LDCL – Lakshadweep Development Corporation Ltd.
LDA – Lakshadweep Diving Academy
LTDC – Lakshadweep Tourism Development Corporation
LCMF – Lakshadweep Co-operative Marke ting Federation
MNRE – Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MW – Mega Watt
MoEF – Ministry of Environment and Forest
MT – Metric Tonne
MoHFW – Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MICE – Meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions
MTDC – Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation
MPSTDC – Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation
NCSCM – National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management
NFSA – National Food Security Act
OFC – Optical Fibre Cable
OMSS – Open Market Sales Scheme
PSU – Public Sector Unit
PHL – Pawan Hans Limited
PPP – Public Private Partnership
RGSH – Rajiv Gandhi Speciality Hospital
SDO – Sub-divisional Officer
SOPs – Standard Operating Procedures
SCI – Shipping Corporation of India
SPORTS – Society for Promotion of Nature Tourism & Sports
TCIL – Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd.

(vii)
TRAI – T elecom Regulatory Authority of India
UTL – Union Territory of Lakshadweep
VFR – Visual Flight Rules
V -SAT – Very Small Aperture Terminal

1
REPORT
CHAPTER- I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Lakshadweep, a scattered group of 26 coral islands around 200 to 400 kms. away from the south-
western coast of India in the Arabian Sea, is the smallest Union Territory of India. It has a total surface area
of only 32 sq km. Lakshadweep has 4200 sq. km. of total lagoon area and 20,000 sq. km. of territorial
waters. Only 10 out of the 26 islands, namely Kavaratti, Agatti, Amini, Kadamat, Kiltan, Chetlat, Bitra,
Androth, Kalpeni and Minicoy, are inhabited.
1.2 All the ten inhabited islands, with their attached islands and islets, are divided into nine sub-divisions.
Each sub-division is under the charge of a Deputy Collector/Sub-Divisional Officer who also functions as
the Executive Magistrate for their respective island. There is a two-tier system of Panchayats in Lakshadweep;
the Island level Village (Dweep) Panchayat and the UT level District Panchayat, with no intermediary Panchayat.
Each of these islands has Dweep Panchayats and the District Panchayat is located at Kavaratti. Consequent
to the transfer of functions vide Notification F. No. 2/1/2012-DOP dated 7/3/12 all major departments
namely agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries, education and medical were devolved to the Panchayats.
1.3 The Administrator of Lakshadweep is the head of the UT and is appointed by the President of India
under Article 239 of the Constitution.
1.4 The total population of Lakshadweep is 64,473 with a density of 2149 per sq. km. as per the 2011
census now estimated at 71,000. The entire indigenous population of Lakshadweep, due to its economic and
social backwardness, has been classified as Schedule Tribes by the Government of India. The per capita
income of Lakshadweep is approximately ‘53,000. Fishing and coconut cultivation are the major occupations
of the people. Intercropping with plantation is the only feasible form of agriculture in Lakshadweep as the
cultivation of a single crop is not viable due to the paucity of open spaces and absence of irrigation facilities.
However the lagoons, sandbanks, open reefs and submerged banks, with an economic zone extending up to
4,00,000 kms., provide a very rich marine life for the Lakshadweep archipelago.
1.5 Lakshadweep due to its unique topography and geographical location suffers from certain
disadvantages that have hindered the scope and pace of its development. Limited landmass and geographical
isolation of the islands has proved to be a hindrance in the development of the Lakshadweep islands. The
islands are entirely dependent on the mainland for all their needs as everything, except coconut and fish, is
brought from the mainland. Availability of clean drinking water is a persistent problem due to limited quantity
and poor quality of ground water due to seawater intrusion. Sanitation and solid waste management are two
other important challenges that persist due to the paucity of land and sensitive nature of ecology. There is a
high level of unemployment due to the absence of any industry and a lack of entrepreneurship and technological
skills among the people. High cost and limited means of transportation, grossly inadequate telecom connectivity,
scarcity of natural resources, lack of a sustainable & permanent source of power generation and a fragile
ecology are other major constraints in the development of the islands.
1.6 Despite the geographical challenges and associated limitations, there are several inherent strengths
and promising factors that can potentially transform the Lakshadweep islands. The Coconut varieties of
Lakshadweep have high-quality copra, higher oil content and other superior attributes, besides being organic.
The territorial waters of Lakshadweep are rich in fishery resources like Tuna and potential resources in the
sea around Lakshadweep is about one lakh tonnes. Though tourism is among the fastest growing industries

2
in Lakshadweep, providing ample scope for investment, there still remains much to be done. The presence
of a number of uninhabited islands with pristine beaches and vast lagoon area hold great future potential for
tourism development. Coral reefs and abundant marine life offer excellent opportunities for developing
water sports. Lakshadweep also offers a huge potential for the utilisation of various non-conventional and
renewable sources of energy. Lakshadweep has a high level of literacy and awareness, healthy demographic
indicators and stabilized population growth. A small population and land area have an inherent advantage as
they enable faster implementation of schemes.
1.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs envisions transforming the UT of Lakshadweep into a happy, prosperous,
inclusive, responsible, and self-sustaining society through sustainable use of the resources and potential
available in the islands, without disturbing the ecology, environment and the socio-cultural heritage of the
islands. The Ministry has also submitted a 2030 Vision Statement for the Lakshadweep Islands (Annexure-I)
outlining specific focal points as follows:-
(i) Faster and sustainable development of the islands by using available resources and potential in
the islands.
(ii) Raising the living standard of the people through enhancement of income and increasing
employment for youth.
(iii) Enhancing the quality of life particularly in respect of improving drinking water supply by
commissioning more desalination plants.
(iv) Ecological protection and eco-friendly solid and liquid waste management.
(v) Adoption of appropriate skill development strategies most suited to the island condition for
reducing the flow of migrant labourers from the mainland.
(vi) Establishing Lakshadweep as an ‘Adventure Sport and Nature Tourism’ location on the global
tourism map.
(vii) Universal access to affordable health care by establishing specialty and superspecialty services.
(viii) Providing daily connectivity among various islands, between the mainland and Lakshadweep,
and vice-versa.
(ix) Ensuring food security.
(x) Tapping new and renewable sources of energy.
1.8 The Committee held detailed deliberations on the various administrative and developmental issues
pertaining to the UT of Lakshadweep with various stakeholders during its meetings held in New Delhi and
also during its visit to Lakshadweep. The Committee found that there were several issues that were stuck
due to systemic inadequacies, poor capacity and bureaucratic delays. The Committee has addressed several
such issues in the succeeding chapter of this Report.

CHAPTER- II
ADMINISTRATIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL ISSUES
ECONOMIC ISSUES
2.1 Expansion of Tourism
2.1.1 T ourism is among the fastest growing industries in Lakshadweep and the single largest source of
potential revenue generation.
2.1.2 The Committee sought to know the plan of the UT Administration to expand and promote tourism in
Lakshadweep. The Ministry submitted that the Lakshadweep Tourism Policy had been finalized and notified
in the Lakshadweep Gazette on 4th March 2016. The tourism policy outlines the overall Vision, Mission and
Objectives of the Lakshadweep Tourism Department.
2.1.3 The Ministry also informed the Committee about the following steps that have been taken to implement
the Tourism Policy since its notification:-
(i) In order to augment tourism infrastructure, Bangaram Island Resort which was closed down
due to litigation, has been re-launched and is now fully operational;
(ii) Commencement of the ATR-72 flight recently, which replaced the previous ATR-48 flight of
Air India, has helped to mitigate connectivity constraints for tourists to a certain extent;
(iii) Cruise tourism was started on a pilot basis when one cruise liner “EUROPA” docked in
Lakshadweep wherein the staff of the Tourism Department, Society for Promotion of Nature
Tourism & Sports (SPORTS) and other agencies got a direct experience and exposure of
handling such a cruise liner. Another cruise liner EUROPA 2 is also expected to dock in the
near future;
(iv) ‘Sports fishing’ was also allowed on a pilot basis and the operations were mediated through
SPORTS, leading to more returns to local boat owners whose boats were hired by sports
fishing operators;
(v) Dive tourism was promoted at a road show in Mumbai. Lakshadweep diving academy is
training local youths and other outsiders for the role of dive instructors;
(vi) Human resource development is being done by sponsoring Lakshadweep students to undergo
tourism-related courses;
(vii) Lakshadweep administration has launched a Request for proposal for selection of a creative
agency for professional marketing and promotion of Lakshadweep tourism. Apart from
conducting National Minicoy Fest at Minicoy which has now become an annual feature,
Lakshadweep Fest was also conducted this year in Kavaratti to show-case the culture and the
traditions of Lakshadweep to the outer world.
(viii) Besides that, in order to open up Lakshadweep tourism for private players the following steps
were taken:-
(a) Detailed guidelines have been framed to regulate private investments in the areas of
tourist resorts, tourist homes etc.
3

4
(b) Tourism carrying capacity is being assessed by the National Centre for Sustainable
Coastal Management (NCSCM), an agency of the MoEF – as per the recommendations
of the Justice Raveendran Committee Report, and it is expected to submit the same by
May 2017. Once the Tourist Carrying Capacity study is completed, these guidelines
can be operationalized to open up private sector investment in tourism.
2.1.4 Apart from these measures, Tourist Home and Tourist Resort Guidelines for enhancing accommodation
arrangements was at the final stage and tourist accommodation would be augmented on the island of Kadamat.
Guidelines are also being framed for setting up of a Scuba Dive Centre and the operation of live-aboard dive
vessels. Agatti and Minicoy islands have been declared as immigration check posts and customs port for
facilitation of tourists. Operation of seaplanes for the transportation of tourists is also being explored. Also,
local candidates have been trained in Catering, Hotel Management and Water Sports for building the required
human resources for the tourism industry in Lakshadweep.
2.1.5 To build the capacity in the tourism sector, the Department of Tourism has allocated about ` 30 lakhs
for training of local candidates aimed towards Human Resource Development in the field of tourism. In the
financial year 2016-17, UTL Administration sponsored 29 candidates for various diploma and degree courses
in the tourism and hospitality sectors across top institutes of the country like IHM-Chennai, IHM-Trivandrum,
and Food Craft Institute at Ajmer by making a total expenditure of  `  32 Lakhs. The Department also
proposes to increase the scope and scale of these trainings in future.
2.1.6 Besides that, every year the Department of Tourism provides  `  1 Crore as grant-in-aid to the
Lakshadweep Diving Academy (LDA) for developing Lakshadweep as a diving destination. LDA has trained
over 1200 candidates in various scuba diving courses of Professional Association of Diving Instructors so
far. In the Calendar year 2016, a total of 301 candidates were trained in Diving. The Department of Tourism
also provides a grant-in-aid to SPORTS for its various activities. SPORTS also conducts in-service training
course for its staff.
2.1.7 The Committee takes note of the new initiatives taken by the UT Administration for promoting
tourism in Lakshadweep. The Committee, however, feels that the existing infrastructure is
inadequate and not conducive for the promotion of high-end luxury tourism, which requires significant
investment, both public and private, for the construction of new facilities and the upgradation of
existing ones. Substantial investment is also required to address the major weaknesses of
Lakshadweep islands such as the low carrying capacity of the islands, and transport and connectivity
bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
must pursue the National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management to complete its assessment
of tourist carrying capacity of Lakshadweep Islands in a time-bound manner and subsequently
initiate measures to open up Lakshadweep tourism for private investors in a regulated manner.
2.1.8 The Committee also notes that the growth of tourism in Lakshadweep is highly desirable as
it would not only generate employment opportunities but also bring foreign exchange to Lakshadweep.
However, the reckless and unsystematic growth may prove to be counter-productive by harming the
fragile ecosystem of the islands. Hence, the Committee feels that the tourism plan of the UT
Administration must strike a balance between realization of tourism potential and ecological
sustainability of the islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs must strive to develop the tourism in Lakshadweep on the development model adopted by

5
Maldives and Mauritius, both of which focus on high-end and low-volume luxury tourism, along
with continuing the current cruise-based tourism approach which would certainly help to regulate
the number of visitors to the islands and to generate substantial amount of revenue.
2.1.9 The Committee is aware of the water sports and underwater tourism potential of Lakshadweep
islands and feels that innovative marketing and promotional strategies must be adopted to establish
Lakshadweep as a global water sports attraction. The Committee recommends that while keeping
in view the fragile ecology the Ministry must come up with a specific long-term plan to develop
water sports and underwater travel and tourism in Lakshadweep in a sustainable manner that
would bring Lakshadweep distinctly on the global tourism map.
2.1.10 The Committee was also apprised by the UT Administration that the Society for Promotion of Nature
Tourism and Sports (SPORTS), a society established in 1982, under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, is
acting as a nodal agency for promoting tourism in Lakshadweep. The prime objective of the SPORTS is to
work for the development and upliftment of the Schedule Tribe community of UT of Lakshadweep by
promoting nature tourism and water sports.
2.1.11 The Committee was given to understand that the Lakshadweep Administration intends to convert
SPORTS into Lakshadweep Tourism Development Corporation (LTDC) as a wholly owned company of
Lakshadweep Administration registered under the Companies Act. It is felt that since SPORTS is a Society
registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860, it is not appropriate for promoting tourism in a larger way
due to its inherent limitations. It would be appropriate to convert the same into a fully government owned
company for better management, effective control and to fulfill various other legal requirements.
2.1.12 Moreover, the activities of SPORTS have increased many fold in the 30 years of its existence. The
pace and nature of tourism development in Lakshadweep has also changed over the years and the nature of
work has become more and more commercial. Besides, arranging the package tours, now SPORTS has to
undertake various activities like entering into a lease agreement with the lease owners, floating global tenders,
entering into a joint venture with the developer, liaison with various agencies for facilitating the visit of
luxury cruises and yachts, running the Lakshadweep Diving Academy and the Lakshadweep Institute of
Water Sports etc. LTDC when compared to SPORTS can be a more efficient form of organization to run
such commercial operations and liaise with other government agencies and private developers. A company
form of organization helps to get more sources of financing and attract more talent.
2.1.13 The Committee observes that most of the State Tourism Departments are having their own
corporations such as Maharashtra-MTDC, Delhi-DTTDC etc. which are engaged in the promotion
and development of the tourism sector and carrying out commercial activities that cannot be
undertaken by their Tourism Departments. The Committee therefore feels that it is necessary to
have a government controlled corporation in Lakshadweep, along similar lines, which would be
solely focused on the development and management of tourism.
2.1.14 The Committee appreciates the measures being taken for converting the Society for Promotion
of Nature Tourism and Sports into a Government owned Lakshadweep Tourism Development
Corporation (LTDC). The Committee feels that the said measure is all the more necessary in order
to expand the tourism sector in Lakshadweep. At the same time, the Committee also recommends
that the Ministry should make adequate financial provisions for LTDC once it gets incorporated and
provide it with necessary infrastructure and facilities.

6
2.2 Agriculture
2.2.1 Agriculture, along with fisheries, is the most widely prevalent economic activity in Lakshadweep.
Out of the total geographical area of 3,220 hectares, area cropped under coconut cultivation is 2,520
hectares. There are 10,285 agriculture holders with an average of 0.24 hectare per holder. Annually around
907 lakh coconuts are harvested of which 20% of the produce has been utilized for domestic consumption
and remaining the 80% are largely processed as copra which fetches high economic value.
2.2.2 The Committee was informed that the Administration was pushing for organic certification of coconuts
which would fetch a higher value. The steps being taken to improve the quality of coconut trees by the
Coconut Development Board (CDB) in Lakshadweep are as given below:-
Sl. No. Name of Scheme Description
1 Integrated Farming in Coconut 1. Laying out of demonstration plots in coconut garden:
Holdings for Production Improvement - Financial Assistance for establishing demonstration plots
for productivity improvement under cluster approach.
2. Organic manure unit:- Financial Assistance for
popularizing use of organic manure in the coconut
gardens.
2 Laying out of Demonstration plot Financial Assistance for establishing demonstration plots
under SCSP/PSP component for productivity improvement under tribal sub-plan on
cluster approach.
2.2.3 CDB is a statutory body established under the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India for the
integrated development of coconut cultivation and industry in the country with a focus on increasing
productivity and product diversification. With a view to accomplishing the objectives envisaged under The
Coconut Development Board Act, 1979, the Board has been formulating and implementing the following
schemes:-
(i) Production & Distribution of Planting Material;
(ii) Expansion of Area under Coconut;
(iii) Integrated Farming for Productivity Improvement;
(iv) T echnology Demonstration;
(v) Market Promotion & Statistics;
(vi) Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme;
(vii) Information and Information Technology;
(viii) Human Resource Development;
(ix) T echnology Mission on Coconut; and
(xi) Replanting and Rejuvenation of Coconut Gardens in Traditional States in India
2.2.4 The Committee is constrained to note that the Coconut Development Board (CBD) is

7
implementing only two schemes out of 10 schemes of CDB in Lakshadweep. The Committee feels
that the implementation of some of the other schemes of CDB like Technology Demonstration,
Market Promotion & Statistics, Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme and Scheme of Information and
Information Technology among others, can be particularly useful for the coconut farmers in
Lakshadweep. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs,
in consultation with the CDB, must explore the possibility of implementing the remaining schemes
of CDB to improve the quality, production, value-addition and marketing of the coconuts in
Lakshadweep.
2.2.5 The Committee feels that the UT Administration must take note of the old age and unplanned
natural growth of the coconut trees and recommends that the Administration must conduct age and
quality assessment of the coconut trees in Lakshadweep. It should also undertake measures for
scientific plantation of new and better quality coconut trees.
2.3 Fisheries
2.3.1 Fishery is the core economic activity in Lakshadweep. The sea around Lakshadweep is rich in
fishery resources. The present annual production is about 15,000 metric tonne (MT) which is hardly 12%
of the sustainable potential available in the Lakshadweep waters. The basic infrastructure available for
preserving the fish products are one flake ice unit of 1 tonne capacity, 6 units of cold storage of 1 tonne
capacity, 1 tunnel freezer of 3 tonne and 5 block ice plants of 10 tonne capacity. The Administration plans to
enhance fish production up to 50,000 MT, increase value addition and improve the available marketing
facilities.
2.3.2 The Committee desired to know the measures that have been taken to develop and promote the
fisheries sector in Lakshadweep. The Committee was informed about the major ongoing programmes for
promoting the fisheries sector, which are as under:-
(i) Strengthening of Fishing Fleet and Improvement of Craft;
(ii) Development of off shore Deep Sea Fisheries and Fishing Technology;
(iii) Development of Post-Harvest Fish Processing Facilities and Marketing;
(iv) Fisheries Co-operatives;
(v) Human Resources Development; and
(vi) W elfare of fishermen
2.3.3 Apart from the ongoing schemes of the Lakshadweep Administration, the Department had already
sent a proposal of  ` 6.79 crores for the development of fisheries sector in U.T. of Lakshadweep to the
National Fisheries Development Board under the ‘Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management
of Fisheries’ Scheme of Government of India.
2.3.4 The Lakshadweep Co-operative Marketing Federation (LCMF), an apex body for supplying various
articles to Lakshadweep Co-operative Societies and to market various products of Lakshadweep recently
entered into an agreement with an Indian Exporter, Accelerated Freeze Drying Company Ltd., Kochi, for
exporting the major Lakshadweep fishery product “Masmeen” (Boiled, smoked and sundried) to Sri Lanka

8
at a better rate. This Federation is funded by the Lakshadweep Administration in the form of a revolving
fund for the purpose of Masmeen procurement. The procurement of Masmeen has already started in the
months of February/March, 2017 itself. The Department of Fisheries, Lakshadweep Administration has
also, in a move to export chilled Tuna from Lakshadweep to Japan, imparted necessary training to local
fishermen in association with Accelerated Freeze Drying Company, Kochi on how to catch and prepare
chilled fish for export. The initial training in this regard has already been held on Agatti island.
2.3.5 The Committee was informed that a Buyer Seller Meet was organized at Kochi during March, 2016
to popularize the fishery products of Lakshadweep including Masmeen. The Buyer Seller Meet was mainly
arranged with intention to avoid middlemen in the trade and to get better value for their products. Value
addition of fish by means of fish pickle, tuna flakes etc. are being carried out in all the islands by Self Help
Groups. Apart from promoting value addition of fish, the Department of Fisheries also provided some
processing equipments to entrepreneurs, under National Agricultural Innovation Project, who come forward
to establish fish processing units in Kavaratti and Minicoy.
2.3.6 The Committee takes note of the huge potential of fish production in Lakshadweep but is
not satisfied with the existing quantum of production, which is just 12% of the estimated sustainable
fish production potential. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
necessary steps for the development of the fisheries sector in Lakshadweep like the procurement
of multi-day sophisticated fishing vessels, development of off-shore cold storage facilities and
establishment of fish processing centres. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that a
scientific approach for development of fisheries sector in Lakshadweep may be adopted at all stages
of fish production from fish catching and its subsequent handling to its storage, processing and
packaging. The Committee also recommends that better fishing equipment and training should be
provided to the fishermen and better deep freezing plants, canning facilities and fish processing
units be established on a priority basis.
2.3.7 The Committee observes that Lakshadweep has a tremendous potential for fish export,
especially Masmeen, and consistent measures are required to harness this potential. The Committee,
in this connection, recommends that the Ministry must chalk out a detailed strategy, in consultation
with the Marine Products Export Development Authority, for developing the export potential of
marine produce of Lakshadweep which would definitely improve the economy of Lakshadweep.
GOVERNANCE ISSUES
2.4 Availability of Subsidised Rice
2.4.1 The Committee, during its meeting held on 16th January, 2017 at New Delhi and also during its study
visit was apprised that after the implementation of National Food Security Act (NFSA), the amount of
subsidized rice allocated to Lakshadweep was decreased and an additional quantity of 100 metric tonne of
subsidized rice was required per month to supplement the quantity that was reduced. The Committee queried
the UT Administration regarding the measures being taken to supplement this shortfall of 100 metric tonne
to which the Ministry replied that it was facing genuine concerns in handling the additional requirement of
rice through e-auction. For the Open Market Sales Scheme (OMSS) the Administration has to participate in
the e-auction and has to place its competitive bid periodically whenever such e-auction is announced by the
Food Corporation of India with a minimum reserved price. The highest bidder gets the release of auctioned

9
rice. In this mechanism there is no guarantee or certainty of confirmed regular supply of rice on a monthly
basis and at a fixed price.
2.4.2 In view of that, the UT Administration had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution vide communication No.13/6/2015-CS (part)/316 dated 22.04.2017
with a request that the UT Administration of Lakshadweep be exempted from participating in the e-auction
and the additional requirement of 1200 MT of rice per annum be allocated to this Administration at a
minimum fixed reserved price for OMSS category. The reply from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food
& Public Distribution was still awaited.
2.4.3 The Committee is disappointed and dissatisfied with the reply of the UT Administration and
wonders as to why it was trying to fulfill the additional requirement of subsidized rice through Open
Market Sales Scheme (OMSS) where the selling rate of rice would definitely be higher than what is
offered under subsidized rice quota mandated by the National Food Security Act. It is unfortunate
that the minimum requirements of a population of barely 71,000 people of their staple food (rice)
cannot be met by the Government of India, thanks to its maze of rules and regulations. The Committee
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this matter with the Ministry
of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution and request it to make a special exemption for UT
of Lakshadweep and provide them an additional 100 metric tonnes of rice per month at the subsidized
rate. The Committee also recommends that, in the interim, the UT administration of Lakshadweep
must procure 100 MT Rice from open market and provide it to the people of Lakshadweep at
subsidized rate. This arrangement should continue until a permanent arrangement for the provision
of subsidized rice is made. The Committee further recommends that the interim arrangement
should be in place w.e.f. 1.8.2017.
2.5 Availability of Subsidized Sugar
2.5.1 The Committee, in its discussion at Kavaratti, was apprised about the issue of reduced allocation of
subsidized sugar by restricting the beneficiaries from 71,000 persons (estimated total current population of
Lakshadweep) to only 4500 who fall under Antyodaya category. To offset this reduction, a subsidy of ` 1 to
1.5 crore per year is required. In this regard, the UTL apprised that there has been a change in the policy
directions of the Ministry with regard to the distribution of PDS Sugar. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food & Public Distribution vide their letter No.5-5/2013-CC-II dated 22.03.2017 informed that, at present the
Central Government is reimbursing sugar subsidy to State/UTs @  ` 18.50/- per kg. limited to the quantity
based on their existing fixed quota (based on the 2011 Census). The coverage of the scheme for FY2017-2018
onwards is under examination and further directions from the Ministry in this regard are still awaited.
2.5.2 The Committee takes note of the reply of the UT Administration of Lakshadweep with regards
to the change in the policy direction of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution.
In this regard, the Committee was informed that the said Ministry would reimburse sugar subsidy
to UT as per the existing fixed quota of 115 Metric Tonne (MT) per month (and an additional annual
festival quota of 22 MT) and any change in policy would occur from FY 2017-18 onwards. However,
an apprehension was expressed that the distribution of PDS sugar may be reduced in the upcoming
policy change. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT Administration must push its
case for reimbursement of sugar subsidy as per the existing quota, even beyond FY 2017-18, by
granting it a special exemption in the policy change which is at present under examination. The

10
Committee also recommends that the UT administration of Lakshadweep must understand the
importance of providing subsidized sugar to the entire population of Lakshadweep, and therefore in
the interim, must procure the requisite quantum of sugar from open market and provide it to the
people of Lakshadweep at a subsidized rate . The Committee feels that the additional amount of
````` 1-1.5 crore is a small amount that can be easily borne by the UT administration of Lakshadweep.
2.6 LPG Coverage
2.6.1 The Committee sought details of existing LPG coverage in Lakshadweep and measures that were
being taken to achieve universal coverage. The UT Administration informed that LPG distribution in the UTL
is done by the Lakshadweep Cooperative Marketing Federation (LCMF), the sole agency, through the primary
Island Co-operative Supply & Marketing Societies (ICS&MS) in the islands. The LPG godowns are run,
managed, controlled, and operated by the concerned Island Co-operative Societies (ICS&MS).
2.6.2 At present the required infrastructure under the prescribed norms for LPG distribution systems in
Lakshadweep is available only in two Islands namely Kavaratti & Minicoy. The status of LPG godowns in
other islands is as follows:-
(i) In Amini and Kadmath, the construction work of godowns has been completed and the
formalties of the Indian Oil Corporation are being completed.
(ii) In Androth, work order for the construction of godown has been issued.
(iii) In Kiltan, construction was completed but pre-construction approval from the Chief Controller
of Explosive was pending.
(iv) In Kalpeni, construction of the godown has been completed but the land owner has raised a
dispute and locked the premises.
(v) In Agatti and Chetlat, land has been identified but acquisition is pending due to necessary
compliance with the provisions of new Land Acquisition Act.
(vi) In Bitra, handing over of suitable land from SDO is awaited.
2.6.3 The Committee observes that apart from Kavaratti and Minicoy, LPG godown construction
and operation is still pending in all the other inhabited islands. The lack of godowns on these islands
has affected the supply chain of distribution of LPG cylinders to the people, which in turn, must
have caused great hardship to the people of Lakshadweep. The Committee therefore recommends
that the construction of new godowns in all the inhabited islands must be completed at the earliest
and adequate stock of cylinders should be maintained in the existing ones to meet the demand of
LPG cylinders. Where godowns have already been constructed but not used for one reason or another,
the UTL Administration must use its powers under various laws and take over the godowns as an
emergency measure (pending resolution of any dispute) and put the godown to use immediately.
2.6.4 The Committee also sought to know the number of households that have benefitted from free LPG
connections to be provided under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana and whether the Ministry has conducted
any drive to identify the households eligibile under this scheme. The Ministry replied that the persons eligible
under this scheme in Kavaratti & Minicoy have been identified, there are seven households in Minicoy and
six in Kavaratti, and their details have been sent to the Ministry of Petroleum and to the state level coordinator

11
HPCL on 18th March, 2017. In this connection, the officers of IOC visited Kavaratti on 28th and 29th
March, 2017 for the completion of formalities. Final orders for release of benefits under the Ujjwala scheme
are expected shortly from IOC.
2.6.5 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the UT Lakshadweep Administration pursuant
to the suggestion given by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs in its meeting held on 16th January, 2017 for identifying the beneficiaries under Pradhan
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. The Committee observes that the beneficiaries in the two islands have
already been identified. The Committee however is not satisfied with the number of households
that were found to be eligible under this Scheme i.e. only seven in Minicoy and six in Kavaratti,
which in the Committee’s view are very few and by this the Administration would not be able to
achieve 100% LPG coverage. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that instead of
identifying the eligible households under the Scheme, the Administration must try to identify
households that do not have LPG connections or cannot afford LPG but are not necessarily below
poverty line and make efforts to grant all such households free LPG connections under this Scheme.
The Committee understands that a special exemption may be required for doing so and recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs may request the Hon’ble Prime Minister to direct the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas to grant such exemption under Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana for
Lakshadweep. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that a special drive must be conducted
in all inhabited islands to identify such households and grant them free LPG connection under the
said Scheme before the end of September 2017.
2.7 Large Number of Vacant Posts in Administration
2.7.1 The Committee during its study visit to Lakshadweep was informed that a huge number of posts,
nearly 1000, were vacant which was affecting the functioning of the Administration. The Committee sought
to know the measures that were being taken to fill these posts and the timeline for filling up these posts,
especially the ones that were within the Administrator’s powers. The UT Administration submitted that
around 750 of the 1000 posts were within the powers of the Administrator and active measures are being
taken to fill up those. Recruitment for around 130 posts in the Education Department is already being
conducted and the recruitment for Indian Reserve Battalion will be conducted soon. The UT Administration
further informed that action for filling up 750 vacancies in its various Departments is under process
(Department wise detailed list is enclosed as Annexure – II). The above vacancies are proposed to be filled
by 31st December, 2017, subject to no legal issues.
2.7.2 The Committee is not convinced by the evasive reply of the UT Administration with regards
to the filling up of vacant posts under the jurisdiction of the UT administration. The Committee
therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry must ensure that the recruitment of the posts
within the powers of the Administrator are completed within the next six months and the Committee
should be apprised about the status of the same by 30.11.2017. The Committee also recommends
that the administration should also pursue the other recruitment agencies for initiating the
recruitment for the vacant posts which are not within the powers of the Administrator at the earliest.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
2.8 Drinking Water and Sanitation
2.8.1 Providing safe and adequate drinking water in Lakshadweep islands is a persistent challenge. The

12
natural source of drinking water is ground water. The quality of ground water is limited and is contaminated
due to intrusion of sea water and lack of proper sanitation network. In order to meet the requirement of
drinking water, the Department has commissioned Low Temperature Thermal Desalination Plants of one
lakh litre capacity in the islands of Kavaratti, Minicoy & Agatti. In addition, there are 3211 rainwater harvesting
tanks varying from 5000 litre to 100,000 litre capacities. In the remaining inhabited islands, by the year
2020, the Ministry plans to install and commission desalination plants in 6 islands of Androth, Kalpeni,
Amini, Kadmat, Kiltan and Chetlat and a reverse osmosis plant at Bitra where the population is less than 300.
The Ministry also plans to identify locations to construct rain water harvesting structures to harvest the rain
water to the extent possible.
2.8.2 The Committee desired to know the status of establishment of desalination plants in the remaining
six islands to help resolve the acute drinking water problem of the islands. The Ministry replied that approval
for the installation of desalination plants in six remaining islands at an estimated expenditure of  ` 226.01
Crore is at an advance stage. Reply to the clarifications sought by the Standing Finance Committee, chaired
by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MoDWS) held on 13.07.2016, was submitted to the
Ministry of Home Affairs on 03.02.2017 vide letter F.No,106/14/2015-S3 dated 13.02.2017. In the SFC
meeting held on 27.03.2017, the Lakshadweep Administration was asked to further submit the item-wise
cost escalation for the years 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2017. The SFC meeting was again held on 1st May 2017
at MoDWS to consider the proposal. However, the SFC sought clarification on the applicability of Land
Survey Records in the preparation of estimate for civil structures on the land for 6 LTTD plants and some
other issues. Clarifications in this regard have been submitted to the Ministry of Home Affairs on 13.05.2017
along with a copy to MoDWS.
2.8.3 As per the DPR provided by National Institute of Ocean Technology, timeline for the commissioning
of the 6 proposed plant is 4 years subject to the SFC approval.
2.8.4 The Committee observes that the plan to install six desalination plants in the remaining
islands is facing delay since 2013 due to procedural issues as the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation is yet to provide the financial approval to the proposal. The entire issue has been caught
in a web of bureaucratic procedures which is totally unacceptable. The Committee understands that
financial matters like cost escalation must be addressed to avoid audit objections later on however
the procedural issues should not become a pretext to delay the decision making process. The
Committee therefore recommends that in the interest of the health of the people of Lakshadweep
the Ministry of Home Affairs must push for an early decision on the grant of financial approval by
the Standing Finance Committee, and in any event before 15.08.2017.
2.9 Biodegradable Toilets
2.9.1 The Ministry submitted that sewage disposal is one of the most serious environmental problems in
Lakshadweep due to the porous nature of the soil and the low depth of the ground water table (1 to 2.5m
from the surface), due to which the discharge from the soak pits and septic tanks contaminate the ground
water which is the primary source of drinking water.
2.9.2 The Committee sought to know the measures taken by the Ministry to resolve this issue and promote
installation and usage of biodegradable toilets. The Ministry submitted that administrative approval for the
installation of 21 bio-toilets based on a Defence Research Development Organisation (DRDO) technology
had been accorded in 2010. Subsequently, 21 bio-digesters (3 at Kavaratti and 2 each in all other inhabited

13
islands) were installed in the year of 2010. Based on a ‘satisfactory’ report of these 21 bio-digesters,
Lakshadweep Administration decided to install 12,000 Bio-digesters in ten different islands. M/s Mohan Rail
Components, Kapurthala was subsequently awarded the contract for the installation of bio-digesters in
Lakshadweep Islands. Despite being given multiple chances and extension of timeline to complete the project,
the vendor completed only 13% of the supply order. Moreover, the vendor did not install any new unit after
December 2014 and did not report any physical progress. Furthermore, routine maintenance of the installed
units was also not being taken up by the vendor. In the Monitoring Committee Meeting held on 18 February,
2016, the vendor was directed to submit the detailed action plan for fabrication, transportation and installation
of Biotoilet in all islands by the first week of March, 2016. The vendor submitted an action plan for the
installation of bio-toilets in the last Monitoring Committee Meeting held on 22.04.2016.
2.9.3 Considering the reluctance and inactivity of the vendor, a performance notice was issued to it and
the reply to the notice was found to be unsatisfactory. Due to non-fulfillment of the contract agreement, the
contract with M/s Mohan Rail Components Pvt. Ltd. was terminated in September 2016 and the bank
guarantee and security deposit were en-cashed.
2.9.4 The Competent authority has ordered the constitution of a committee to evaluate the performance of
the existing Bio-toilets installed in the islands of Kavaratti, Androth and Bitra. The Committee will be collecting
user feedback in written format from 30-40% of the users in these islands and will also seek inputs from the
DRDO, Gwalior who is the technology provider. After collecting the feedback, the committee consisting of
representatives of DRDO, Gwalior and the Officers designated from the Lakshadweep Administration will
submit an analytical report to the Monitoring Committee for considering the future course of action. The
action is being initiated on priority.
2.9.5 The Committee is astonished by the loss of precious time due to the non-fulfillment of the
contract for the installation of 12,000 bio-toilets by the selected vendor. The Committee observes
that the vendor had stopped installation of bio-toilets three years ago and since then the UT
Administration is locked in a battle with the vendor. The Committee feels that the Administration
could have adopted a decisive approach and made parallel efforts to identify other vendors during
these three years. The Committee recommends that the UT Administration must urgently initiate
renewed efforts to identify a new vendor for installation of bio-toilets and the prior experience of
such large-scale installation should be made a mandatory criterion for selection of the vendor. The
Committee also notes that installation of Bio-toilets is the only feasible solution to the problem of
sewage disposal in Lakshadweep and recommends that sufficient number of bio-toilets may be
installed at the earliest. The Committee desires to be apprised about the revised time line for
completion of the project and the progress made in this regard.
2.10 Public Health and Medical Facilities
2.10.1 T welve posts of specialists of Central Health Service have been sanctioned for the Hospitals in the
UT. Except one post each of a Physician and a Gynecologist, which are held by native officials, the remaining
posts are vacant. These posts are under the Central Health Service and they are to be filled by the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW).
2.10.2 The Committee, during its meeting on the subject, was apprised that several posts of specialist
doctors in Lakshadweep Islands have been lying vacant for the past 13 years. The Ministry was queried
about the measures taken to fill these posts and why the rule pertaining to compulsory posting was not

14
invoked to fill these vacant posts. In its reply, MHA submitted that the issue of posting specialist doctors
was taken up with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on various occasions. However, it was observed
that any specialist posted by the Government of India was not willing to stay at Lakshadweep. As an interim
arrangement, MoHFW was deputing specialists on rotation basis to Indira Gandhi Hospital, Kavaratti for a
period of 90 days. This arrangement also did not work well and the matter was brought to notice of the
Ministry several times. The 90 days deputation of specialists was not effective due to an inordinate delay in
reporting by the specialists, non-availability of requisite team of specialists at a given time and frequent
deferral and cancellation of posting orders.
2.10.3  In order to address the issue, an attempt was also made by the Administration to hire specialists on
contractual basis under National Health Mission which also did not yield the desired results. The Lakshadweep
administration then notified ten posts of specialists to be hired on contract basis vide employment Notice
dated 18.06.2015 and 22.09.2015. One General Surgeon and Pathologist attended the interview. However,
the appointed General Surgeon and Pathologist resigned from the post within 4 months of engagement.
2.10.4  In order to ensure minimum specialty services in disciplines like Obstetrics & Gynaecology,
Paediatrics, Anaesthesia, General Surgery and Medicine to carry out surgeries and other procedures, the
UTL administration proposes to enter into a PPP model with IGH Kavaratti, GH Minicoy and CHC Androth
and Amini on the same lines as those existing in RGSH Agatti under which services of twenty posts of
specialist doctors for these hospitals will be outsourced.
2.10.5  During the meeting of the Committee, it was suggested that Lakshadweep residents working elsewhere
in the mainland as specialist doctors may be adjusted against these posts. However, in the deliberations on
the issue during the study visit of the Committee, the UT Administration informed that it was able to identify
only two such doctors and even their relocation was not possible as the rules concerned do not allow that.
The Lakshadweep Administrator suggested grant of approval for ad-hoc appointments which would enable
the Administration to attract a number of doctors. The Committee sought comments of the MHA on the
matter and the official concerned explained that the MHA had taken up the matter with the MoHFW but due
to shortage of specialists throughout the country invoking compulsory posting rule was not feasible as it
would create a shortage elsewhere.
2.10.6  The Committee was also informed during the study visit that medical quota seats provided by
Government of India for students of Lakshadweep have been reduced from 13 to 5 from 2015-16 onwards.
The Ministry was asked to submit the reasons for this; however, no satisfactory reply was given.
2.10.7  The Committee is anguished by the lackadaisical approach of the Government towards the
medical requirements of the people of Lakshadweep where several posts of specialist doctors have
been lying vacant for the past 13 years and no fruitful effort has gone into resolving the issue. The
Committee takes serious note of the fact that the doctors are either unwilling to come to Lakshadweep
or soon resign from their posts to go back to the mainland. The Committee finds that this is a gross
failure on the part of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare which could not fill up the vacancies
despite having the powers to invoke rules pertaining to compulsory posting.
2.10.8  The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make all
out efforts to resolve the issue by either relaxing the rules and empowering the Administrator of
UTL to make ad-hoc appointments or by pursuing the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to
invoke the compulsory posting rule and depute sufficient number of specialist doctors to Lakshadweep

15
at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that, meanwhile, the MHA must allocate adequate
funds to the UT of Lakshadweep for the purpose of outsourcing services of specialist doctors. The
Committee also recommends that the Government should try to provide special allowances and
incentives to candidates who are willing to work in Lakshadweep.
2.10.9 The Committee also recommends that the MHA must pursue the medical recruitment agencies
and the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to incorporate a clause in the Recruitment Rules for
mandatory posting to Lakshadweep without any exception and any reluctance on the part of doctors
may be a sufficient ground for their dismissal from service.
2.10.10  The Committee is also anguished to note that the medical quota seats of Lakshadweep,
which is already suffering from inadequacy of doctors, has been reduced from 13 to 5 from 2015-16
onwards. The Committee feels that this indicates the Government’s insensitive approach towards
Lakshadweep and seems unjustified. Moreover, the Ministry was unable to provide any satisfactory
response on this measure. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should take up this issue with the Ministry concerned and pursue it for a rollback of this measure
and a restoration of the previous quota of medical seats for Lakshadweep.
2.11 Universal Health Insurance
2.11.1 The Committee also enquired about the coverage of health insurance in Lakshadweep and by when
will the Ministry be able to achieve Universal health insurance. The UT Administration replied that it was
sincerely implementing a Health Insurance Scheme that covers around 20% population of Lakshadweep i.e.
around 15,000 people, apart from the nearly 30,000 Nos. of Government servants who are eligible for
Government health insurance scheme and Universal health Insurance is definitely the way forward after a
year or so. However, the insurance program was still in its nascent stage and a thorough claim and performance
evaluation needs to be done before expanding the ambit of the program.
2.11.2 The Committee accepts the assertion of the UT Administration that a thorough evaluation of
the health insurance program is necessary in order to universalize the benefits of the program.
However, the Committee observes that out of a total population of around 65,000 almost 45,000
(existing 15,000 beneficiaries and 30,000 Government servants) were already covered under one or
the another health insurance scheme and only around 20,000 people were left out from the ambit of
the insurance coverage. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that an evaluation of the
health insurance programme should be carried out at the earliest and necessary action should be
taken immediately to achieve Universal Health Insurance in Lakshadweep.
2.12 Medical equipment and skilled manpower
2.12.1 During its study visit to Lakshadweep, the Committee was informed that while the availability of
medical equipment was not an issue, its operation, maintenance and servicing was a big issue due to lack of
skilled manpower on the islands and reluctance of suppliers to come to Lakshadweep. To overcome this
issue, UTL is exploring the possibility of entering into maintenance contracts to make it mandatory for the
companies to provide service on time for the equipment that malfunctions. The Committee also suggested
the Administration to explore the possibility of leasing medical equipment instead of buying it.
2.12.2 The Committee is unhappy to note that despite the availability of medical equipment, its
operability and maintenance were limiting its application and utility. The Committee feels that

16
leasing of equipment and maintenance contracts can resolve this issue to a certain extent. The
Committee therefore recommends that efforts must be made to lease medical equipment along
with a maintenance contract. While leasing the Administration should also make it a condition that
a certain number of permanent Lakshadweep residents should be trained for operating/handling
the equipment by the lessor or the supplier of the equipment before concluding the lease/purchase.
2.13 Education
2.13.1 Lakshadweep has an overall literacy rate of 92%. The Ministry informed that emphasis is given on
achieving universal access to quality education and skills. All existing schools are to be provided with digital
labs, digital connectivity, smart class rooms, e-library etc. The Administration plans to establish a vocational
higher secondary school for promoting skill development and a sports school with boarding facilities for
promoting sports. There is also a plan to establish an extension centre of a Central/National University for
uplifting the higher education opportunities, especially for women, in the UT. Streamlining of District Institute
of Educational Training (DIET) is also required to orient the teachers with the curriculum frame work,
educational technologies etc.
2.13.2 The Committee sought details of funds required to equip all schools with digital labs, digital connectivity,
smart class rooms, e-library etc. The Ministry submitted that an amount of  ` 3.87 Crores is required in the
first year and  ` 3.42 Crores in each subsequent year to provide digital connectivity through V-SAT links
under Vidhya Vahini Project. For setting up of 10 smart class rooms the total cost comes up to ` 1.30 Crores
while an amount of  ` 41.25 Lakhs is required for setting up e-libraries in each of the 11 senior secondary
schools.
2.13.3 The Committee takes note of the amount of expenditure required to establish digital labs,
internet connectivity, smart classrooms and e-library in various schools of Lakshadweep. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry must provide adequate funds to Lakshadweep
Administration for the purpose. The Committee also observes that promoting education is one of
the focus areas under the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy and therefore recommends that
UT Administration may seek funds from the corporate sector under their CSR initiatives.
2.13.4 The Committee, during its study visit to Lakshadweep, was informed that there was a scholarship
programme in the mainland and another specifically in Kerala under which students of Lakshadweep can
enroll in various courses in several universities in which the seats are reserved for them. However, there was
discrimination between the sponsored and the nonsponsored candidates with respect to the amount of
scholarship. While the sponsored candidate is eligible for reimbursement of the entire amount of expenses
towards the course, the nonsponsored candidate i.e. the candidate who manages to get admission on his/her
own, is eligible for only partial reimbursement. Moreover, several new generation courses like maritime
courses are not listed in the scholarship rules due to which the students have to bear the full cost of
education despite being otherwise eligible for the scholarship.
2.13.5 On being queried, the UT Administration replied that there are two types of seats - sponsored and
non-sponsored. The Candidates sponsored by the UTL, who get admitted to seats reserved in GoI Universities
and Colleges, get full scholarship of tuition fee as well as boarding and lodging. Even in case of non-
sponsored candidates, the reimbursement of tuition fee is provided at the rates stipulated by the GoI which
ranges from ` 1800 to ` 3000. However, for the non-sponsored candidates, who get admitted in the self-
financing courses, the boarding and lodging charges are quite high and are therefore not reimbursed. Even

17
the tuition fee in the self financed courses is very high and a scholarship at the rates mandated by the GoI
can only cover a very small part of the total amount. The UT Administration, however, submitted that
meritorious candidates who qualify in prestigious national examinations are provided full scholarship that
covers all the expenses.
2.13.6 The Committee is aware that most of the Lakshadweep students pursue their higher education
in Kerala. The Committee feels that if UTL Administration can construct and maintain hostels in
selected higher education destinations, especially in Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and Kozhikode
cities of Kerala, this can help to eliminate the boarding and lodging costs of the students. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry must identify such locations where a majority
of Lakshadweep students regularly pursue their higher education and explore the possibility of
establishing hostels at these locations.
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES
2.14 T elecommunications and Data Connectivity
2.14.1 UT Administration informed the Committee that as per the current bandwidth availability, a total of
102 mega bits per second is allocated to the UT of Lakshadweep for all its communication needs. This
bandwidth is not enough for optimal mobile and data connectivity. The mobile network is very congested
resulting in call drops, failed calls, denial of service and other problems. The data services offered by BSNL
are also overloaded because of a large number of smart phones that results in poor network service. This
has created a digital divide between the islands and the mainland and has hampered the implementation of
e-governance and provision of online services to the public. The UT Administration plans to obtain the
approval of Government of India for the project of submarine optical fibre cable based connectivity between
the mainland and islands and among the islands, augment the bandwidth available for Lakshadweep by at
least 200% through V-SA T based connectivity, rollout Electronic System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM),
skilling at least 500 people and establishment of e-office.
2.14.2 The Committee sought to know the status of the proposal of submarine Optical Fibre Cable (OFC)
between mainland and islands and its projected cost and timeline of implementation. The UT Administration
replied that the capital expenditure of submarine optical fibre links is beyond the funding abilities of the
Administration and it has been, therefore, pursuing the case with the Ministry of Communication and
Information Technology which intimated that the work of preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) has
been awarded to Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd (TCIL) vide their letter dated 17.11.2016 for
the submarine OFC connectivity between mainland India (Kochi) and six islands of Lakshadweep viz.
Kavaratti, Agatti, Androth, Amini, Kalpeni and Minicoy. Further, future bandwidth requirement of 7.56 Gbps
forecasted by TRAI for backhaul shall be met through this project. The estimated expenditure/cost as per
TRAI recommendations dated 22.4.2014 is about ` 468 crore. The DPR is awaited from TCIL and the exact
project cost would be known on submission of DPR by TCIL. The project has been targeted to be implemented
by December, 2019.
2.14.3 The Committee is concerned about poor state of telecom and data connectivity in the
Lakshadweep islands and feels that the benefits of digital revolution are yet to penetrate significantly
in this geographically isolated Union Territory of India. The Committee agrees with the UT
Administration that the quantum of capital expenditure required is beyond its financial capacity,
however, the Committee observes that delayed implementation of the project would only lead to

18
higher capital expenditure in future. Moreover, provision of a secure and robust means of
communication in Lakshadweep is all the more necessary in view of the strategic importance of the
islands and, in the Committee’s view, the submarine optical fibre connectivity is the only long term
solution to resolve the connectivity problem of the islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the Department of Telecommunication for an early
implementation of the submarine optical fibre project and the funds from Universal Service
Obligation Fund may be sanctioned to cover the capital as well as operational expenditure of the
project.
2.15 Renewable Sources of Energy
2.15.1 Electricity generation in Lakshadweep islands is mainly through 11 Diesel Generating (DG) power
houses having 46 DG sets with an installed capacity of generating 21,910 KWH and 11 solar power plants
with an installed capacity of generating 2150 KWH. The Ministry informed that it envisages 24x7 supply
of power generated through renewable sources of energy by tapping the potential of solar energy and
biomass.
2.15.2 The Committee desired to know the measures that have been taken to harness renewable energy
sources available in Lakshadweep and the challenges in expanding the use of solar energy. The Committee
was informed that paucity of land was the biggest challenge. To overcome this challenge UT Administration
is working on the possibility of installing rooftop solar panels on both public and private buildings.
2.15.3 The Ministry informed the Committee that solar power plants of 1.9 MW combined capacity have
been installed in various islands of the Union Territory. The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy Sources
(MNRE) has allotted a target of installing 10 MW rooftop solar power plants in Lakshadweep by the year
2022. In this regard, Central Electronics Ltd., a PSU, has already surveyed rooftop of Government offices/
institutions in five islands to assess the capacity of solar rooftop plants to be accommodated in each building.
It was learnt that two more islands would be surveyed and a DPR would be submitted to MNRE. The
implementation of these projects is expected to commence shortly. Implementation of rooftop projects in
domestic sector would be taken care of by Lakshadweep Energy Development Agency (LEDA) for which
tendering process is being initiated to identify the channel partners of the Ministry. Additionally, the feasibility
of setting up of solar panels in the lagoon is also being explored. A proposal received in this regard has been
forwarded to the Ministry concerned for technical and financial evaluation.
2.15.4 The Committee is well aware of the acute problem of limited sources of energy and power-
generation in Lakshadweep. The existing power generation through diesel is both costly and not
environment friendly, and is therefore unsustainable in the long run. The Committee notes that
steps are being taken for installation of rooftop solar power panels on both public and private
buildings. However generation through such panels may not be sufficient to reduce the dependency
on diesel power. The Committee also notes the proposal for floating solar panels on lagoons and
feels that the UT Administration can make use of the abundant lagoon area available in the
Lakshadweep islands for installation of floating solar power panels. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
conducting an early technical feasibility study and financial evaluation of the proposal to install
floating solar power panels and the UT Administration may be directed to identify all islands where
there is a possibility to implement this proposal.

19
2.16 Civil Aviation
2.16.1 The Committee was given to understand that lack of adequate civil aviation infrastructure and services
is a major reason for backwardness of Lakshadweep. Presently, only Air India provides direct air connectivity
between Kochi and Agatti through ATR-72 aircraft. Besides, Lakshadweep UT administration provides
helicopter services for limited intra-island connectivity and emergency evacuations. The test flight for
introducing seaplane service has been conducted and was found to be successful. Agatti Island is the only
island that has an airport with a small runway of 1204 m. The length of the runway and the infrastructure of
airport are in urgent need of upgradation.
2.16.2 The Ministry had informed the Committee that there was a project on the anvil to expand the runway
at Agatti Aerodrome from the existing length of 1204m to 1725m. Presently, ATR Aircraft operate with
payload restrictions and the Lakshadweep Administration proposed extension of runway for operation of
ATR aircraft with full payload. Considering the limitation of land, it was decided to extend runway to 1500m
by extending present runway by 200m towards north and 90m towards south without dislocation of
infrastructures already created for operation of ATR aircraft and accordingly surveys were carried out by
the UTL Administration and the AAI. However, subsequent to the meeting taken by Secretary, Civil Aviation
on 18.02.2013, AAI prepared a revised Master Plan of Agatti Airport for operation of Q-400 type of aircraft
with full load instead of operation of ATR type aircraft. In the revised plan, runway is proposed to be
extended to 1725 metres which requires additional land of 17.6 acres at Agatti for extension of runway and
construction of allied infrastructures and 0.5 acres at Kalpitti Island for installation of navigational equipments.
A team from the AAI carried out the inspection of land from 22nd to 23rd July, 2013 and observed that
demolition of several structures of resorts, houses etc. was required.
2.16.3 The Administrator had already accorded “in principle” approval for acquisition of 73,280 sq. metres
of land at Agatti and the Department concerned submitted request for acquisition of land in Agatti for
extension of the airport. However, acquisition process was delayed due to promulgation of ‘Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Re-settlement Act, 2013' implemented
with effect from 1.1.2014 which required certain clarification from the Ministry of Rural Development,
submission of the requisition form along with Social Impact Assessment, a fresh Administrative approval
and fresh submission of necessary documents in original. However, recently the Administration, considering
the paucity of land and the importance of land in the northward side for tourism purpose, also considered
examination of the idea for extension of Airport exclusively towards Kalpitti island (instead of Northward
expansion) and the AAI was requested to examine the proposal and identify the land requirement accordingly.
In this regard, the Indian Navy has also expressed interest in expansion of the runway towards southward
side.
2.16.4 The Committee is disappointed to observe the delay in extension of runway at Agatti aerodrome
which has hampered the expansion of air connectivity options to Lakshadweep islands. The Committee
is not convinced by the intended utility of the proposed extension plan as it would only allow Q400
type aircraft which does not offer much advantage over the existing ATR-72 aircraft in terms of
enhancing seating capacity or other parameters. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should conduct intensive inspections and prepare an extension plan with a long term view which can
allow Airbus A320/Boeing 737 type standard aircraft to ply regularly so as to enable flight operations
by private airlines as well. In the short term, the Committee recommends that the frequency
of existing flights may be increased and a flight should be made available twice a day, seven days

20
a week, especially during the peak tourist season, to meet the demand for higher passenger
capacity.
2.16.5 The Committee also notes the revised extension plan and feels that the extension of runway
towards Kalpitti Island should be preferred as it does not disturb the existing structures and the
Ministry may also explore the possibility of constructing a bridge on sea to expand the runway by at
least 750 metre to a total length of 1900 metre so as to allow operations of standard aircraft. The
Committee also recommends that the extension plan may also take into consideration the possibility
of international flight operations to facilitate charter flights and export related activities.
2.16.6 The Committee also sought to know the status of development of night landing facilities in all helipads
of Lakshadweep. The Ministry apprised that a team consisting of Pawan Hans Limited (PHL), AAI, DGCA
and UTL had visited all the islands for a preliminary inspection of requirements for night landing facility in all
islands. The team submitted their report recommending a second joint inspection for the purpose. Accordingly,
the UTL had again requested the PHL to send a team consisting of PHL, DGCA and AAI for the second
inspection on night landing facility. The PHL was also requested to attend a joint meeting at Kavaratti in this
regard. The convenience of PHL and DGCA is, however, awaited.
2.16.7 The Committee in its meeting held on 16th January, 2017 deliberated on the issue of relaxing rules
for Lakshadweep to allow Visual Flight Rules (VFR) for Night Landing Operation in times of exigencies.
The representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted that at present only Instrument Flight Rules
(IFR) is allowed, however, DGCA is working on the proposal of allowing VFR based night landing. The
representatives of Pawan Hans Ltd. submitted that the helicopters and pilots who are rated for VFR based
night landing are available. However, the Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted that since this required a
change in the policy and rules, therefore, no specific timeline could be provided.
2.16.8 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure on the slow progress on the project
for providing night landing facility in Lakshadweep. The Committee feels that establishing
Instrument Flight Rules based night landing at all helipads would require significant amount of
time and costs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must explore the
option of allowing Visual Flight Rules based night landing, at least in times of emergency evacuations
and medical exigencies. The Committee therefore requests the Ministry of Home Affairs to pursue
the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to amend the rules for night landing operations and
allow VFR for remote locations like Lakshadweep where land availability is an issue and compliance
with IFR requirements is prohibitively costly and not feasible.
2.16.9 The Committee also sought to know what alternative means of connectivity, such as seaplanes, were
being explored by U.T. Administration. The Lakshadweep Administration in its reply submitted that it was
planning to introduce seaplane service between mainland and Islands as well as for inter-island connectivity
for the purpose of tourist transportation. Lakshadweep Administration published an Expression of Interest
(EoI) vide notice dated 15.06.2015 for operation of seaplane for tourists visiting Lakshadweep. In response
to EoI, three firms submitted EOIs and out of these three firms, two firms have qualified in the EoI. After
analysing the EoIs, the Department asked the firms to submit the financial model/models on which the firm
would like to operate seaplane Services in Lakshadweep. The financial models submitted by both parties
involved substantial part of the costs to be underwritten by the Lakshadweep Administration. Meanwhile,
another proposal was received by UTL Administration from ‘Sea Bird’ where they intend to operate on a
commercial basis (without UTL Administration under-writing any operational expenditure). UTL Administration

21
will have to provide only the basic infrastructural facilities and permissions/clearances. For this, UTL
Administration asked DGCA to clarify on infrastructural requirements for seaplane base and water drome
etc., as well as any other clearances required. DGCA has submitted its reply, stating that:-
(i) Waterdromes operator has to obtain security clearance from MHA and environmental clearance
from MoEF.
(ii) For infrastructure, regulations are covered in CAR Section 3 Series C Part IX para 8.
(iii) Aircraft operator has to ensure compliance with CAR Section 3 Series C Part IX and
certification requirements as per AOC Manual CAP-3100, apart from airworthiness
requirements.
(iv) Detailed SOPs are required from waterdrome operator and sea plane operator.
2.16.10  The Committee was informed that the Director, Tourism UTLA had recently visited Andaman and
Nicobar Islands for studying the operation of seaplane Services in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and submitted
a Report. After analysis of the Report, Lakshadweep Administration has requested the MHA for issuing ‘No
Objection Certificate’ for starting seaplane services in Lakshadweep islands.
2.16.11  The Committee is of the considered view that air connectivity needs to be strengthened
urgently by exploring alternative means like seaplanes. The Committee, taking note of the progress
on the project of operationalising seaplanes, however, feels that the efforts need to be intensified to
achieve an early operationalisation of seaplanes. The Committee therefore strongly recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must grant a ‘No Objection Certificate’ immediately for starting
the seaplane services at the earliest and the UT Administration may be directed to complete all the
other formalities in a timely manner.
2.17 Shipping
2.17.1 Shipping services are the lifeline of the people of Lakshadweep islands and any inadequacy in this
sector has a direct adverse affect on the development of these islands. Though the total population of
Lakshadweep is around 71,000, people live in 11 different islands which are separated by deep sea and lie at
an average distance of 60 Km to 300 Km between each other. The main connectivity of these islands is only
by ship and regular mainland-island and intra-island connectivity with improved berthing and passenger
embarkation facilities is an absolute necessity for the people of these islands. To address the requirements of
this sector, UT Administration has prepared a 15 year perspective plan to ensure timely acquisition of new
ships, daily connectivity among islands and between mainland and islands, elimination of open sea embarkation
and disembarkation and establishment of base stations for high speed craft at Agatti, Kadmat and Kalpeni.
2.17.2 The Committee sought to know the present status of capacity of all-weather passenger ships vis-a-
vis the requirement and details of additional fleet of ships that are being acquired to meet the requirement.
The Ministry submitted the details of existing fleet of ships as given in the table below:-
Sl. Name of the Vessel Type of vessel        Capacity     Year
No. Cargo (MT) Pax   of Build
All-weather Mainland-Island ships
1 M.V . Kavaratti Passenger cum cargo 160 700 2008

22
2 M.V . Arabian Sea Passen ger cum cargo 100 250 2009
3 M.V . Lakshadweep Sea Passenger cum Cargo 100 250 2010
4 M.V . Corals Passenger cum Cargo 250 400 2014
5 M.V . Lagoons Passenger cum Cargo 250 400 2015
Fair-weather Mainland-Island ships
6 M.V . Dweep Setu Passenger cum cargo ** 25 150 1984
7 M.V . Amindivi passenger cum cargo 25 150 2001
8 M.V . Minicoy passenger cum cargo 25 150 2001
Fair-weather High Speed Vessels
9 HSC Kadeeja Beevi inter-island passenger ferry ** - 100 1991
10 HSC Hameedath Beevi - 100 1991
11 HSC Viringili Inter-Island passenger vessel - 15 2007
12 HSC Bangaram Inter-Island passenger vessel - 20 2007
13 HSC Parali Inter-Island & Mainland- - 150 2007
Island passenger vessel
14 HSC Valiyapani Inter-Island & Mainland- - 150 2007
Island passenger vessel
15 HSC Cheriyapani Inter-Island & Mainland- - 150 2007
Island passenger vessel
16 HSC Skip Jack I nter- Island passenger vessel - 50 2007
17 HSC Blue Marlin Inter-Island passenger vessel - 50 2007
18 HSC Black Marlin Inter-Island passenger vessel - 50 2007
Cargo Vessels
19 M.V . Ubaidulla All weather cargo vessel 600 Nil 1989
20 M.V . Thinnakara All weather cargo vessel 600 Nil 1989
21 M.V . Laccadives All weather cargo vessel 600 Nil 1989
22 M.V . Cheriyam All weather cargo vessel 600 Nil 1989
23 M.V . Elikalpeni All weather LPG Domestic Cylinder 2000 Nos 2012
Carrier OR 60T Petroleum Products
in Barrels.
Sl. Name of the Vessel Type of vessel        Capacity     Year
No. Cargo (MT) Pax   of Build

23
24 M.V . Sagar Y uvraj All weather multipurpose cargo vessels 800 MT 2016
25 M.V .Sagar Samraj
Oil Barge (Bunker vessels for HSC)
26 M.B. Suheli Fair weather oil barge 60 Nil 1987
27 M.V . Kodithala All-weather oil barge 150 Nil 2013
Bollard Pull Tugs
28 M.V . Kiltan 10 T Bullard Pull Tug - - 2006
29 M.V . Kalpitti 10 T Bullard Pull Tug - - 2007
** Out of above, M.V. Dweep Setu and High Speed Crafts, Kadeeja Beevi & Hameedath Beevi have been withdrawn from
service after expiry of economic service life.
2.17.3 The UT Administration also informed that the following requirements of ships/vessels have been
projected for the Second Perspective Plan period (2015-2030):
Passenger Ships:
 Acquisition of one all-weather ship of capacity 500 passengers for induction by 2020 which
would provide for connectivity between mainland and Kavaratti, which would act as a hub
for inter-island movement of passengers in the form of Hub and Spoke model.
 Acquisition of two 150 Passenger all-weather vessels by 2020 to ensure round the year
connectivity from Kavaratti to other islands.
 Acquisition of two all-weather ships of capacity 150 passengers by 2025 to operate between
islands to Beypore/Mangalore and for induction at the time of withdrawal of M.V. Amindivi &
M.V. Minicoy in 2015.
 Acquisition of one 250 Passenger all-weather ship for tourists visiting the islands.
Cargo ships:
 Acquisition of six 600 MT Multipurpose Cargo Vessels as replacement vessels for M.V .
Ubaidulla and M.V . Thinnakara (2018), M.V . Laccadives (2020) and M.V . Cheriyam (2022)
and also to handle the growing demand of cargo movement.
 Acquisition of one 700/750 MT Oil Barge to handle transportation of HSD especially for
generation of electricity, petrol, kerosene and ATF for chopper operation.
 Acquisition of three LPG cylinder carriers with a capacity to carry 2000 LPG cylinders in
each vessel.
2.17.4 The Committee takes note of the ageing fleet of passenger and cargo ships/vessels of the UT
of Lakshadweep, especially the all-weather cargo ships. The Committee is aware that the acquisition
Sl. Name of the Vessel Type of vessel        Capacity     Year
No. Cargo (MT) Pax   of Build

24
and induction of the ships requires a considerable time period and timely planning. The Committee
is also aware that the existing connectivity is not optimal and requires augmentation of the existing
fleet with new ships/vessels. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry
must ensure that the 15 year perspective plan for shipping sector be approved and implemented in
a timely manner so as to improve sea connectivity to the Lakshadweep Islands.
2.17.5 The Committee desired to be apprised about the status of long pending acquisition of an oil barge and
was informed that the approval for acquisition of one 1000 MT Oil Barge for Union Territory of Lakshadweep
Administration at a total cost of  ` 37.95 crores was received vide letter No.S-150 11/01/2011-SY .11 dated
8.02.2013. Accordingly, UTL had initiated steps to acquire the Oil barge and had floated tender in this regard
through M/s. Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) (Technical Consultant of UTL). However, two successive
tenders floated during 2013 were not completed due to the fact that SCI did not follow a standard procedure
for evaluation of the tender which had resulted in disqualification of certain participating shipyards at the
stage of evaluation. Therefore, the Committee constituted by UTL recommended going for a re-tender in
order to receive more competitive offers. Tenders were again floated by SCI during mid 2015 and 8 shipyards
participated out of which 6 shipyards were considered qualified subject to their meeting tender conditions.
However, even this tender could not materialize as one of the bidders was found to be outsourcing the
designer to other shipyards that were selected even when there was no provision in the tender document for
out sourcing of designer.
2.17.6 In the meantime, however UTL Administration took over the delivery of 2x800 MT Multipurpose
Cargo vessels MV Sagar Samraj and MV Sagar Yuvaraj built by M/s Modest Infrastructure private Ltd. Due
to an increase in length, these vessels were found to have problems during entry inside the lagoons and
berthing on the western side jetty at Kavaratti and Minicoy during monsoon. At present, Indian Oil Corporation
has erected shore storage tanks at Kavaratti and Minicoy. Hence, it is necessary for the Oil Tanker to come
alongside the western side jetty for any operation. In view of above , it was felt necessary to review the
proposed principal dimensions of the vessel and discussions were held with Union Territory of Lakshadweep
Administration’s ship operator M/s LDCL who suggested that a vessel having length of 60M, beam of 12M
and draft of 2.5M will be most suitable for operation in Lakshadweep Island. Accordingly, SCI has now
come up with a draft technical specification with the carrying capacity of the vessel being adjusted to 700/
750 MT for the finalised key dimensions. Therefore, it has been decided to go for acquisition of one 700/750
MT Oil Tanker instead of 1000 MT capacity in order to acquire the most suitable vessel for operation in the
Island under any given operating condition.
2.17.7 The Department is now seeking ‘in-principle’ approval of the GoI to change the capacity of the
proposed Oil tanker to 700/750 MT instead of the already approved 1000 MT. After receipt of approval,
fresh tender will be floated for acquisition of the vessel in 2017-18 and acquisition is expected to be completed
by 2018-19. The Department has written letters dated 15th February 2017 and 10th April, 2017 seeking the
approval of Government of India.
2.17.8 The Committee is constraint to note that a lack of proper planning and prior assessment has
delayed the acquisition of the long pending oil barge. The Committee feels that the failure of the UT
Administration to assess the limitations of the jetties at Kavaratti and Minicoy beforehand was also
responsible for this inordinate delay along with Shipping Corporation of India’s failure to follow a
standard evaluation procedure during the tendering process. The Committee observes that the
capacity of the existing oil barges is woefully inadequate from a near-future perspective and, therefore,

25
timely acquisition of a higher capacity barge is an absolute necessity. The Committee therefore
recommends now that a suitable vessel has been identified and specifications finalized, the Ministry
of Home Affairs must grant early approval for acquisition of a 700/750 MT capacity oil barge. The
Committee also recommends that the UT Administration of Lakshadweep, pursuant to grant of
approval, must proceed with the tendering process in a planned and timely manner taking into
account the opinion of the technical experts and leave no room for any further delay.
2.17.9 The Committee is anguished to note that while formulating the specific technical requirements
at the tendering stage, opinion of technical experts was not sought and a proper technical evaluation
was not done prior to the floating of tender. The Committee observes that the UT Administration
took more than five years to finalize the appropriate vessel as per the requirements and feasibility
which should have been done in 2013 itself. The Committee strongly objects to this waste of time
and effort and feels that in such matters Government cannot function on a trial and error basis.
The Committee recommends that accountability for the failure of successive tenders may be set
which led to a loss of crucial time and cost escalation and caused delay in resolving the demandsupply
gap of fuel in Lakshadweep.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
ECONOMIC ISSUES
Expansion of Tourism
The Committee takes note of the new initiatives taken by the UT Administration for
promoting tourism in Lakshadweep. The Committee, however, feels that the existing infrastructure
is inadequate and not conducive for the promotion of high-end luxury tourism, which requires
significant investment, both public and private, for the construction of new facilities and the
upgradation of existing ones. Substantial investment is also required to address the major
weaknesses of Lakshadweep islands such as the low carrying capacity of the islands, and transport
and connectivity bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs must pursue the National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management to complete
its assessment of tourist carrying capacity of Lakshadweep Islands in a time-bound manner and
subsequently initiate measures to open up Lakshadweep tourism for private investors in a regulated
manner. (2.1.7)
The Committee also notes that the growth of tourism in Lakshadweep is highly desirable as
it would not only generate employment opportunities but also bring foreign exchange to Lakshadweep.
However, the reckless and unsystematic growth may prove to be counter-productive by harming the
fragile ecosystem of the islands. Hence, the Committee feels that the tourism plan of the UT
Administration must strike a balance between realization of tourism potential and ecological
sustainability of the islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs must strive to develop the tourism in Lakshadweep on the development model adopted by
Maldives and Mauritius, both of which focus on high-end and low-volume luxury tourism, along
with continuing the current cruise-based tourism approach which would certainly help to regulate
the number of visitors to the islands and to generate substantial amount of revenue. (2.1.8)
The Committee is aware of the water sports and underwater tourism potential of Lakshadweep
islands and feels that innovative marketing and promotional strategies must be adopted to establish
Lakshadweep as a global water sports attraction. The Committee recommends that while keeping
in view the fragile ecology the Ministry must come up with a specific long-term plan to develop
water sports and underwater travel and tourism in Lakshadweep in a sustainable manner that
would bring Lakshadweep distinctly on the global tourism map. (2.1.9)
The Committee observes that most of the State Tourism Departments are having their own
corporations such as Maharashtra-MTDC, Delhi-DTTDC etc. which are engaged in the promotion
and development of the tourism sector and carrying out commercial activities that cannot be
undertaken by their Tourism Departments. The Committee therefore feels that it is necessary to
have a government controlled corporation in Lakshadweep, along similar lines, which would be
solely focused on the development and management of tourism. (2.1.13)
The Committee appreciates the measures being taken for converting the Society for Promotion
of Nature Tourism and Sports into a Government owned Lakshadweep Tourism Development
Corporation (LTDC). The Committee feels that the said measure is all the more necessary in order
to expand the tourism sector in Lakshadweep. At the same time, the Committee also recommends
26

27
that the Ministry should make adequate financial provisions for LTDC once it gets incorporated and
provide it with necessary infrastructure and facilities. (2.1.14)
Agriculture
The Committee is constrained to note that the Coconut Development Board (CBD) is
implementing only two schemes out of 10 schemes of CDB in Lakshadweep. The Committee feels
that the implementation of some of the other schemes of CDB like Technology Demonstration,
Market Promotion & Statistics, Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme and Scheme of Information and
Information Technology among others, can be particularly useful for the coconut farmers in
Lakshadweep. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs,
in consultation with the CDB, must explore the possibility of implementing the remaining schemes
of CDB to improve the quality, production, value-addition and marketing of the coconuts in
Lakshadweep. (2.2.4)
The Committee feels that the UT Administration must take note of the old age and unplanned
natural growth of the coconut trees and recommends that the Administration must conduct age and
quality assessment of the coconut trees in Lakshadweep. It should also undertake measures for
scientific plantation of new and better quality coconut trees. (2.2.5)
Fisheries
The Committee takes note of the huge potential of fish production in Lakshadweep but is
not satisfied with the existing quantum of production, which is just 12% of the estimated sustainable
fish production potential. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
necessary steps for the development of the fisheries sector in Lakshadweep like the procurement
of multi-day sophisticated fishing vessels, development of off-shore cold storage facilities and
establishment of fish processing centres. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that a
scientific approach for development of fisheries sector in Lakshadweep may be adopted at all stages
of fish production from fish catching and its subsequent handling to its storage, processing and
packaging. The Committee also recommends that better fishing equipment and training should be
provided to the fishermen and better deep freezing plants, canning facilities and fish processing
units be established on a priority basis. (2.3.6)
The Committee observes that Lakshadweep has a tremendous potential for fish export,
especially Masmeen, and consistent measures are required to harness this potential. The
Committee, in this connection, recommends that the Ministry must chalk out a detailed strategy,
in consultation with the Marine Products Export Development Authority, for developing the export
potential of marine produce of Lakshadweep which would definitely improve the economy of
Lakshadweep. (2.3.7)
GOVERNANCE ISSUES
Availability of Subsidised Rice
The Committee is disappointed and dissatisfied with the reply of the UT Administration and
wonders as to why it was trying to fulfill the additional requirement of subsidized rice through Open
Market Sales Scheme (OMSS) where the selling rate of rice would definitely be higher than what is

28
offered under subsidized rice quota mandated by the National Food Security Act. It is unfortunate
that the minimum requirements of a population of barely 71,000 people of their staple food (rice)
cannot be met by the Government of India, thanks to its maze of rules and regulations. The Committee
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this matter with the Ministry
of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution and request it to make a special exemption for UT
of Lakshadweep and provide them an additional 100 metric tonnes of rice per month at the subsidized
rate. The Committee also recommends that, in the interim, the UT administration of Lakshadweep
must procure 100 MT Rice from open market and provide it to the people of Lakshadweep at
subsidized rate. This arrangement should continue until a permanent arrangement for the provision
of subsidized rice is made. The Committee further recommends that the interim arrangement
should be in place w.e.f. 1.8.2017. (2.4.3)
Availability of Subsidized Sugar
The Committee takes note of the reply of the UT Administration of Lakshadweep with
regards to the change in the policy direction of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food &
Public Distribution. In this regard, the Committee was informed that the said Ministry would
reimburse sugar subsidy to UT as per the existing fixed quota of 115 Metric Tonne (MT) per month
(and an additional annual festival quota of 22 MT) and any change in policy would occur from FY
2017-18 onwards. However, an apprehension was expressed that the distribution of PDS sugar may
be reduced in the upcoming policy change. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UT
Administration must push its case for reimbursement of sugar subsidy as per the existing quota,
even beyond FY 2017-18, by granting it a special exemption in the policy change which is at present
under examination. The Committee also recommends that the UT administration of Lakshadweep
must understand the importance of providing subsidized sugar to the entire population of
Lakshadweep, and therefore in the interim, must procure the requisite quantum of sugar from
open market and provide it to the people of Lakshadweep at a subsidized rate . The Committee feels
that the additional amount of  ` ` ` ` ` 1-1.5 crore is a small amount that can be easily borne by the UT
administration of Lakshadweep. (2.5.2)
LPG Coverage
The Committee observes that apart from Kavaratti and Minicoy, LPG godown construction
and operation is still pending in all the other inhabited islands. The lack of godowns on these
islands has affected the supply chain of distribution of LPG cylinders to the people, which in turn,
must have caused great hardship to the people of Lakshadweep. The Committee therefore
recommends that the construction of new godowns in all the inhabited islands must be completed at
the earliest and adequate stock of cylinders should be maintained in the existing ones to meet the
demand of LPG cylinders. Where godowns have already been constructed but not used for one
reason or another, the UTL Administration must use its powers under various laws and take over
the godowns as an emergency measure (pending resolution of any dispute) and put the godown to
use immediately. (2.6.3)
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the UT Lakshadweep Administration pursuant
to the suggestion given by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs in its meeting held on 16th January, 2017 for identifying the beneficiaries under Pradhan

29
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. The Committee observes that the beneficiaries in the two islands have
already been identified. The Committee however is not satisfied with the number of households
that were found to be eligible under this Scheme i.e. only seven in Minicoy and six in Kavaratti,
which in the Committee’s view are very few and by this the Administration would not be able to
achieve 100% LPG coverage. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that instead of
identifying the eligible households under the Scheme, the Administration must try to identify
households that do not have LPG connections or cannot afford LPG but are not necessarily below
poverty line and make efforts to grant all such households free LPG connections under this Scheme.
The Committee understands that a special exemption may be required for doing so and recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs may request the Hon’ble Prime Minister to direct the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas to grant such exemption under Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana for
Lakshadweep. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that a special drive must be conducted
in all inhabited islands to identify such households and grant them free LPG connection under the
said Scheme before the end of September 2017. (2.6.5)
Large Number of Vacant Posts in Administration
The Committee is not convinced by the evasive reply of the UT Administration with regards
to the filling up of vacant posts under the jurisdiction of the UT administration. The Committee
therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry must ensure that the recruitment of the posts
within the powers of the Administrator are completed within the next six months and the
Committee should be apprised about the status of the same by 30.11.2017. The Committee also
recommends that the administration should also pursue the other recruitment agencies for initiating
the recruitment for the vacant posts which are not within the powers of the Administrator at the
earliest. (2.7.2)
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
Drinking Water and Sanitation
The Committee observes that the plan to install six desalination plants in the remaining
islands is facing delay since 2013 due to procedural issues as the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation is yet to provide the financial approval to the proposal. The entire issue has been caught
in a web of bureaucratic procedures which is totally unacceptable. The Committee understands that
financial matters like cost escalation must be addressed to avoid audit objections later on however
the procedural issues should not become a pretext to delay the decision making process. The
Committee therefore recommends that in the interest of the health of the people of Lakshadweep
the Ministry of Home Affairs must push for an early decision on the grant of financial approval by
the Standing Finance Committee, and in any event before 15.08.2017. (2.8.4)
Biodegradable Toilets
The Committee is astonished by the loss of precious time due to the non-fulfillment of the
contract for the installation of 12,000 bio-toilets by the selected vendor. The Committee observes
that the vendor had stopped installation of bio-toilets three years ago and since then the UT
Administration is locked in a battle with the vendor. The Committee feels that the Administration
could have adopted a decisive approach and made parallel efforts to identify other vendors during
these three years. The Committee recommends that the UT Administration must urgently initiate

30
renewed efforts to identify a new vendor for installation of bio-toilets and the prior experience of
such large-scale installation should be made a mandatory criterion for selection of the vendor. The
Committee also notes that installation of Bio-toilets is the only feasible solution to the problem of
sewage disposal in Lakshadweep and recommends that sufficient number of bio-toilets may be
installed at the earliest. The Committee desires to be apprised about the revised time line for
completion of the project and the progress made in this regard. (2.9.5)
Public Health and Medical Facilities
The Committee is anguished by the lackadaisical approach of the Government towards the
medical requirements of the people of Lakshadweep where several posts of specialist doctors have
been lying vacant for the past 13 years and no fruitful effort has gone into resolving the issue. The
Committee takes serious note of the fact that the doctors are either unwilling to come to Lakshadweep
or soon resign from their posts to go back to the mainland. The Committee finds that this is a gross
failure on the part of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare which could not fill up the vacancies
despite having the powers to invoke rules pertaining to compulsory posting. (2.10.7)
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make all
out efforts to resolve the issue by either relaxing the rules and empowering the Administrator of
UTL to make ad-hoc appointments or by pursuing the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to
invoke the compulsory posting rule and depute sufficient number of specialist doctors to Lakshadweep
at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that, meanwhile, the MHA must allocate adequate
funds to the UT of Lakshadweep for the purpose of outsourcing services of specialist doctors. The
Committee also recommends that the Government should try to provide special allowances and
incentives to candidates who are willing to work in Lakshadweep. (2.10.8)
The Committee also recommends that the MHA must pursue the medical recruitment agencies
and the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to incorporate a clause in the Recruitment Rules for
mandatory posting to Lakshadweep without any exception and any reluctance on the part of doctors
may be a sufficient ground for their dismissal from service. (2.10.9)
The Committee is also anguished to note that the medical quota seats of Lakshadweep,
which is already suffering from inadequacy of doctors, has been reduced from 13 to 5 from 2015-16
onwards. The Committee feels that this indicates the Government’s insensitive approach towards
Lakshadweep and seems unjustified. Moreover, the Ministry was unable to provide any satisfactory
response on this measure. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should take up this issue with the Ministry concerned and pursue it for a rollback of this measure
and a restoration of the previous quota of medical seats for Lakshadweep. (2.10.10)
Universal Health Insurance
The Committee accepts the assertion of the UT Administration that a thorough evaluation of
the health insurance program is necessary in order to universalize the benefits of the program.
However, the Committee observes that out of a total population of around 65,000 almost 45,000
(existing 15,000 beneficiaries and 30,000 Government servants) were already covered under one or
the another health insurance scheme and only around 20,000 people were left out from the ambit of
the insurance coverage. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that an evaluation of the

31
health insurance programme should be carried out at the earliest and necessary action should be
taken immediately to achieve Universal Health Insurance in Lakshadweep. (2.11.2)
Medical equipment and skilled manpower
The Co mmittee is unhappy to note that despite the availability of medical equipment, its
operability and maintenance were limiting its application and utility. The Committee feels that
leasing of equipment and maintenance contracts can resolve this issue to a certain extent. The
Committee therefore recommends that efforts must be made to lease medical equipment along
with a maintenance contract. While leasing the Administration should also make it a condition
that a certain number of permanent Lakshadweep residents should be trained for operating/
handling the equipment by the lessor or the supplier of the equipment before concluding the
lease/purchase. (2.12.2)
Education
The Committee takes note of the amount of expenditure required to establish digital labs,
internet connectivity, smart classrooms and e-library in various schools of Lakshadweep. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry must provide adequate funds to Lakshadweep
Administration for the purpose. The Committee also observes that promoting education is one of
the focus areas under the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy and therefore recommends that
UT Administration may seek funds from the corporate sector under their CSR initiatives. (2.13.3)
The Committee is aware that most of the Lakshadweep students pursue their higher education
in Kerala. The Committee feels that if UTL Administration can construct and maintain hostels in
selected higher education destinations, especially in Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and Kozhikode
cities of Kerala, this can help to eliminate the boarding and lodging costs of the students. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry must identify such locations where a majority
of Lakshadweep students regularly pursue their higher education and explore the possibility of
establishing hostels at these locations. (2.13.6)
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES
Telecommunications and Data Connectivity
The Committee is concerned about poor state of telecom and data connectivity in the
Lakshadweep islands and feels that the benefits of digital revolution are yet to penetrate significantly
in this geographically isolated Union Territory of India. The Committee agrees with the UT
Administration that the quantum of capital expenditure required is beyond its financial capacity,
however, the Committee observes that delayed implementation of the project would only lead to
higher capital expenditure in future. Moreover, provision of a secure and robust means of
communication in Lakshadweep is all the more necessary in view of the strategic importance of the
islands and, in the Committee’s view, the submarine optical fibre connectivity is the only long term
solution to resolve the connectivity problem of the islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the Department of Telecommunication for an early
implementation of the submarine optical fibre project and the funds from Universal Service
Obligation Fund may be sanctioned to cover the capital as well as operational expenditure of the
project. (2.14.3)

32
Renewable Sources of Energy
The Committee is well aware of the acute problem of limited sources of energy and power-
generation in Lakshadweep. The existing power generation through diesel is both costly and not
environment friendly, and is therefore unsustainable in the long run. The Committee notes that
steps are being taken for installation of rooftop solar power panels on both public and private
buildings. However generation through such panels may not be sufficient to reduce the dependency
on diesel power. The Committee also notes the proposal for floating solar panels on lagoons and
feels that the UT Administration can make use of the abundant lagoon area available in the
Lakshadweep islands for installation of floating solar power panels. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
conducting an early technical feasibility study and financial evaluation of the proposal to install
floating solar power panels and the UT Administration may be directed to identify all islands where
there is a possibility to implement this proposal. (2.15.4)
Civil Aviation
The Committee is disappointed to observe the delay in extension of runway at Agatti aerodrome
which has hampered the expansion of air connectivity options to Lakshadweep islands. The Committee
is not convinced by the intended utility of the proposed extension plan as it would only allow Q400
type aircraft which does not offer much advantage over the existing ATR-72 aircraft in terms of
enhancing seating capacity or other parameters. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should conduct intensive inspections and prepare an extension plan with a long term view which
can allow Airbus A320/Boeing 737 type standard aircraft to ply regularly so as to enable flight
operations by private airlines as well. In the short term, the Committee recommends that the
frequency of existing flights may be increased and a flight should be made available twice a day,
seven days a week, especially during the peak tourist season, to meet the demand for higher passenger
capacity. (2.16.4)
The Committee also notes the revised extension plan and feels that the extension of runway
towards Kalpitti Island should be preferred as it does not disturb the existing structures and the
Ministry may also explore the possibility of constructing a bridge on sea to expand the runway by at
least 750 metre to a total length of 1900 metre so as to allow operations of standard aircraft. The
Committee also recommends that the extension plan may also take into consideration the possibility
of international flight operations to facilitate charter flights and export related activities. (2.16.5)
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure on the slow progress on the project
for providing night landing facility in Lakshadweep. The Committee feels that establishing
Instrument Flight Rules based night landing at all helipads would require significant amount of
time and costs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must explore the
option of allowing Visual Flight Rules based night landing, at least in times of emergency evacuations
and medical exigencies. The Committee therefore requests the Ministry of Home Affairs to pursue
the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to amend the rules for night landing operations and
allow VFR for remote locations like Lakshadweep where land availability is an issue and compliance
with IFR requirements is prohibitively costly and not feasible. (2.16.8)

33
The Committee is of the considered view that air connectivity needs to be strengthened
urgently by exploring alternative means like seaplanes. The Committee, taking note of the progress
on the project of operationalising seaplanes, however, feels that the efforts need to be intensified to
achieve an early operationalisation of seaplanes. The Committee therefore strongly recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs must grant a ‘No Objection Certificate’ immediately for starting
the seaplane services at the earliest and the UT Administration may be directed to complete all the
other formalities in a timely manner. (2.16.11)
Shipping
The Committee takes note of the ageing fleet of passenger and cargo ships/vessels of the UT
of Lakshadweep, especially the all-weather cargo ships. The Committee is aware that the acquisition
and induction of the ships requires a considerable time period and timely planning. The Committee
is also aware that the existing connectivity is not optimal and requires augmentation of the existing
fleet with new ships/vessels. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry
must ensure that the 15 year perspective plan for shipping sector be approved and implemented in
a timely manner so as to improve sea connectivity to the Lakshadweep Islands. (2.17.4)
The Committee is constraint to note that a lack of proper planning and prior assessment has
delayed the acquisition of the long pending oil barge. The Committee feels that the failure of the UT
Administration to assess the limitations of the jetties at Kavaratti and Minicoy beforehand was also
responsible for this inordinate delay along with Shipping Corporation of India’s failure to follow a
standard evaluation procedure during the tendering process. The Committee observes that the
capacity of the existing oil barges is woefully inadequate from a near-future perspective and, therefore,
timely acquisition of a higher capacity barge is an absolute necessity. The Committee therefore
recommends now that a suitable vessel has been identified and specifications finalized, the Ministry
of Home Affairs must grant early approval for acquisition of a 700/750 MT capacity oil barge. The
Committee also recommends that the UT Administration of Lakshadweep, pursuant to grant of
approval, must proceed with the tendering process in a planned and timely manner taking into
account the opinion of the technical experts and leave no room for any further delay. (2.17.8)
The Committee is anguished to note that while formulating the specific technical requirements
at the tendering stage, opinion of technical experts was not sought and a proper technical evaluation
was not done prior to the floating of tender. The Committee observes that the UT Administration
took more than five years to finalize the appropriate vessel as per the requirements and feasibility
which should have been done in 2013 itself. The Committee strongly objects to this waste of time
and effort and feels that in such matters Government cannot function on a trial and error basis.
The Committee recommends that accountability for the failure of successive tenders may be set
which led to a loss of crucial time and cost escalation and caused delay in resolving the demand-
supply gap of fuel in Lakshadweep. (2.17.9)

MINUTES

37
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 28th September, 2016 in Committee Room “A”,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Majeed Memon
5. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri R. K. Sinha
9. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
10. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
11. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Kaushal Kishore
14. Shri P. Nagarajan
15. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
16. Shri Bishnupada Ray
17. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
4. Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
Opening Remarks
2.1 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting of the newly re-constituted
Standing Committee on Home Affairs and expressed his happiness on re-nomination of all but five Members
of the earlier Committee. The Chairman felt that the present Committee would be benefitted from the
experience of the Members of the previous Committee who are continuing now. The Chairman also informed
the Committee about the newly nominated Members namely, Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas, Shri Majeed
Memon, Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti, Shri R.K. Sinha, besides himself. Then as desired by the Chairman,
other Members of the Committee and Officers of the Secretariat introduced themselves.

38
2.2 All the Members congratulated the newly nominated Chairman of the Committee and expressed their
trust and faith in his leadership.
Identification of the Subject
3.1 The Chairman then pointed out that the previous Committee had taken up a number of subjects,
some of them deliberated upon and some yet to be taken up. The Chairman sought the opinion of Members
on the pending subjects of previous Committee while suggesting that the Committee should take up the
pending subjects first. Most of the Members endorsed the views of the Chairman that the Committee should
finish first the pending matters and then take up fresh subject according to the priority determined by its
context and relevance.
3.2 Members also raised various issues and matters which were in the list of unfinished items of the
previous Committee and also highlighted certain relevant issues viz., Terrorism, Social and Communal
Tensions, Internal and Coastal Security, Modernization of Police Forces, Border Management, Disaster
Management, Problems of UTs and North Eastern States etc.
3.3 The Committee then decided to take up examination of the subject “Border Security: Capacity Building
and Institutions” in its next meeting. It also decided to meet frequently to consider the matters taken up for
detailed examination.
3.4 Concluding the deliberations, the Committee agreed to take up the following subjects for consideration
and detailed examination:
1. Border Management:
(i) Border Security; Capacity Building and Institutions
(ii) Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pakistan Borders - Issues and concerns
(iii) Security Situation on Eastern and North Eastern Border
2. Internal Security:
(i) Terrorism in the Country
(ii) Naxalism
3. Social and Communal Harmony; Atrocities on Weaker Sections (Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes, Women etc.)
4. Modernisation of Police Forces; Road Map for Implementation of Police Reforms
5. Administration and development of UTs:
(i) Andaman & Nicobar Islands
(ii) Puducherry
(iii) Lakshadweep
6. Disaster Management

39
7. Central Armed Police Forces/Organisations
8. Development of North Eastern Region
4.1 A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
5.1 The Committee then adjourned at 3.55 
P.M. to meet again on 6 th October 2016.

VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16th January, 2017 in Room “B”, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
5. Shri Majeed Memon
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
9. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
10. Shri Kaushal Kishore
11. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
12. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
13. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Additional Secretary
2. Shri P. K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jindal, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Pradeep Gupta, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar, Chief Controller of Accounts
6. Shri Nitesh Kumar Mishra, Controller of Accounts
7. Shri Pankaj Goyal, Director
8. Shri A.V . Dharma Reddy, Director
9. Shri Neeraj Semwal, Advisor to Adrninistrator, Lakshadweep
40

41
10. Dr. Tariq Thomas, Secretary, Finance & Tourism, Lakshadweep
11. Shri Asar Pal Singh, Additional Resident Commissioner, Lakshadweep
Representative of Ministry of Shipping
Shri Chandramani Raut, Director
Representative of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Shri B. Bandyopadhyay, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
1. Dr. B.K. Murthy, Sr. Director
2. Shri D.V.L.N. Rao, Director
3. Shri Parveen Chandekar, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Anil Srivastava, Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.S. Subbiah, Chief Executive Officer, Alliance Air
3. Shri Pankaj Srivastava, Commercial Director, Air India
4. Air Commodore T A Dayasagar, Executive Director (Operation and Technical), Pawan Hans Ltd.
5. Shri H.S. Suresh, Executive Director, Engineering, Air Ports Authority of India
6. Shri Charul Shukla, Joint General Manager (Arch.), Air Ports Authority of India
Representative of Department of Telecommunications
Shri Birendra Pratap, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation
1. Shri Satyabrata Sahu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri D. Rajasekhar, Deputy Advisor
Representative of Ministry of Earth Sciences
Shri M.P. Wakdikar, Advisor
Representative of Ministry of Tourism
Dr. R. K. Bhatnagar, Additional Director General
Representative of Indian Coast Guard
Inspector General Sivamani Pararnesh, Deputy Director General (Operations & Coastal Security)
Representatives of National Informatics Centre (NIC)
1. Shri K. Rama Subramanian, Senior Technical Director
2. Ms. Rachna Srivastava, Senior Technical Director
3. Shri Ajay Madhukar Joshi, Technical Director & HOD (Land Records)
4. Shri D. S. Venkatesh, Scientist ‘0’, Land Records
I. Opening Remarks
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and informed
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the presentation of representatives of the Ministry of

42
Home Affairs on various aspects of Administration and Development of the Union Territory of
Lakshadw eep.
II. Oral Evidence of Ministry of Home Affairs
3.0 The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Union
Territory Administration of Lakshadweep to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman asked the
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs to inform the Committee whether the number of jetties and
ships at the disposal of coastal police stations at Kochi and Lakshadweep were adequate for security of the
Lakshadweep Islands. The Chairman asked the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the steps taken for the
development of the Union Territory and achievement of targets in the last three years. The Chairman also
asked the Ministry to inform the Committee about the measures taken to improve the connectivity of the
islands and to address the issues related to health, education, telecom, employment and tourism.
3.1 The representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs then made a brief presentation on the Administration
and Development of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep.
3.2 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs then briefly gave some clarifications on the
issues like solid waste management, unregulated construction, lack of health services and coastal policing
raised by the Chairman.
3.3 The Members of the Committee then sought clarifications on the following issues:
(i) Poor utilization of budgetary allocations in the past years;
(ii) The demographic status of the population of Lakshadweep on the basis of gender and age
groups and the average per capita annual income of Lakshadweep;
(iii) Steps taken to promote tourism and exploring the possibilities of further development of
tourism in Lakshadweep;
(iv) Participation of private sector through PPP mode under tourism sector including shipping
and transport;
(v) Timeline and expected cost of the projects mentioned In the perspective plan of Ship
Connectivity, Port & Harbour and Civil Aviation sectors;
(vi) Bottlenecks in increasing the number of airlines operators including private operators for
flights to Lakshadweep;
(vii) Project of installation of 12000 bio-degradable toilets in Lakshadweep and the reasons for
abandoning of the project by the contractor; and tapping of Corporate Social Responsibility
funds for installation of bio-degradable toilets;
(viii) Lack of higher education facilities in the Islands;
(ix) Capacity addition of airplanes operating to the Islands;
(x) Measures taken by the Ministry to fill the posts of specialist doctors in Islands that have been
lying vacant for the past 13 years and constraints in invoking the rule pertaining to compulsory
posting to fill these vacant posts; and the present status of the proposal of hiring or outsourcing
specialist doctors on a PPP mode;

43
(xi) Constraints in achieving 100% LPG coverage in Lakshadweep Islands under Ujjwala Yojna;
(xii) Difficulty in harnessing renewable energy sources in Lakshadweep Islands;
(xiii) Difficulty in setting up more desalination plants to strengthen the stable source of water;
(xiv) Steps contemplated to set up diverse livelihood opportunities;
(xv) Filling up of vacant posts in Lakshadweep Administration by the local Officers in view of the
unwillingness of DANICS Officers;
(xvi) Convert Lakshadweep Development Corporation into Lakshadweep Shipping Corporation on
the lines of Shipping Corporation of India wherein it may be possible to bring in more technically
qualified officers for operation and maintenance of ships;
(xvii) Lack of connectivity options & night landing facility and measures being taken to resolve
such Issues;
(xviii) Measures being taken to create marketing facilities and set up processing units for fisheries
sector;
(xix) Measures being taken to improve the existing harbor facilities and to build new harbors;
(xx) Measures being taken for surveillance and periodic patrolling/visit of uninhabited islands; and
(xxi) Reduction of food ration under Public Distribution System after implementation of National
Food Security Act.
3.4 The representatives of MHA replied to some of the queries. With regard to queries not answered
orally, the Ministry promised to send written replies at the earliest.
(The witnesses withdrew thereafter)
4.0 A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
5.0 The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 
P.M.

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 29th May, 2017 in Committee Room “A”, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram    — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
5. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOKSABHA
9. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
10. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
11. Shri Reman Deka
12. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
13. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
14. Shri Kaushal Kishore
15. Shri P. Nagarajan
16. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
17. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
18. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
2. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and apprised them about the
agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration and adoption of the draft 204
rd Report on Administration and
Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep.
2.1 The Chairman recapitulated that the Committee, in its meeting held on 28 th September 2016, had
identified the subject ‘Administration and Development of UT of Lakshadweep’, and subsequently heard
the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, UT Administration of Lakshadweep and the other
Ministries concerned on various aspects of the subject in its meeting held on 16 th January, 2017. The
Chairman also recalled that the Committee visited the UT of Lakshadweep from 24 th to 27th April, 2017
44

45
and during the said study visit discussed several issues on the subject in detail and received some important
inputs.
2.2 The Chairman, then, informed the Committee that on the basis of the deliberations held in the
Committee’s meeting and inputs received during its study visit, the draft 204 th Report was prepared and
placed before the Committee for consideration and adoption. The Chairman also informed the Committee
that one of the Members, Shri Mohammed Faizal P.P, who was abroad and could not attend meeting, had
proposed some modifications to paras pertaining to availability of subsidized rice, subsidized sugar and
universal health insurance issues, and he wanted the Committee’s recommendations modified in a manner
that directs the Lakshadweep Administration, instead of the Ministry of Home Affairs, to comply with the
Committee’s recommendations on those issues. The Chairman informed the Committee that Shri Mohammed
Faizal P.P would send the details of suggested modifications by email. The Chairman then asked for approval
of the Committee for incorporating those modifications in the Report. The Committee agreed to Chairman’s
proposal approving the modifications of Shri Mohammed Faizal PP. The Chairman, then, requested the
Members to give their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the said draft Report.
3.0 The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted the draft 204
th report. The Committee, however,
authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if any. The Committee further authorized
the Chairman to decide the names of the Members and the date for laying/presentation of the Report to the
Parliament during the ensuing monsoon session.
4.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 P.M.

ANNEXURES

49
ANNEXURE-I
2030 VISION STATEMENT FOR THE LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS
CORAL PARADISE- INDIA
LAKSHADWEEP
A prosperous, harmonious and eco-friendly Island

50
INDEX
Sl. No. Particulars Page No
1. Profile 3
2. Basic Statistical Information 3
3. Administration 6
4. Vision- Vision Statement 6
SWOT Analysis
5. Strength 8
6. Weakness 11
7. Opportunities 12
8. Threats 13
Sectoral Vision, Strategy and Action Plan
Social Sectors
9. Education 15
10. Health 16
11. Food & Civil Supplies 18
12. Drinking Water 19
Economic Sector
13. Agriculture 20
14. Fisheries 21
15. Animal Husbandry 22
16. Tourism 22
Infrastructure Sector
17. Port Shipping 24
18. Aviation 26
19. Information Technology 26
20. Power 27
21. Sports and Youth Affairs 28
22. Vision Implementation 29

51
PROFILE
Lakshadweep, formerly known as Laccadives, has 26 coral islands, with untouched beaches and
verdant coconut groves, scattered off the Kerala coast in the Arabian Sea at a distance of 220 to 460 KM
away from the Kerala coast covering an area of 32 sq. km. Out of 26 small islands, only ten are inhabited
and they are Androth, Amini, Agatti, Bitra, Chetlat, Kadmath, Kalpeni, Kavaratti, Kiltan and Minicoy. The
Lakshadweep islands are thesmallest of the Union Territories of India. Kavaratti is the headquarters of the
Lakshadweep islands. Each island is densely covered with coconut palms, and serenely set in a sea, the
waters of which range from palest aquamarine to turquoise. All the entire indigenous population because of
their economic and social backwardness has been classified as Schedule Tribes by Government of India.
Malayalam is the local language which is spoken in all the islands except in Minicoy where people speak
Mahal, the language spoken in Maldives. The entire native population belong to Muslim community.
BASIC STATISTICAL INFORMATION
Sl.No. Information Unit          2015-16
1. Total Geographical area Sq.km 32
2. Longitude 71
o
-74
o
 East
3. Latitude 8
o
-12
o
-30
o
 North
4. Islands including sub merged Nos 36
sand banks
5. Inhabited islands Nos 10
6. Uninhabited islands 26
7. Land use area Sq.km 26.89
8. Total Lagoon area Sq.km 4200
9. Territorial waters Sq.km 20000


52
10. Coastal length Km 113.07
11. Economic Zone Sq.km 400000
12. Average Temperature Degree celsius Max 31.75
Min 25.70
13. Average Annual Rainfall mm 1382
14. Per Capita Income (Approximate) Lakhs 0.53
15. Education Institutions Nos. 68
16. Enrolment (2015) Nos. 12841
17. Gross Enrolment Ratio Primary 94.40
Upper Primary 98.15
18. Net Enrolment Ratio Primary 96.15
Upper Primary 84.50
19. Dropout Ratio Ratio 0
20. District Panchayat Nos. 1
21. Village Dweep Panchayat Nos. 10
22. Population 2011 Census Nos. 64473
Male Nos. 33123
Female Nos. 31350
23. Total workers (2011 Census) % 29.09
Male % 46.25
Female % 10.96
24. Main workers (2011 Census) % 16.76
Male % 27.59
Female % 5.32
25. Marginal workers (2011 Census) % 12.33
Male % 18.60
Female % 5.64
26. Density of population Per Sq. Km 2149
27. Sex Ratio Per 1000 Males 946
Sl.No. Information Unit 2015-16

53
1001 for local ST
population
28. Decadal Population Growth Rate % 6.3
2001-2011
29. Health Facilities Nos 12
30. Birth Rate Per 1000 population 12.37
31. Death Rate Per 1000 population 5.44
32. IMR Per 1000 population 19.53
33. MMR Per 1000 population 1.22
34. Registration of Birth & Death % 100
35. Immunization % 99
36. No. of All weather Ship Nos 5
37. No. of fair weather Ship Nos 2
38. HSC Nos 8
39. Cargo Vessel Nos 8
40. No. of Helicopter Nos 2
41. Fish Landing MT 15612
42. Fish Product Export (MAS) MT 1717
43. Domestic Tourist arrival Nos 6682
44. International Tourist arrival Nos 649
45. Revenue Realised Cr 26.96
46. No. of Tourist Resort Nos 5
47. Production of Coconut Lakh nuts 907
48. Coconut Cultivable Area Hectare 2570
49. Organic coconut producers Nos 9
Society
50. Area covered under organic Hectare 921
cultivation
51. No. of Organic Farmers Nos 3844
52. Cattles Nos 4373
Sl.No. Information Unit 2015-16

54
53. Goats Nos 46497
54. Poultry Nos 138444
55. ICDC Blocks Nos 9
56. Installed Capacity (000 KW) Diesel 21.91
Solar 2.15
57. Consumer Connection Nos 21744
58. Per capita Consumption KWH 592
59. Consumer Index Price (April 2016) Current Price 1270
ADMINISTRATION
Prior to the formation of this Union Territory on 1st November, 1956 these Islands formed part of
the erstwhile Madras State. The entire group of islands is considered as one District. The Headquarters of
the administration was shifted from Calicut (Kerala State) to Kavaratti Island in March 1964.The necessity
for decentralization of the department was felt and accordingly new offices were created in 1972.The
Administrator appointed by the President of the Union, under Article 239 of the constitution is the head of
the UT. To bring the Administration closer to the people, all the inhabited islands along with their attached
islands and islets were divided in to nine Sub-Divisions. Each Sub-Division is under the charge of a Deputy
collector/Sub-Divisional Officer. They also function as Executive magistrate for respective island.
According to Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 1994 promulgated by the President of India on
23rd April, 1994 consequent on Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 1992, there is two-tier System of
Panchayat in Lakshadweep, the Island level Village (Dweep) Panchayat and the UT level District Panchayat.
There is no intermediary Panchayat in this Territory. The ten inhabited islands each have Dweep Panchayats.
The District Panchayat having its Head Quarter at Kavaratti, the capital of the Territory. Chairperson/ Vice
Chairperson in the Dweep Panchayats are looking after the activities of their respective panchayats. Consequent
on the transfer of function and functionaries transferred to panchayat vide notification F.No. 2/1/2012-
DOP; dated 07.03.2012 five major departments namely Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries, Education
and Medical were devolved to panchayat.
VISION
The people, of Lakshadweep envision transforming their UT into a happy, prosperous, inclusive,
responsible, and self sustaining society through sustainable exploitation of the resources & potentials available
in the Islands, without disturbing ecology, environment and the socio-cultural heritage for faster and sustainable
development to become the best UT in India and a leading global tourism destination by 2030.
VISION STATEMENT
1. Towards the faster and sustainable development of the islands by using available resources and
potentials in the islands.
Sl.No. Information Unit 2015-16

55
2. Raising living standard of people through enhancement of income increasing employment for youth.
3. Enhancing quality of life particularly in respect of improving drinking water supply by commissioning
more desalination plants and providing daily connectivity between interisland and island to mainland.
4. Ecological protection and eco-friendly solid and liquid waste management.
5. Adoption of appropriate skill development strategies most suited to the island condition for reducing
flow of migrant labourers from mainland.
6. Make the UT as an “Adventure Sport- Nature Tourism” location in the world tourism map.
7. Universal access to affordable health care by establishing specialty and super specialty services.
8. Daily connectivity from Island to mainland and inter Island.
9. Ensuring food security.
10. Tapping of new and renewable souces of energy.

56
SWOT ANALYSIS
STRENGTHS
1. Coconut
Agriculture in Lakshadweep is coconut husbandry. The people of Lakshadweep depend on coconut
for their livelihood. Agriculture is the productive sector of the islands economy. The entire cultivable area
occupied for coconut cultivation is 2570 hectare. The production of coconut during 2015-16 was 907 lakh
nuts. The yields per tree per annum recorded on average is 120 nuts. Lacadive ordinary and Lacadive micro
are the two time tested eco-types of the UTL with high quality copra, higher oil content and other superior
attributes besides being organic. The UTL has the highest nut productivity in the country.
2. Fisheries
Lakshadweep is the only coral atols of our country. It has a vast lagoon of 4200 Sq. Kms., territorial
waters of 20,000 Sq. Km., Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of 4,00,000 Lakhs Sq. Kms and coastal line of
about 132 Kms. The sea around Lakshadweep is rich in fishery resources and the main fishery resource in
the islands is Tuna. The estimated marine fishery potential resources in the sea around Lakshadweep is
about one lack tonnes of tuna & tuna like fishes and about an equal quantity of Shark.
3. Uninhabited Islands –
In Lakshadweep there are total 36 islands out of which 26 are uninhabited with total are area of
1.65 sq. km. ranging from 0.01 sq.km in smallest uninhabited island and 0.46 sq.km. in the largest
uninhabited island. Out of total lagoon area uninhabited islands occupies 125.21 sq. kms. These islands


57
consist of vast lagoon area with silver sandy beaches and have place of its own importance in tourism
industry. The islands have best of all good things for a perfect holiday destination, serene beaches, open
road; sun bathed shores and wonders in under water. In these islands you can slip away from hustle and
bustle of urban jungle and step into the cocoon of tranquillity.
4. Smallness of the islands
The total land area of inhabited island is 30.05 Sq. kms. and population is also very small. The
smallness of islands is an added advantage for achieving better results while implementing any programmes
in a given period of time. For example; Administration was able to achieve 100% financial inclusion under
PMJDY within 3 months. Similarly Education department was able to enrol 100% school going children and
make Lakshadweep as zero dropout territory.
5. Coral Resources:
Lakshadweep the only coral atolls of our country having a vast lagoon area of 4200 Sq. Kms. with
crystal clear water and abundant marine life enhance the beauty of the islands. There are three main natural
eco systems in islands, land, lagoon and ocean eco-system. The corals offer excellent opportunities for
water sports, scuba diving, snorkelling etc. Underwater reef walls, turn out to be a divers paradise. Natural
reefs made of marine live coral boulders block the incoming swells of the outer sea. The presence of coral
reefs, the most productive ecosystem makes these islands ecology very important. There are at about 148


58
species of corals and 300 species of ornamental fishes recorded from Lakshadweep. Out of 148 coral
species, 8 species of corals have reported to be exclusive to Lakshadweep.
6. Beach
Pristine beaches make Lakshadweep a destination for relaxation, recuperation and rejuvenation with
fun and excitement. The island beaches are a heaven for natural lovers and adventure enthusiast.
7. Women Status
Women of Lakshadweep relish a higher social status and economic freedom than their counter parts
elsewhere in the country. The women participation in the developmental activities is high. The women
community are safe and most respected in Lakshadweep. The girl students can study up to their desired
level.
8. Controlled population
The population growth according to 2011 census was 6.23% whereas the growth rate from 1991 to
2001 was 14.66%. Compared to the national average the population growth in the islands had almost
stabilised.


59
9. Literacy
Lakshadweep having overall literacy rate of 92%, stands first among the UTs and stands third in
India. The literacy rate has increased from 15.23% in 1951 to 92% during 2011.
WEAKNESSES
1. Geographical Isolation
Lakshadweep islands lay at a distance of about 220 to 460 kms. away from the Kerala coast between
8 and 12 degrees North latitude and 71 & 74 degrees east longitude thus being physically separated from
mainland. The inter-island distance varies from about 10 to 376 km.
2. Paucity of land
The paucity of land and high density of population are great limiting factors in taking up many
developmental activities and build high-tech infrastructure.
3. Availability of potable water
The only natural source of water is ground water. Quantity of ground water is limited and the quality
is disturbed by sea water intrusion and the high water table level. Use of potable water has increased due to
Increase in population and developmental activities in islands. The existing resources are grossly insufficient
to meet the drinking water requirements.
4. Dependency on mainland
The islands are entirely dependent on the mainland for all their needs as everything except coconut
and fish are to be brought from the mainland. This has led to a situation where in a minor disruption in the
connectivity with mainland will have direct bearing on the survival in the islands.
5. Power
Power is an important determinant of economic growth of the area. The power generation in
Lakshadweep is mainly through Diesel generator. The electricity generation by diesel generating sets is
highly expensive and creates ecological and environmental impacts.
6. Sanitation & Waste management
The paucity of land area coupled with the high water table in the islands and the fragile nature of the
ecology in the islands imposes a lot of challenges in disposal of solid and liquid waste management.
7. Scarcity of Resources
The coconut and fish are the only resources available in the primary sector in the islands for economic
exploitation. There is no major or minor industry in the islands which leads to high unemployment among
the educated youths.
OPPORTUNITIES
1. Agriculture and Organic farming
The Agriculture sector plays a pivotal role for achieving self-sustained economy. Out of the total
geographical area of 3220 hectares, area cropped under coconut cultivation is 2520 hectares. There are

60
10285 agriculture holders with an average of 0.24 hectares per holder. Annually around 907 lakhs nuts are
harvested in which 20% of produce has been utilized for domestic consumption and remaining 80% are
largely processed as copra which fetches high economic value.
Due to the well-known ill effect of use of pesticides, insecticides and fertilizers, Organic farming is
the need of the day. In the open market organic products earn 3 to 4 time’s higher price than ordinary
products. Therefore, it is time to exploit the full potential of organic farming in the islands with vivid branded
organic products such as coconut oil, virgin coconut oil, desiccated coconut powder, coconut vinegar,
coconut water, coconut jaggery, coconut chips, coconut neera etc.
3. Fisheries
Exploitation of hitherto to unexploited, untapped sea potentials around the islands by evolving and
introducing innovative technologies, deep sea fishing fleets with facilities for processing, creating offshore
infrastructure for product diversification, developments of cooperative for fisherman welfare, fisherman
village, and fish processing & exporting hub are core area which offer a lot of scope for higher per capita
income.
4. Tourism
Tourism is one among the fastest growing industries in Lakshadweep and single largest source of
potential investment. Tourism has emerged as an instrument for employment generation, poverty alleviation
and viable economic development. Lakshadweep is one of the most popular holiday destinations for both
national and international tourists. The tourist arrival during 2015-16 is 6682 domestic & 649 foreign tourists
respectively which fetched revenue of Rs.27.00 cr. The opportunity is there to increase the inflow of tourist
by providing world class facilities and expansion of marketing strategy. Cruise tourism, Beach tourism,
leisure tourism, dive tourism, adventure tourism, sports fishing tourism, house boat tourism, MICE tourism,
Heli tourism, cine tourism, cultural heritage tourism, religious tourism are vivid types of tourisms to be
introduced to exploit full potentials. Tourism being a hospitality industry the intangible attributes like, a
friendly smile, well intentioned hospitality, a sense of security and an assured honesty through continuous
initiatives like hospitality managements training programmes would influence the tourism industry.
5. New and Renewable Sources of Energy
Lakshadweep is the land of sun, wind and sea. The sun is available throughout the year except
couple of months during monsoon. There is high and tremendous scope for encouraging various non-
conventional resources in Lakshadweep has not been exploited fully. The non-conventional and renewable
sources of energy like Roof Top Solar, Wind Energy, Floating Solar, Biomass, Ocean Thermal Energy etc.
can be exploited.


61
6. Sports & Youth Affairs
Sports and Games play a vital role in developing good health and all round personalities of the citizens
in this territory. Active participation in sports and Games foster the attitude of sportsmanship, team spirit,
obedience to rule etc. With limited resources and infrastructure the youths continuously participated and
bagged remarkable positions in the national event. Being islanders, swimming is known to most of the
islanders and some of them are experts in swimming. They can be groomed to become world class swimmers
by providing proper infrastructure and training facilities.
THREATS
1. Acceptability of the farmers to switch over to organic farming and to adopt innovative methods.
2. Excessive/unscientific exploitation of coral resources may impact the fragile ecology of the coral
atolls.
3. Excessive/uncontrolled inflow of tourists may have its impact on the fragile ecology of the islands.
4. The Island Society shares happiest situation of a relatively more egalitarian social structure with a
great deal of harmony, community life and a social milieu of cooperation among people. This is their
greatest strength which has enabled them to face life and many odds, both natural and man-made,
with equanimity. The process of development should not tinker with this and de- stabilize their lives,
create competition which strikes at the root of fellow feeling.
5. The island topography does not contain any elevated land strata. All islands are located a few metres
above mean sea level. Their common features include a storm beach on eastern rim, the coral sand
plain to the west and wide boulder strewn inter-tidal space on the western side as also a shallow
lagoon. This makes it particularly vulnerable to natural disasters, particularly during monsoons. The
gales are a potential threat not only to life and property but also to the coral reef formation. The
terrain also creates a drainage problem since no natural gravity is available.
6. Lakshadweep continues to suffer from the tyranny of distance in several ways. Wide dispersal of the
population in small islands scattered far away from each other and also from the mainland in the
Arabian Sea making transport and communication a crucial elements in even the least ambitious
development effort. The distance from mainland affects:-
(a) The mobility of people (for education, employment, social and religious purposes, medical
treatment etc.,
(b) In many ways it increases the time and cost of travel,
(c) Delays communication (especially newspapers, periodical, etc.),
(d) Increase the cost of almost all products consumed in the islands,
(e) Obstruct the mixing of people, exchange of ideas and their thinking process,
(f) Makes people more inward looking about the future,
(g) Causes delay in deriving benefits from the developments in science & technology,
7. The High density of population and consequent limitation on land based resources making the sea
and its untapped potential the only significant direction for establishing a self-generating economy
for the islands.

62
Sectoral Vision, Strategy and Action Plan
Social Sector
1.  Education
Education plays a significant and remedial role in balancing socio-economic status and all round
development of the society can be achieved by building strong foundation in education. The basic facilities
available in the sector are 19 Nos. pre- primary schools., 22 Nos. Primary schools, 10 Nos. upper primary
schools, 11 Nos. Secondary & senior Secondary schools, 1 each Kendriya & Navodaya Vidayala, 3 University
Centres and 1 DIET Centre. The total enrolment of schools is 12841 students.
Vision
To offer quality school education and to achieve 100% literacy by providing state of the art educational
facilities in the Islands.
Main emphasize is given for achieving universal access to good quality education and skills. All
existing schools will be provided with digital labs, digital connectivity, smart class rooms, e-library etc.
Establishment of one each vocational higher secondary school, sports school with boarding facilities for
promoting skill development and sports & games respectively. Establishment of extension centre of a Central
University/ National University for uplifting the higher education opportunities for woman folk in the UT.
Lakshadweep having overall literacy rate of 92%, stands third in India. The total enrolment is 12841 with
girl’s enrolment of 6533. The teacher pupil ratio 1:18 and the drop out ratio is zero. Streamlining of District
Institute of Educational Training (DIET) to orient the teachers with curriculum frame work, educational
technologies etc. The vision is to make Lakshadweep as 100% in literacy and graduate territory by 2029.
Strategy
(1) Use of Information Communication Technology to enable learning outcome in Schools by providing
the modern learning tools like, smart class room, e library, language lab, digital lab etc.
(2) Providing of sufficient computers & internet facility – the computer labs functioning in the schools
were set up long back and most of the computers available in the lab are out dated and defunct.
Therefore the strategy is to streamline the existing computer lab with sufficient number of computers
and internet facilities.
(3) Construction/ Renovation of school building – the strategy is to reconstruct and remodelling of the
existing schools building which have completed its life spans for providing better infrastructural
facilities to the students.
(4) Enhancement of quality education to achieve 100% Literacy- The literacy rate percentage has increased
from 15.23% in 1951 to 92 % in 2011 due to the vast growth in the sector of education that have
taken place during the last six decades. The main emphasis during the coming period will be to
improve the overall quality of education by strengthening Adult Education Centres, Informal Education,
providing proper training and incentive to teachers to achieve 100% results.
(5) Strengthening District Institute of Education and Training- the functioning of DIET was started
during 2008 with 14 faculties with objectives to improve the quality of elementary teacher education
through innovative pre-service and in-service education. The strategy is to restructure and reorganize

63
the elementary teacher education to make it more responsive and to improve quality of teaching by
delivering effective training to the teachers and planning the need based curriculum.
(6) Introduction of V ocational stream in Senior Secondary School- In addition to the regular streams,
vocational need based streams to be introduced to kindle the spirit of entrepreneurship in order to
combat the unemployment situation.
(7) Opening new facility to build carrier opportunity- to facilitate local schedule tribe candidate to attend
the competitive examination like UPSC, Staff Selection Commission etc. it is proposed to establish a
carrier guidance centre.
(8) Establishment of an institution for conducting maritime courses – islands are surrounded by sea and
there is amble scope for establishment of institute for maritime courses to create employment
opportunity to youth in merchant navy.
(9) Establishment of extension centre of a Central University/ National University - for uplifting the
higher education opportunities for woman folk in the UT.
Action Plan up to 2020
1. Setting up of smart class room, e library, language lab, in all islands in a phased manner.
2. Providing of computers to all schools.
3. No school shall be functioning from private/rented building.
4. Achieve 100% literacy to become the first UT to achieve such feat.
5. Opening of Carrier Guidance Centre to facilitate students for attending various competitive
examinations.
6. Introduction of V ocational stream in Higher Secondary School with different disciplines.
7. Conduct a feasibility study for Establishment of an institution for conducting maritime courses.
2.  Health
Lakshadweep has witnessed a radical transformation in the field of Health Services. Presently, Health
Care Delivery services are provided through 3 Hospitals, 3 CHCs, 4 PHCs and 2 First Aid Centres. Indira
Gandhi Hospital Kavaratti is functioning as First Referral Hospital (FRU). RGSH Agatti is functioning as
Specialty Hospital with 12.
Specialists under PPP model. CT scan facility is available at RGSH Agatti and Ultra sound in all
islands except FAC’s.
Vision
To offer basic speciality services in all islands and selected super speciality services in the major
islands. Ensure un-interrupted availability of lifesaving drugs and medicines throughout the year and implement
e-hospital initiatives in all the hospitals.
Strategy
1. Providing 24X7 health care facilities along with basic speciality services in all islands and selected

64
super specialty services in kavaratti: - It is proposed to provide minimum speciality services in all
islands and super speciality services in Kavaratti Island.
2. Conversion of existing PHCs in to CHCs and CHCs in to Hospitals with Speciality services.
3. Introduction of E-Hospital initiatives: - Digitization of health care facilities to leverage better patient
management system and creation of e-Health Profile.
4. Providing AYUSH facilities: - Establishment of A YUSH Hospitals in major islands including AYUSH
wellness and fitness centres and opening of new dispensaries in the minor islands.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. Introduction of minimum speciality services in the islands of Amini, Minicoy and Androth.
2. Establishment of Cardiac Lab in IGH kavaratti.
3. Setting up of Cancer Day Care and Chemotherapy Centre at IGH Kavaratti.
4. Upgradation of 3 CHCs in to Hospital and 4PHCs in to CHCs.
5. Establishment of Oxygen Gas Generator Plant.
6. Introduction of e-Hospital suite in all the hospitals.
7. Creation of Health Profile for residents of Lakshadweep.
8. Establishment of AYUSH Hospitals and wellness /fitness centres in four major islands.
9. Providing Telemedicine facilities in all the islands to connect them with the specialised institutions.
3.  Food and Civil Supplies
The Public Distribution System in Lakshadweep play a significant role to ensure successful distribution
of food grains under APL,PHH,AAY and Annapurna schemes and it is channelized through a network of 39
fair price shops run by the Cooperative Societies under Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer
Affairs, Lakshadweep. The National Food Security Act (NFSA) has been implemented in Lakshadweep
from 1.8.2015. Lakshadweep requires 4620.12 MT of food grains annually to ensure food security. There


65
are 16857 card holders under different schemes of APP, PHH, AAY and Annapurna. At present LPG cooking
gas facilities are available in the islands of Kavaratti and Minicoy with storage capacity of 1000 and 8000 kg
respectively.
Vision
To have a modernized network of Fair Price Shops in the islands for uninterrupted supply of essential
foodgrains and LPG connections available to all the islands.
Strategy
1. Digitalization of 100% rations cards with Aadhar seeding : Around 98 % of ration card holders
are seeded with Aadhar card and 100% will be achieved shortly for bringing more transparency in
PDS.
2. Modernization of Fair Price Shops : There are 10 inhabited islands with 39 Fair Price Shops in all
the islands put together. It is propose to modernize the shops by end to end computerization for
online allocation and supply chain management.
3. Introduction of LPG facilities in all remaining islands : At present only two inhabited islands are
provided with LPG Cooking Gas connections. It is proposes to extend these facilities in remaining
inhabited islands also.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. 100% digitalization of ration card
2. Introduction of LPG facilities in all islands in a phased manner.
3. Modernization of Fair Price Shops in all islands.
4.  Drinking Water
Providing safe and adequate drinking water in these small islands in the middle of sea is a challenge.
The natural source of drinking water is ground water. The quality of ground water is limited and getting
contaminated due to intrusion of sea water and lack of proper sanitation network. In order to meet the
requirement of drinking water, the department has commissioned Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
Plants of one lakh litre capacity in the islands of Kavaratti, Minicoy & Agatti. In addition, there are 3211 Nos.
of rainwater harvesting tanks varying from 5000 litre capacity to 100,000 litre capacities.
Vision
To ensure the supply of adequate potable water as per the national norms with maximum utilisation
of rain water.
Strategy
1. Installation of Desalination Plants in the remaining 6 islands: For providing safe and adequate drinking
water in all islands, it is propose to setup LTTD plants in the remaining islands except Bitra.
2. Rain water harvesting: Construciton of Rain water harvesting Structures to arvest the rain water to
the extent possible.

66
3. Reverse osmosis plant at Bitra: To erect a RO plant at Bitra where the population is less than 300.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. Get the approval of Govt. of India for the Establishment of Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
Plants (LTTD) in the remaining six islands and complete the commissioning of the plants in all the
islands.
2. Commissioning of Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plant in Bitra Island.
3. Identification of the number of Rain Water Harvesting Tanks to be constructed.
Economic Sector
1.  Agriculture:
The people of Lakshadweep depend on coconut for their livelihood. Agriculture is the productive
sector of the island’s economy. The entire cultivable area of 2570 Ha. is under coconut cultivation. Presently
organic farming is practiced in a small scale whereby around 30% of the total land area covered under
organic certification.
Vision
To transform Lakshadweep into a fully organic farming UT with the benefits of organic farming
being translated into the improved livelihoods of the islanders. To achieve self sufficiency in meeting the
demands of the island for basic vegetables.
Strategy
1. Increasing the area under organic farming.
2. New practices like poly house cultivation, rooftop gardening, sprinkler irrigation and drip irrigation
etc. to be introduced.
3. Empowerment of Organic Producers Societies.
4. To encourage start-ups for processing and product diversification for coconut value addition centres.


67
Action Plan upto 2020
1. Coverage entire area under organic certification.
2. Setting up of 100 numbers of Poly Houses.
3. Establishment of 750 roof top gardening.
4. Introduction of 100 sprinkler irrigation farms.
5. Introduction of 300 drips irrigation farms.
6. Setting up of 300 virgin coconut oil extraction units.
7. Setting up of 50 coconut cream production units.
8. Setting up 10 desiccated coconut powder unit.
9. Establishment of 100 Neera tapping units.
10. Establishment of 100 Vinegar making units.
11. Establishment of 100 Jaggery making units.
12. Setting up Revolving fund for organic coconut producer’s society.
13. Skill and entrepreneurial development and Technology transfer
2.  Fisheries:
The sea around Lakshadweep is rich in fishery resources because of its being surrounded by
an exclusive economic Zone of about 400,000 sq km with a lagoon area of about 4,200 sq km and
territorial water of 20,000 sq km. The present annual production is about 15,000 tonnes which is
hardly 12% of the sustainable potential available in the Lakshadweep waters. The basic infrastructure
available for preserving the fish products are one flake ice unit of 1 tonne capacity, 6 units of cold
storage 1 tonne capacity, 1 No. tunnel freezer of 3 tonne and 5 Nos. of block ice plants of 10 tonne
capacity.
Vision
Derive benefits from sustainable fishing potential of the islands for improving the livelihoods of the
people.
Strategy
1. Enhance fish production from 15000 MT to 50000 MT per annum: - The sustainable fishing potential
of the islands is estimated to be around one lakh tonnes per annum. There is huge scope for improving
the fish harvest.
2. Increasing value addition and improve the marketing facilities: - Strengthening of off-shore
infrastructure facilities, skill development, value addition and marketing.

68
Action plan upto 2020
1. Procurement and supply of multi- day fishing vessel to enable fishermen to do multi day fishing.
2. Development of Off-shore facilities like freezer/storage facilities.
3. Setting up of fish processing centres.
4. Revitalization of fishermen training centre.
5. Strengthening and setting up of fishermen cooperative and establishment of fishermen cooperative
federation.
6. Opening of Sales Outlets at mainland.
3.  Animal Husbandry
The animal husbandry is one among the few growth sectors in the islands. Poultry goat and cattle
can provide livelihood support to small and marginal farmers. It is highly woman oriented. Due to scarcity
of feed and grazing lands, organised dairy farming is not encouraged. There are 4 Nos. of veterinary hospital
and 6 Nos. of veterinary dispensaries available in the UT.
Vision
To bring more farmers under poultry development and to achieve self- sufficiency in the production
of milk, broiler meat and egg production so as to meet the demand for the animal protein.
Strategy
1. Poultry production: - the strategy is to establish large scale poultry farming in the private sector both
layer and broiler, including strengthening the layer and broiler hatching units in the major islands. As
a part of achieving self-sufficiency, the department proposes to assist farmers for setting up of large
scale cage house considering scarcity of land.
2. Feeds: - It is targeted to ensure the availability of feeds throughout the year for promoting start up
entrepreneurs.
3. Setting up of goat farm: - Chevon is popular meat in Lakshadweep and people consume it at all
occasions especially marriage functions. In order to promote goat farming in Lakshadweep it is
envisaged to set up got rearing farm in the islands.


69
4. Household Cattle Farming: - In order to increase present level of milk production, it is targeted to
setup household milking cattle units in the private sector consisting of 2 to 3 genetically improved
hybrid varieties of animals.
5. Upgradation of Veterinary Facilitates: - Proposal is to upgrade existing veterinary clinics into a Veterinary
Hospital.
Action Plan up to 2020
1. Setting up of large scale layer unit and broiler unit.
2. Introduction of cage house farming.
3. Establishment of breeding goat units and promotion of household farming.
4. Setting up of household cattle units.
5. Conversion of existing veterinary clinics into hospitals.
6. Ensure availability of quality feed throughout the year.
4.  Tourism
Lakshadweep, nature is at its colourful and pristine best. As an archipelago, the islands are having a
land area of 32 Sq. Kms. surrounded by 4200 Sq. Kms. of lagoon. It is one of the most spectacular tropical
Island systems of the world. Tourism sector has good potential for not only creating employment opportunity
but also for boosting economic growth. The tourist facilitates developed so far in the islands include 5
tourist resorts with an accommodation of 182 beds, 2 health clubs and 4 dive centres.
Vision
To make Lakshadweep world’s favourite Island destination by promoting low volume high value
tourism in consistent with the fragile ecology of the islands and make the tourism industry as the back bone
of Lakshadweep economy.
Strategy
1. To open the tourism sector to private players: - At present tourism facilities are available only with
SPORTS a society under the Administration. The strategy is to open up the tourism to private players
like resort operators, tourist home owners and dive operators for vivid types of tourism activities.
The main emphasise is to prioritise tourism under PPP mode to boost the economy of islands by
respecting ecological constrains.
2. To develop eco-friendly tourist resorts of international standards in uninhabited islands: - Setting up
of eco-friendly tourism in the uninhabited islands like Suheli, Cheriyam, Thinnkara and to augment
the present infrastructure available in inhabited islands with the help of private players.
3. To improve the connectivity for the tourists desiring to visit the islands of Lakshadweep.
4. To position Lakshadweep as the preferred dive destination in the world.
Action Plan upto 2020
(a) Issue guidelines for implementing the Tourism Policy of UTL.

70
(b) Opening of tourism in uninhabited islands of Suheli, Cheriyam, Thinnkara.
(c) Operating an all-weather luxury Ship exclusively for tourism.
(d) Introduction of Seaplane, cruise ship and bigger aircraft.
(e) Aggressive marketing for the Dive Tourism in UTL.
Infrastructure Sector
1. Port, Shipping
Union Territory of Lakshadweep is a group of islands located 200-400 kms. off South-West Coast of
India. It consists of 36 islands of which 10 are inhabited. There are no highways, roads and bridges to
connect any of these islands as they are separated by deep sea and lie far away from one another. Till the
year 1959 the inter-island connectivity was maintained by small rowing boats and the connectivity between
islands and mainland was maintained with traditional sailing vessels, which are no more in existence in the
islands. Till the early part of 1960s these islands were not having any hospital and schooling facilities. Only
few people attained education at the basic level in Mainland in those days. There are no major agricultural
and industrial activities in these islands except coconut cultivation, its harvesting and fishing. Hence all food
items including rice, wheat, sugar, pulses and vegetables etc. are transported from mainland. Further, all
commodities like building materials, kerosene, Diesel for electricity generation, clothing, stationeries, provisions
and other essential items required to meet the daily requirements of the local people are transported from
mainland. Schooling facility up to 10 + 2 level is only available in islands and for further educational
requirements people have to travel to mainland. There are limited medical facilities in these islands and for
any specialized treatment; people are forced to travel to mainland. Shipping services therefore are the life line
of the people of these islands. Any inadequacy in this sector has a direct and adverse affect on the development
of these islands.
Though the total population of Lakshadweep is around 65000, the people live in 11 different islands
which are separated by deep sea and lie at an average distance of 60 Kms. to 300 Kms. Therefore, the main
connectivity of these islands for people is by ships only. The basics infrastructure available are 5 Nos. all
weather ships, 2 Nos. of fair weather ships with a total passenger capacity of 2308 is on fleet. 4 Nos. cargo,
2 multipurpose cargo vessel, 1 oil barge & 1 LPG Cylinder carries and 8Nos Inter island HSC is are also
available.
Vision:
To have regular sea connectivity between mainland and island and regular intra island connectivity
with improved berthing and passenger embarkation facilities.
Strategy:-
1. Address the requirements of shipping sector by having a 15 year perspective plan: - Since the
acquisition of ships involves a considerable time period, the requirements of the ships for future
needs is to be assessed with a longer time frame. With a Perspective plan in place the acquisition of
new ships and barges can be taken up in a timely manner.

71
2. Daily connectivity: - At present connectivity from mainland to island and inter island and vice versa
are limited. Therefore, the proposal is to guarantee daily connectivity from island to mainland and
inter island and vice versa by establishing one transport hub and procuring passenger ships according
to the demand.
3. Elimination of open sea embarkation and disembarkation:- In the existing system of embarkation/
disembarkation of passenger and loading and unloading of cargos ship remain anchored in open sea
and passenger embark/disembark into small boats and brought to the existing jetties constructed
inside the lagoon at western side in the islands. The existing system becomes extremely tough and
risky and sometimes may lead to causalities. During monsoon even this facility not viable because of
extreme bad sea condition. To alleviate hard ship faced by the Islanders deep sea berthing facilities is
unavoidable by construction of deep water/Eastern side jetties in all the islands like it is in Agatti,
Kavaratti, Amini and Minicoy.
4. Establishment of base station for HSC at Agatti, Kadmat and Kalpeni: In order to improve the inter
island connectivity base station for HSC at Agatti, Kadmat and Kalpeni are required to be started.
Action Plan upto 2020:-
1. Completion of Perspective Plan preparation and getting the approval for the same from the Ministry
concerned.
2. Completion of Techno Economic Feasibility studies for Construction of Break water/ Eastern side
Jetties in the remaining islands.


72
3. Improving the utilisation of the existing Eastern side jetties in the 4 islands by providing additional
fenders wherever required.
4. Establishment of base station at Agatti, Kadmat and Kalpeni.
5. Online web ticketing service made accessible to public at any destination.
6. Introduction of Logistic Cargo Management System (LCMS) for easy booking and delivery of cargo
services.
2.  Aviation
There is only one ATR-42 aircraft plying between Agatti and Kochi. Two air ambulance helicopters
are also operating for evacuation of patients including shifting of air passengers. The test flight for introducing
sea plane service has been conducted and found successful.
Vision
To have daily connectivity for Agatti Island with adequate passenger capacity and frequency with
the Sea planes supplementing the connectivity required for the other islands and also for the Intra Island.
Strategy:
1. Expansion of Agatti Airport: - Presently only ATR-42 aircraft can land in Agatti due to restriction of
runway length. The strategy is to expand Agatti airport from its current length so that bigger aircrafts
like Q-400 can be operated between Agatti and mainland.
2. Introduction of Sea Plane: - Sea planes can offer an alternative mode of connectivity from mainland
to island and inter-island sectors.
3. Establishment of night landing facilities in all islands: - Presently there is no night landing facilities
available for helicopter. It is propose to establish night landing facilities in all islands for timely
evacuation of patients.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. Completion of acquisition of land required for the Expansion of Agatti Airport.
2. Introduction of Sea Plane services.
3. Providing night landing facilities for the Helicopters in all the inhabited islands.


73
3.  Information Technology
As per the current bandwidth availability, total of 102 mbps is allocated to the UT of Lakshadweep
for all its communication needs. This Bandwidth is not enough for Mobile and Data services alone. The
Mobile network is very congested resulting in call drops, Call fail, Denial of Service and other problems. The
Data services offered by BSNL are also overloaded because of good penetration of Smart phones thus
resulting in poor service.
Vision
To have seamless digital connectivity from all the islands at par with the mainland. To deliver all the
citizen centric services to the people. To enable the local youth to pursue employment in IT related sectors.
Strategy
1. Bridge the digital divide between islands and mainland: - It proposed to lay out Submarine OFC from
mainland to islands in order to ensure uninterrupted connectivity.
2. Develop a pool of skilled man power: - Roll out Electronic System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM)
for generating skill development and quality employment through LITSS.
3. Implementation of e-Services: It is propose to make delivery of all services through electronic mode
for better management and accessibility.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. To obtain the approval of Govt. of India for the project submarine OFC based connectivity between
mainland to island and across the islands.
2. To augment the bandwidth available for Lakshadweep by at least 200% thru v-sat based connectivity.
3. Rollout Electronic System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) and skilling at least 500 people.
4. Establishment of e-office.
4.  Power:
Energy is considered as the basis for the progress and prosperity of the nations and societies.
Availability and consumptions levels of energy are the best indicator of the economy and social development.
The power generation is the main driving force for the development. The basic facilities available in
Lakshadweep are 11 Nos. of Diesel generating power houses with 46 Nos of DG sets with an installed
capacity of generating 21910 KWH and 11 Nos. of Solar power plants with an installed capacity of generating
2150 KWH.
Vision: -
To have 24 X 7 power supply thru renewable sources of energy with energy efficiency.
Strategy:
1. 24 x 7 hour power supply: It is envisaged to ensure 24 X 7 power supplies in islands by installing
adequate number of DG Sets with different capacities to meet the maximum demand required for
each island.

74
2. Barge Mounted 2 MW Power Plant: It is targeted to commission 2 MW Barge Mounted DG Sets in
order to tackle the emergency situation.
3. Construction of bulk oil storage facilities: In order avoid storing of fuel in 200 litres capacity barrels
it is proposed to construct bulk storage facilities in the islands. This will reduce contamination of
ground water arising through seepage of oil and also will eliminate loss.
4. To tap the solar potential by installing Roof Top Solar plants in all the buildings possible.
5. Biomass Plant: To commission Biomass based plant in at least 3 islands.
6. To replace all the energy consuming incandescent bulbs/ fluorescent lamps with energy efficient
LED bulbs.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. Procurement and installation of additional DG Sets.
2. Commissioning of Barge Mounted 2 MW Power Plant.
3. Commissioning of bulk storage facilities in Kavaratti and Minicoy island and begin the Construction
work for bulk oil storage facilities in other two islands.
4. Commissioning of Biomass power plant in at least one island.
5. Replacement of all the incandescent and fluorescent lamps in all islands with LED bulbs.
6. Imposing a ban on use of incandescent and fluorescent lamps in all islands.
5.  Sports & Youth Affairs
Sports and Games play a vital role in developing good health and all round personalities of the citizens
in this territory. Active participation in sports and Games foster the attitude of sportsman ship fairness, team
spirit, obedience to rule etc. With limited resources and infrastructure of fours indoor sports halls, six health
clubs and one tennis court, the youths continuously participated and bagged remarkable placements in the
national event. However, continuous motivation is required to augment large portion of the youth to participate
national/ international events in order to place them in to the excellent positions.
Vision
To nurture sportspersons to represent the country especially in disciplines like Swimming, Football
and Water Sports.
Strategy
1. To develop basic and quality infrastructure like open stadium ground, Indoor stadium and swimming
pool.
2. To develop and motivate girls for participating in the national and international sports and games
competitions.
3. To establish National Institute for Water Sports for promoting water sports activities.
Action Plan upto 2020
1. Construction of Open Stadium at Amini with synthetic tracks.

75
2. Establishment of SAI training centre.
3. Establishment of Sports hall with health fitness facilities in all islands.
4. Construct 400 meters track & field.
Vision Implementation
The Vision 2030 envisions transforming Lakshadweep into a developed UT by 2030, planning and
implementing a 15 year long development plan has its own hazards in terms of unknown and currently
unknowable externalities, externalities that could make or break achievement of the Vision depending on the
ability of the Vision Framework to engage with them and also internalize them, if required. To mitigate such
eventualities, the UT Administration has delineated the Vision into Programme Phases with specific milestones
while keeping in mind the overall the Vision targets and outcomes. The Vision envisages endowing all
citizens with their basic rights and saturating access to basic amenities to immediately advance their standard
of living, well-being and happiness. Additionally, actions focusing on transforming the UT into a harmonious
and eco friendly society will be initiated, not in a sequential manner, but simultaneously according to a
clearly defined roadmap. Subsequent Vision Programme Phases will be delineated later allowing for mid-
course corrections and innovations required then to achieve the over-all Vision targets and outcomes. The
responsibility for delivering the Vision 2030 will be collectively and separately of all concerned stakeholders
and people at large in the UT, will take the lead in putting in place a vision governance apparatus that will
initiate and coordinate actions and efforts of all players. At the UTL, Lakshadweep Administration will
establish Lakshadweep Coral Paradise Vision 2030 Governing Committee under the chairmanship of the
Hon’ble Administrator for steering and mentoring implementation of the vision and providing leadership.
The other members of the Vision Committee will be; elected representatives, Secretaries of Departments,
head of line Departments. The Director, Planning & Statistics, as the member secretary of the Vision
implementation.

ANNEXURE-II
Detailed List of Vacancies in Various Departments of
UT Administration of Lakshadweep
Sl. Department No of vacant No of Post Notified                 Remarks
No. Post for recruitment/
exam conducted/
Offer of appointment
issued/ DPC related
1. Agriculture 59 2 For 55 posts, Recruitment committee
meeting fixed for 12.4.2017. For 2
posts, DPC proposal is submitted. For
1 post of Coconut Development
Officer(Gr.A-UPSC post), file
processed. For the post of
Director(Gr.A post), file is being
processed as the post is to be filled by
the Ministry.
2. Animal Husbandry 20 9 For 6 posts, notification issued. For 2
post, interview for contract
appointment was conducted on
31.3.2017. For 1 post, processed
proposal for the DPC. File processed
for the absorption of few casual
labourers under the department and
waiting for the outcome of the
proposal to notify the remaining
vacancy. 1 Gr. A post of Director, the
post is to be filled by the Ministry. For
one Gr. A post, file processed for the
upgradation of the post.
3. Art & Culture 7 3 For 2 posts, offer of appointment
issued. For 1 post (reserved for PH
candidate), no eligible applicant applied.
For 2 MTE posts, notification will be
issued along with posts under Service
department, For 2 posts, notification
is being processed.
4. Collectorate 6 3 For 2 post, notification issued, For 1
post recruitment process completed
but Court case is pending, For 3 post
notification process is going on.
76

77
5. Co-operation & 3 3 For  2  posts,  offer  of  appointment
FCS issued. For 1 post, DPC meeting is
scheduled.
6. DIET 5 4 For 1 Gr. A post, RR pending with
Ministry. 4 posts notified for contract
appointment.
7. Directorate of 53 20 Among 53 posts, 23 posts are Group
Health Services A posts including CHS cadre posts,
Ministry is the appointing authority for
CHS cadre posts. For 20 posts,
recruitment committee meeting held
and file processed for notifying the
vacancy. For 10 posts process is going
on.
8. Directorate of 0 0 NIL
Panchayats
9. District & Session 1 1 The post notified for deputation.
Court
10. District Panchayat 0 0 NIL
(HQ)
11. Education 220 170 For 157 posts, recruitment tests
conducted in 7 centres on 8th and 9th
April, 2017. For 13 posts, interview
conducted. For 23 posts, court cases
are pending. For 11 posts, RR pending
with Ministry.
12. Election 0 0 NIL
13. Electricity 49 35 For 33 posts notification issued. For
2 posts, proposal DPC proposal is on.
For 7 posts notification is being issued.
For 7 posts, Court case is pending.
14. Enviornment & 10 0 For 1 Gr. A post, the post is to be filled
Forest by the Ministry. For 2 posts, requested
the Dept.of Port, Shipping & Aviation
to fill up the posts of Boat Driver &
Lascar under the Dept. For 6 posts,
requested the Dept. of Agriculture to
include the posts of Fieldman and
Maistry under the Dept. of E&F while

78
notifying the vacancies under
Agriculture Dept.
15. Fire Protection 47 30 For 27 posts notification issued. For
Control unit 3 promotion posts, file processed for
departmental tests. For 17 promotion
posts, waiting for legal opinion from
Legal cell.
16. Fisheries 28 19 For 14 posts, notification issued. For
5 promotion posts, file processed for
DPC. For 1 post, file submitted for
notification. For 6 posts, file submitted
for RR committee meeting. For 2 Gr.A
posts, RR pending with Ministry.
17. India Reserve 209 209 For 185 DR posts, final check list of
Battalion a pplied candidates published. For 17
promotion posts, file under process.
4 posts proposed to fill up on
deputation basis. For the remaining 3
posts, notification issued. published
18. Industrial Training 3 1 For 2 posts need RR amendment and
Institute is in progress.
19. Industries 27 9 For 9 promotion post, DPC proposal
under progress, For 4 posts RR needs
modification, For 14 post, after
Recruitment committee meeting, file
submitted for notifying the vacancy.
20. Information & 12 1 For  1  post,  DPC  findings  in  sealed
Public Relations cover. For 4 posts, file submitted to
Hon’ble Administrator for the approval
of recruitment committee. For 5 posts,
proposed Recruitment committee
meeting could not be held due to
Administrative reasons. For 1 post,
seniority list being issued. for 1 post,
file processed.
21. Labour & 3 1 For 1 post approval of amendment of
Employment RR is pending with Ministry, For 1
direct recruitment post which is
reserved for PH, process is on. 1 post
is a Gr.A post.

79
22. Legal Metrology 0 0 NIL
23. Pay & Accounts 10 9 Post of DDA(Gr. A post) to be filled
by CGA, For 2 promotion posts of
AO, no eligible candidates are available
in the feeder grade, For 7 posts of
JAO, notified for deputation and
appointment orders issued to 4
candidates, but only one incumbent
joined duty.
24. Planning & 6 3 For 3 posts, RR pending with Ministry.
Statistics For 3 posts, DPC proposal is under
process.
25. Police 118 118 For 18 posts (i.e. fo17 Promotion &
1 Appointment), orders issued. For 19
posts, notification issued. For 28
posts, DPC proposal under progress.
For 36 posts, no eligible candidates
found as per the RR. For 17 posts,
Court case is pending.
26. Port Shipping & 50 22 For 19 posts, DPC proposal is under
Aviation process. For 2 posts, appointment
order being issued. For 1 post RR
needs amendment, for 1 post, no
candidates passed in trade test. For 1
post action is on to fill up vacancy.
For 26 posts, Court case is pending.
27. Printing & 23 8 For  8  posts,  DPC  proposal  under
Stationery progress. For 5 posts, RR committee
meeting completed. For 1 Gr.A post,
RR pending with Ministry. For 2 posts
needs RR amendment. For 1 post,
notification is being issued. For 6 posts
Court case is pending.
28. Public Works 23 11 For  10  posts,  notification  issued.  4
Department posts proposed for contract
appointment. 7 posts under Court
case. For 1 post, DPC proposal is
processed. For 1 post, need RR
amendment.

80
29. Road Transport 1 1 Vacancy notified and file processed for
filling up of the post
30. Rural Development 4 0 1 post is to be filled by LPWD and
3posts from Secretariat.
31. Science & 10 4 For  4  posts,  DPC  proposal  under
Technology progress. For 6 posts, file processed
for direct recruitment.
32. Services 65 41 For 9 posts, promotion order issued.
For 4 posts, appointment order issued.
For 2 posts, offer of appointment
issued. For 32 promotion posts,
proposal for DPC is being processed.
For other posts, a common notification
will be issued for filling up of the
vacancies.
33. Social Welfare & 1 1 The post notified for deputation.
Tribal Affairs
34. Tourism 3 0 For  3  posts,  file  submitted  for  the
Development approval for notifying the posts.
35. Women & Child 17 12 For  6  promotion  posts,  no  eligible
Development candidates in feeder cadre. For 2
promotion posts, VCC not issued due
to departmental enquiry. For notified
4 posts , court case is pending. For 2
posts, file processed for absorption
from Boarder Area Project. For 2
posts, file being processed. 1 post is a
Gr. A. post.
Grand Total 1073 750