t 
' • :; 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPART MENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION BILL , 1998 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY , 1999) 
(LAID IN TilE LOK SABIIA ON THE 25TH FEBR UARY, 1999) 
R\JYA SABJIA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 1999/F/\LGU:-.IA. 1920 (SAKA) 

1. 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY -FIRST REPORT 
ON 
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION BILL, 1998 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 1999) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY , 1999) 
S52S/RS / F- I·A 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETAR IAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 1999/FALGUNA. 1920 (SAKA ) 

1. 
2. 
3. 
.• . 4. 
------------------------------------------------------------ ~~ 
CONTENTS 
CoM1'0SJ'!10N OF THe CoMMriTEE 
RePORT 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF TltE CoMMOTEE 
ANNEXURE$ 
l. THE CENTRAl. YIOil..ANCE CoM~HSS I ON ORDINANCE, 1998 
ll. THE CENTRAL YIOILANCE CoMM ISSION (AMENDMEKT) 
0ROINI\NCE, 1998 
III. THe CENTRAL YIOILANCE CoMM ISSION BILL, 1998 
,. 
(i)·(ii) 
l-20 
21-33 
35---46 
47-48 
49-64 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
I. Shri Pranab MukhcrJec-Ciramnan 
RAJYA SABBA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumamhappa 
5. Shri M. Vcnkaaah Naidu 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri Prafull Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillaa 
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M . Ibrahim 
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13. Dr. (Ms.) P. Sclvie D;t~ 
'14. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
''15. Shri Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOK SADHA 
16. Shri Krishn;~ Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19. Shri Vijny Gocl 
20. Shri j>ushpaoan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar liegde 
23. Dr Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrimati Meira Kumar 
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
29 Shri C.K. Jaffer Shariet 
30. Shri Nedurumalh Janardhana Reddy 
31. Shri lshvarbhaa Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shri Motalal Vora 
33. Shri Mom Kumar Subba 
34. Shri Sudhir Gin 
35. Shri Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Sbri C. Sreenivaasan 
38. Mohd. Ali Ashara[ Fatmi 
39. Sh ri Laloo Prasad 
40. Shri Abdul Gh3foor 
'Nominoaec.l w[lh cffcel from lllh June. 1998. 
"Nominoac<l wiah cffcc1 fron1 11111 Augusa. 1998. 
SS28/RS/F-2·A 
(i) 

L 
(ii) 
41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
43. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
44. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
@45. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETA RIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary • 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Comminee Officer 
@Nominurcd wirh offecr from 26rh June, 1998. 

REPORT 
!, the Chair man of the Departmenr-rcl~tcd Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf. present 
this Ftfty-first Repon of the Commillee, relating to the Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 
1998.• 
2. ln pursua nce. of the Rules relating tO the Department -relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha. in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
referred .. the Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 
7th December, 1998 and pending therein, to the Commillee.for examination and report by the 
16th December, 1998. 111c Bill seeks to replace the Centra l Vig.ilancc Commission Ordinance, 
1998 promulgated on the 25th August, 1998* .. and the Central Vigilance Commission 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1998 promulgated on the 27th October. 199s.•••• (As the Central 
Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 ..... seeking to replace the afores aid Ordinan~e' could not be 
passed by the Parliament during its last Session, another Ordin ;mce, nam ely. the Central 
Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1999 (No.4 of 1999) has been promulgated on 8th January. 
1999 to give effect to the provisions of the Bill under considcrauon of the Commillee). 
3. The above reference was considered by the Commiuee in its meeting held on LOth 
Decembt!r, 1998. The Commi11ee felt that it would not be possible for it to complete 
examination of the provisions of the Bill and submit it~ report within the stipulated time . 
Accordingly, Chairman, Rajya Sabha wa, reque,ted to grant extension of time to the 
Comminee, upto the last day of the first week of the 1999 Budget Session of Parliament, for 
presentation of its report on the 'Bill. The request for extension of time was kindly granted and 
notified in the Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part ll No. 37167 dated the 22nd December, 1998. 
4. In pursuance tO the recommendations of the Commille e on Prevention of Corruption 
headed by Shri K. Santhanam, the erst while Central Vigilance Commission was set up vide 
Resolution No. 24/7/64-AVD dated the 11th February, 1964. The said Resolution imer alia 
provided that the Central Vigilance Commi,,ioner would be attached to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (now with the Ministry of Per.;onncl, Public Grievance' and Pensions), but in the 
exercise of its powers and functions it will not be subordi nate to any Ministry/Depanment and 
will have the same measure of independence and autonomy as the Union Public Service 
Commission. Paragraph 3 of the said Resolution also stipulated that the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner will be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and that he 
will not be removed or suspended from the office except in the manner provided for the removal 
or suspension of the Chairman or a Member of the Union Public Service Commission. This 
Resolution was amended in November. 1995 deleting the provtson relating to appointment of 
the Central Vigilance Commissioner by the President by warrant under his h:md and seal. 
5. In September, 1997, the Government constituted an Independent Review Committee 
(IRC) comprising Shri B.G. Deshmukh. Shri S. V. Giri and Shri N.N. Vora to suggest measures 
for strengthening, Inter alia, anti-corruption activities a~ pan of it\ efforts against corruption . 
One of the recommendations made by the l RC was th<H the question of confering statutory 
status to the Central Vigilance Commissio n along with the restora tion of the provision relating 
to appointment of the Cen tral Vigilance Commissioner being made under the hand and ~ea l of 
• Published on the Gazelle of India Exoraordin:ory P:on-tl . Seelion 2. d:otC<J the 7th l)ecemb cr. 1993. 
•• Rajya Sabha Parliaonentory Bulletin Pan II d:oted ohc lOth December, 1!/\18. 
••• Annexure I. 
• • •• Annexure 11. 
• • • · • Annexure Ill. 

2 
the President may be considered by the Governme nt. The lRCalso recommended that the Central 
Vigilance Commission should be made responsible for the erficient functioning of the CB1. 
6. Subsequently, the Supreme Court vide its order dated 18th December, 1997 in 
Criminal Writ Petitions Nos. 340-34).193- Vineet Narain and others versu> Union of India 
and olhers (generally known as Jain Hawala case) had Inter alia given directions that 
statutory status should be conferred upon the Central Vigilance Commission. Several 
consequences of the conferment of such status were also tJirected by !he Scprcme Court to 
follow. The Supreme Coun in !he said order had also directed that the terms of reference of 
the Commission be widened to include supervision and monitoring of investigation 
conducted by !he CBl and the appointment of its Director as also the appointment of 
Director, Directorate of Enforcement in the Ministry of Finance. 
7. To facilitate !he Committee in considering the Central Vigilance Commis~ion Bill, 
1998, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions had furnished a 
Background Note thereon. lt may be pertinent to reproduce the following para from that 
Note:-
"ln the meeting taken by the Prime Mini~ter, on 7th April, 1998 to consider issues 
arising from the order of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid Criminal Writ Petitions 
dated 18.12.1997 it was decided that the issue regarding confcmng statutory status to 
the Centr~l Vigilance Commission may be referred to the Law Commission for early 
advice and a suitable draft of the legislation. Accordingly, the Department of Legal 
Affairs were requested to provide a draft of the proposed legislation from the Law 
Commission. While action on the formulation of the suitable legislation for the 
conferment of statutory status upon the Central Vigilance Commission was under 
way, the then Central Vigilance Commissioner in position tendered his resignation 
and it became necessary to appoint a new Incumbent tO the post, which would have 
to be on the lines of the directions of the Supreme Court. Accordingly, in view of the 
urgency involved, the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affaih, Legislative 
Department were requested on June 19, 1998 to prepare the draft legislation relating 
to conferment of statutory status upon the Central Vigilance Commission 
immediately. The Legislative Department were reminded in the matter on June 26, 
1998". 
7.1 The Background Note of the Ministry goes on to narrate the following facts which 
are quite rele.\lant to the present context:-
'"ln view of the urgency involved in the matter and keeping in mind the fact that the 
next Session of Parliament was likely to take place not earlier !han November, 1998 
the Government dectded to put ihe proposed law in place through an Ordinance. 
The draft Ordinance conferring statutory status upon the Central Vigilance 
Commission and other related matters connected therewith was placed before:: the 
Cabinet at its meeting held on 20th August, 1998. Before this, the Department of 
Legal Affairs forwarded the Law Commission's report to this Department late on the 
evening of August 19. 1998 regarding conferment of statutory ~tat us upon the Central 
Vigilance Commission. It may be noted that all the forma lities to put tbe proposed 
law in place through an ordinance had already been finalised before the Law 
Commission's repon was received. The Cabinet at its meet ing held on August 20. 
1998 approved the promulgation of the Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 
1998 subject to the modification that suitable provisions regarding appointment of 
Director, Enforcement Directorate should also be mduded in the proposed 
Ordinance . The Cabinet furlher directed that the Legislative Department may. in 
modifying the existing draft of the Ordinance. take guidance of a Group of 
Ministers constituted for the purpose. After modifying the draft Ordinance and 
holding discussion with the Group of Mimsters consisting of Minister of Urban 

Affairs and Employment, Minister of Power. Minister of Law, Justice and Company 
Affai~. Minister of Surface Transport, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pension~ and :Mmr\ter of State 10 the Ministry of Finance 
(Banking, Revenue and ln~urance). con~muted for rhe purpose. it was finally 
decided that the Ordinance a~ drafted by the Legislative Department whrch by that 
time, included the necessar y and relevant provisions relating to the Director of 
Enforcement, should be submitted to the President. Accordingly, the Central 
Vigilance Commission Ordinance. 1998 (No. IS of 1998) was promulgated by the 
President on 25th August. 1998". 
7.2 In the same context, the following ft~ctual statemeqt from the Background Note of the 
Ministry may be reproduccd:-
"11 may be noted here that the Law Commission's report which w•s received in this 
Department on 19th Augu'ot, 1998. did not include the words ·and others' tn sub­
clause (3) of Clause 3 of the Central Vigilanc:e Commi,sion Bill prepared by them. It 
was only on September 10, 1998 that the Department of Legal Affairs Informed tht'o 
Department that the Chairman. Law Comrna~sion ha> t '>u~d a Corr igendum .-id"' hi> 
D.O. letter No. 6(3) (49)198-L.C.(LS) d:tted September 3. 1998 addressed to the 
Hon'ble MiniMer of Law, Justice & Comp;any Aff;airs for rectific;Haon of an 
unintentionaVaccidental error / omission of the words "and others" in 'ub·dause (3) of 
Clause 3 of the Central Vigilance Commission Dill prepared by the Ll\\ 
Commission". 
8. Subse quent to tlte promu lgation of the Ordin:ance on the 2Sth August. 199ll, the anucus 
curiae Shri Ani! Div;an in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3&/97 an the Supreme C'ourt filed 
certain written objections. objecung to certuin provision> of rhe Ordimmcc . The pr;ayer~ 
made by the amicus curiae in ht' submi"ion' were as under :-
(a) the Secretury (Personnel) be injuncted frl.lm serving a~ member of the Commission: 
(b) tha t Section 6A as inserted in the Delhi Spec ial Police Establishment Act ampos ing 
the condirion .of prevaous ;approv"l of the Commission to be wkcn by 1hc 
investigative agencies read with Secuon S(l)(d) be directed no! to be implemented; 
(c) all provisions including those contaancd in Section 8, Sccuon S(1) rclaung to the 
previous approval for ongoing invt,llgatiuns be ~rayed and the tn\csugaring 
authorities be permitted tu c:arry ou t !heir aawcstigatiun., and disch;arge thc.:ir duties 
in !he same manner "' hcl<>r~ the proatlulgatton of the Ordinance; and 
(d) no further appointments of the Vigliancc Commis,ioncr' 01 other officer~ be made: 
under the ~atd Ordinance . 
9. When the matter was heard by the Supreme Cour1 on th~ 22nd September. 1998, the 
Attorney-Gencr:ll appeari ng on hclualf of the Union of India made sub mission s 10 the effect 
that he intends to have the matter discussed with the highe st authority in !he Government 
and thai he would makt: further 'ubmi~.,ions after >uch di$cu"ion., On receiving th~ views of 
the learned Anorney-General. the Pre>ident promulgated the Ccntr;rl Vigilance Commi>>ion 
(Amendment) Ordinance. 1998 (t\o . lll of 1998) on 27th October. 1998. On 18th Octoba. 
1998 . when the mutto.:t was heud by tile Supt·cme Court. the amendment> made to the 
Cen tral Vigilan ce Commission Otdinam:e. L<J9S b~ the c~ntr•tl Vigilance Comm ission 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 199S were 't"cpt.cd hy the Supreme Court dOtl they di>mis>cd the 
written objections filed by !he amicus mriac • in the above ca-.c. 
10. The Ordinance promulgated on 27th October. 1998. amended three key provisions of the 
55:!8/ RS / F-:l-A 

-
4 
Ordinance promulgated on 25th Augu~t. 1998. Two deletions--of the "single directive" and 
the provision making the Union Personnel Secretary an ex-of[rcio member of the CVC- and 
one inclusion-a provision to enable non-civil servaniS to become members of the 
CVC-constituted the CVC (Amendment) Ordinance 1998. 
11. The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 aims to provide for the constitution of a 
Cen tral Vigilance Commission to inquire or cause inquiries to be conducted into offences 
alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by certain 
catego ries of public servants of the Central Government, corporations cstnblished by or under 
any Centra l Act, Government companies, societ ies and local authorities owned or controlled 
by the Central Government and for matters CO!)nected therewith or incidental thereto. 
12. Following are the salient features of the Bill:-
(i) The Central Vigilance Commission shall consist of a Central Vigilance Commissioner 
as Chairperson and not more than four Vigilance Commbsioners as Members; 
(ii) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners shall be 
appointed from amongst persons:-
(a) Who have been or are man all-India Service or in any civil service of the Union 
or in a Civil post under the Union having knowledge and experience in the 
matters relating to vigilance, policy making and administration including police 
administra tion; 
(b) Who have held office or a re holding office in a corpora tion established by or 
under any Centra l Act or a Government company owned or contro lled by the 
Central Government and persons who have expertise and experie nce in finance 
including insurance und banking, law, vigilance and investigation: 
Subject to the condition that from amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner and 
the Vigilance Commissioners, not more than three persons shall belong to the 
categories of persons referred to eithe r in (a) or (b) above; 
(iii) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and their appointment 
shall be made after obtaining the recommendations of a Committee consisting of the 
Prime Minister as Chairperson, the Minister of Home Affairs and the Leader of the 
Opposition in the House of the People as Members; 
(iv) The term of the Centra l Vigilance Commissioner shall be for a period of four years 
from the date on which he enters upon his office or till be atta ins the age of 65 years 
whichever is earlier; 
(v) The term of a Vigilance Commis~io ner sha ll be for a period of three years from the 
date on which be enters upon his office or till he attains the age of 65 years whichever 
is earlier: and 
(vi) On ceasing to hold office, the Central Vigilance Commissioner and every other 
Vigilance Commissioner shall be ineligible for reappointment tn the Commi.ssion and 
further employment to any office of profit under the Government of India or the 
Government of a State. 
13. The Committee set down tO consider the Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998, in its 
meeting held on 6th January, 1999. 
13.1 The Chairman referred to the order of the Supreme Court dated 18.12.97 in the case of 
5528/RS/1'-3-B 

5 
Vineet Narain and Othe r vs. Union of lndiu and others inter alia directing that statutory 
status should be conferred upon the Central Vigilance Commis~ion; the i~suance of 
Ordinance on 25.8.98 setting up a statutory CVC; objections filled by the amicus curille in 
the Supreme Coun relating to certain provision~ of the Ordinance; the issuance of the 
second Ordi nance on 27 .10.98; the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha on 7.12.98 
replacing the Ord inances and subsequent reference of the Bill to the Commit tee for 
examination and report. In this context the Ch<tirman asked the Secretary whether the 
Government did not apply its mind while promulgating the first Ordinance especially in 
regard to the Composition of the CVC. He, thereafter, requested the Secretary to make a 
presentation on the Sill. 
13.2 The Secretary (Personnel) apprised the Commitlce of the genesis of the institution of 
CVC and the histori cal development> leading to the issuing of the Ordinances and the Bill 
replacing the same. 
13.3 The Secretary, then made a presentation on the various provisions of the Bill. 
13.4. The Chairman and Members put several quest ions and queries which mainly 
penained to reasons for not taking the normal legislative route in setting up a statutory 
CVC; multi-member character of CVC; primacy of Cemral V1g1lance Commissioner in 
decision making process; appointmt:nt of Secretary and staff of CVC, !heir independence 
and imparlia.ilty, terms and condiuons or service; ineligibility of Central Vigilance 
Commissio ner and Vigilance Commissioners in holding offices afler ret irement; inter se 
seniority amongst the Centra l Commissioner and other Commi~~ioners; power to remove 
difficulties; Annual Report; and superintendence over the Directorate of Enforcement, etc. 
13.5 The Secretary responded to many of the question and queries. He imer alia suggested 
that the Committee may recommend an amendment in the first proviso to Clause 5(7) which 
would be of a technical nawre relating to retirem ent benefit in respect of previous services 
in case of Central Vigilance Commiss ioner or Vigilance Commissioners having rendered 
service in a corporation established by or under any Central Act or a Government company 
owned or controlled by the Central Government. 
14. The Comm inee then in its meeting held on 7th Janu ary, 1999 heard S/Shri K. 
Madhavan, former Joim Dire ctor Cl31, M.S . Vt.:rma, Hon orary Adviser, RBI and S.K. 
Chowdhary, former Chairman, Coal lndia Ltd . on the provision of the Bill. 
14.1 Shri Madh avan, while welcoming the Bill initially made some general observations 
thereon. He stated that CBI and Police should be free from Governmenta l contro l and 
placed urtder an independent agency. Thereaf ter. he suggested a number of amend ments in 
the various clauses of the Bill, particularly 1he Long Title, Clauses 2. 3, 8, 17, 25, and 26. 
14.2 Members put certain pointed questions and queries to the wimess arising out of his 
presentation and submission which were replied to. 
14.3 The Committee then directed Shr i Madhavan to send the written tex ts of the 
amendments, proposed by him on the various clauses of the Bill. 
14.4 Thereafter , Shri M.S. Verma inter alia stated that the jurisdiction of the Central 
• 

--
6 
Vigilance Commission should not extend to business enterprises which were requ ired to be 
run on commercial lines and earn profit. As far as overseeing the Banks and Financial 
institut ions was concerned, the same could be wken care of by their respective Boards of 
Directors. He also suggested that only very. senior level officers of ihe Banks and Financial 
institut ions should be brought under the purview of the eve and for that purpose a cut off 
level may be indicated. Shri Verma further suggested that a disti nction should be made 
between 'ownership' and 'control' of corpo rations and compa'nies by the Central 
Gove rnment and that Cen tral Vigilance Commission may exercise its jurisdiction in respect 
of those Companies; which were only controlled by the Government instead of ·owned or 
controlled ' as stated in the Long Title and other clauses in the Bill. Shri Verma then made 
specific suggestions for amendments in the long title, Clauses 3, & 8 of the Bill. 
14.5 The Committee dirtected Shri Verma to send the written texts of the amendments 
proposed by him on the various clauses of the Bill. 
14.6 Shri S. K. Chowdhary shared with the Commiuee in brief his long expe rience with 
regard to the vigilance matters in Coal India Ltd. He then suggested that in commercial 
enterprises, their Board o f Directors should be entrusted with all the responsibilities with 
regard to supervision of all vigilance matters. He also suggested that only Board level 
officers in the PSUs should be brought under the purview of the Bill. 
15. As directed by the Comm ittee, the witnesses/experts submitted their written 
S[\ggestionslcomments on the general aspects of Lhe Bill as also on its specific clauses . The 
suggestions in brief and response of the Government thereto have been sum marised as 
under:-
SUGGESTION 
(i) The CBI takes follow up action in three stages in respect of informat ion received 
relating to corrup tion. They are (a) Verification of information (b) Preliminary 
Enquiry and (c) Investigation. Therefore it is suggested that in the Bill , at all places 
where the CVC is empowered to supervise the work of CBI or give instructions to 
CBI etc. , the provision shoul d be in respect of verification, enquiries and 
investigat ions conducted by CBl and not mere ly one or two of these. 
Government's response 
This issue is separately under examination in consultation with the Department of Legal 
Affairs and their advice is awaite d. 
Committee's recommendation 
The Comm ittee directs the Minist:ry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions to get 
the advice expedited, examine the same and arrive at a decision before proceeding with the 
Bill. 
SUGGESTION 
(ii) Clause 3 of the Bill envisages a multi-member CVC . There is apprehension Lhat it 
would become difficult for such a multi-member Commission to function with 
cohesion and unity of purpose and direction . A view has been expressed that as the 
eve is to be appointed by a very high level committee , there is probab ly no need 
to appoint Vigilance Commis-sioners. One cannot rule out the possibility of one or 
more Vigilance Commissioners working at cross purposes with the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner. I mer se ego clash could also result. These could creaL acute problems 
in giving effect to the object of the Bill. The System of sole Vigilance Commissioner 

7 
has been worki ng for 35 years. lt has, therefore, been suggested that the eve may 
comprise only of the Central Vigilance Commissioner as ar present . 
Government's response 
The Cen tral Vigilance Commission has been made a multi-member body in order to 
ensure that U1e extremely sensitive matters which have been entrusted to it have the benefit 
of the experience and wisdom of more than one member. This will also assure judiciousness 
and prevent arbitrariness. In this connection the views expressed by the Supreme Court in 
the case S.S. Dhanoa vs. Union of India and others (1991) 3 SSC 567 are of relevance. Para 
26 thereof is reproduced below:-
"The re is no doubt that :wo heads are better than one, and particular ly when an 
institution like the Election Comm ission is entrusted with vital functions , and is 
armed with exclusive uncontro lled powers to exec ute them , it is both necessary and 
desira ble that the powers are not exercised by one individual , however, all-wise he 
may be. Ir will conforms the tenets of rhe democratic rule. lt is true that the 
independence of an institution depends upon the persons who man it and not on 
their number. A s ingle individual may sometimes prove capable of withstanding all 
the pulls and pressures, which many may not. However, when vast powers are 
exercised by an institution which is ;,ccounwble to none , it is politic to entrust its 
affairs to more bands than one . It helps to assure judiciousness and want . of 
arbitrariness. The fact, however. remains that where more individuals than one, man 
an institu tion, the ir roles have to be clearly defined , if the functioning of the 
institutio n is not to come to a naught" . 
SUGGESTION 
(iii) In Clause 2, the word 'inquiry' needs to be defined as includ ing verification and 
inquiries conducted by the Delhi Special Police Establishment and also 
departmental inquiry against delinquent public servant. 
Govern ment's respo os 
There appears to be no need to spec ifically define 'inqui ry' in Clause 2 of the Bill as 
that will cons trai n the functions entrusted to the Centra l Vigilance Commission under Clause 
8(1) (b) and (c) of the Bill. The Clauses 11 a nd 12 of the Bill empower the Commission for 
conducting such inquiry. 
SUGGESTION 
(iv) What i s the view of the M inistry regarding substi tuting the words "Prevent ion of 
Corruptio n Act , 1988" with the w.ords ''Preve ntion of Corrupt ion Act , 1988 and 
other related offence .s" occuri ing in Clause 8? The reason being that corruption 
cases often include !PC Sections as well. 
Government's response 
The Prevention of Corru ption Act, 19.98 provi des for the trial of a case which may 
include offen ces other tha n those speci fied in t he said Act but which is included under the 
Code of Crimin al Procedure , 1973. In view of this, the need to m<ldify Clause 8 of the Bill is 
not appare nt. 
55281 RS/ f-4 -A 

8 
SUGGESTION 
(v) In relation to Clause 8(l)(c) of the Bill. CVC needs to be empowered to issue 
appropriate instructions to 1he competent authorities for talking early decisions in 
the mauer of issue of sanctions for prosecution Mere power to review may not 
include the power to issue such instructions. 
Government's response 
The Supreme Court in the case Vincet Narain & others versus Union of India of India 
& others (popularly known as Jain Hawaht case) vide its order dated 18th December. 1997, 
has inter alia, laid down as follows:-
(i) "The CVC shall review the progress of ~II cases moved by the CBI for sanction of 
prosecution of public servants which are pending with the compet ent authorities, 
~pecially those in which sanction has been delayed or refused. 
(ii) Time-limit of three momhs for grant of sanction for prosecution must be strictly 
adhered to. However, additional time of one months may be allowed where 
consu ltation is required with the AttOrney-General (AG) or any other Law Officer 
in the AG's Office". 
As this i~ now the law of the land. the Comm ission b tompetent to bring to the notice 
of the authorities who are not adhering to the ume·frame already laid down. 
SUGGES TION 
(vi) There is need for including reference to 'A ll India Services' also in Clause 8(2)(a). 
Gove rnment'~ response 
There seems to be no obJection in including reference to office~ belonging to the • AJI 
lndia Services' serving in connection with the affairs of the Centr~l Government also in 
Clause 8(2)(a). 
SUGGESTION 
(vii) As per Clause 8 (2)(b). various senior categories of public servants are not included 
and there is ri~k that CBl may prosecute them without obtaining advice of the 
CVC. Whether it would not be appropriate to amend the said Clause to read .. Such 
level of public servants as defined in Section 2 o f Prevention of Corruption Act, 
1998 as the Cen tr~l Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify 
in this behalf"! 
Government's response 
Under the previous arrangemen l that was ext~tmg, the Central Vigilance ComnllSsion 
was a non-s tatutory organisation. A list conta ining the categories of public servants in 
respec t of whom it was necessary to consult and obtain the advice of the Commission in 
discip lioary and vigilance matters has been notified. This was to ensure that there was 
appropriate and adequate consultation with the Commission to enwre objecttvity in the 
maner of initiating and continuing di~ciplinary proceedings, prosecution, etc. The powers 
available to Central Govern ment under Clause 8(2)(b) are to enab le the Ce ntral 
Governmerit to contin ue to issue such notifications from time to time in cons ultation with 
the concerned Department/Organisat ions, etc. In view of this, it may not be correct to 
apprehend that certain senior categories or officers may suffer due to lack of due 
consultation with the Commission in mauers of disciplinary proceedings, prosecution, etc. 
55281 

9 
SUGGESTION 
(viii) It would be better to amend the proviso to Clause 17 of the Bill to make it 
mandatory to lay a copy of Statement on the Table of each Houso: of P~rliamcm of 
such cases where the advice of the CVC in ca:.c of sanctions ha' not been 
accepted? 
Government's response 
Clause 14 of the Bill provides that the Comml>sion shall pre>ent annually to the 
President a report as to work done by the Commission and on receipt of such report, the 
Pres1dent shall cause the same to be la1d before each House of Parh;1ment wh1ch will 
invariably include, inter alia, the cases of disagreement also. In fact the present Repom 
forwarded by the Commission already mclude such information . As the ;uggestion made in 
this question has already been taken care of b) Clause 14 of the Dill, there appears to be no 
need to amend the clause as proposed. 
SUGGESTION 
(ix) Clause 25 of the Bill relates w :•ppomtme nt of the Director of Enforcement and 
officers of the Enforcement Directorate of the level above the Deputy Director of 
Enforcement. The Bill docs not, however, vest any power 1n the CVC to supervise 
the e nquiries conducted by the Enforceme nt Directorate under the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. There are other such agencies of the Central 
Government also e.g. the Director of Revenu e In telligence , Director-Genera l 
(Investigation) of the Income-Tax Department etc . However. eve hus not been 
vested with any power unde r the Bill in rehltion to the appoi ntment of the Heads of 
the Department of such age ncies. Consequen lly, the powe r vested on ly in respect of 
Director of Enforceme nt appears to be odd. Therefore, it would be appropriate 1f 
Clause 25 is deleted. 
Governm ent's response 
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Committee for appointment tO 
the post of Director of Enforcement and oUicers above the level of Deputy Director 
Enforcement and regulation of their tenure etc. It is a vital clause which has been duly 
incorporated keeping in view the directions of the Supreme Court. The Government 
therefore, is not in favour of the suggestion that Clause 25 may be deleted 
SUGGESTION 
(x) ln clause 26, in respect of Section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act , 
1946, the power to be exercised by the Directo r, CBl should be as of a Director­
General of Pohce in a State and not Inspector-General of Police. This is for the 
reason that in all States now, the police forces are headed by Director-Generals of 
Police and not Inspector-Genera ls of Police as it was over a decade back. As such 
suitable changes may be made in the Bill. 
Government 's response 
The e,en tral Burea u of Investigation derives its powers under the Delhi Special Police 
Establ ishme nt Act, 1946. The present formulation in the Bill has been prov ided keeping in 
view the relevant provisions existing in the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. 1946. 

-
[ 
10 
SUGGESTION 
(xi) In Clause 26(b), in proposed Section 4 A (3)(b) of the DSPE Act, 1946, the 
eligible category of offi~rs for being considered for appointment as Director, CBI 
may be mentioned as under: 
"Chosen from amongst officers belonging to the Indian Police Service constituted under 
the All India Services Act, 1951 and Departmental Officers of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment". 
Government's response 
Members of the Indian Police Service at the level of DGs who have wide experience by 
virtue of their postings in the States and the Centre are expected to provide leadership to 
Central Police Organisations (CPOs) including the CBI. In terms of the Recruitment Rules 
for the post of Director, CBI, officers of the Indian Police Service who have been approved 
for appointment as Director-General of Police under the Government of India are eligible 
for the appointment as Director, CBI. The post is filled up by the method of transfer on 
deputation basis. Moreover, in Central Police Organisations like BSF, CRPF, CISF, ITBP, 
there is no provision for the promotion of cadre officers of the ranks of Additional DG or 
DG above the level of I.G. Hence, the existing formulation is appropriate/adequate. 
SUGGESTION 
(xii) It is desirable to define the composition of the Commission in more specific terms. 
An apprehension has been expressed that in the absence or specific earmarking of 
slots, it is entire ly possible that the composition of the Commission might turn out 
to be such that it is composed of the officers of All India Services. Hence a view is 
that it is not desirable to club various disciplines together, if the composite 
character of the Commi~sion is to be preserved. Accordingly, a revised draft 
Clause 3(2) (b) has been suggested as under: 
2(b) The Commission shall consist of-
( a) A Central Vigilance Commissioner-Chairperson, 
(b) Not more than four Vigilance Commissioners from Administration, Finance 
(PSUs, Financial Institutions. Banks etc.), Criminal investigation and Law. 
Government's response 
According to proviso to sub-Clause (3) of Clause 3 of the Bill, from amongst rhe 
Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners, not more than three 
persons shall belong to the category of persons referred to either in sub-clause(3) (a) or in 
sub-clause(3) (b). Further, the said clause also enables considering persons with the specific 
experience referred to in this question for appointment as Central Vigilance Commissioner 
as well as Vigilance Commissioners. Therefore, there appears to be no need to revise Clause 
3(2) (b) as suggested above. 
SUGGESTION 
(xiii) It is desirable to put additional disabilities in Clause 5(6) (b) in relation to further 
employment of CVCr. and VCrs. On ceasing to hold office, so as to include 
constitutional appointments also. 

ll 
Govern ment's response 
The existi ng clause 5(6) has been in~:orpnratcd in the 'll111i! pattern us the Union Public 
Service Commission. Anidc 316(3) of the Con:a itutio n prov id6 th;tt a person who holds 
office as a Member of Public Service Commission shall. on the expiration tlf his term of 
office. be ineligible for reappointmen t to that office. The l'rotection of Human Rights Act. 
1993 also provides that on ceas ing to hold office a Chairperson or a Member shall be 
ineligible for further employmen t under the Government of Ind ia or under the Government 
of any State. 
It may be reca lled that during the delibe r:nion s of the Committee held on 6.1. 1999. the 
Chairman of the Committee had ht'ld that this is>ue would be discussed amongs t the 
members of the Committee. 
SUGGESTION 
(xiv) The failure to cover in the Bill the Depanmen t:tl enquiries conducted bv the CVC 
<ll present as pan of its responsibi lity appears to be an inadverteiH omission. In 
actual practict: 80% of the cases t:Oming to the Commission's notice are ihose 
which would warrant departmental action. Only 20% of the ca~es happen to be in 
the nature involving mens rea under the !PC o r any other criminal Act. • 
Therefore. it would be inadvisable to divest the Commission of these power. 
Government's response 
All the activ ities which were beinl! di,chargcd by the Cc11tt a! Vigilance C<11llllli>sion 
earlier under the Resolution of the (iove rnment of India, Ministry or tiH: I lome Affairs 
No. 24/7/64-AVD dated the l l th h:bruary. 196~ , will cont inue to be discharged by the 
Commiss ion under thi> Bill. These also include the basic functions entrus ted to the present 
Central Vigilance Commission like advice on dep:mmenwl enquirie> ;trising our of vigilance 
cases which are conducted by the Comtntssioners for Departmental 1 nquiries etc .. Clause 24 
of the Bi ll further protects all actions already taken by the Commission under the earlier 
Resolution. 
SUGGESTION 
(xv) Cla use l l of the Bill vests the Com tmsston with ex tcnstvc power': Clause I :2 
imparts the character of judicial proceedings to the lll<lllcr' dealt witl1 by the 
Comm ission. It is not clear whether this will necessarily result in the Departmental 
proceedings before the C<Jmmission ~tssuming the ch;tracteris .tics of a civil dispute. 
Whe ther Governmem would ensure th;H the sUfll'1J<try nature of the Departmental 
Enquiries is not lost in the pmcess of clothing the Commission with 3ddirion:tl 
power$? 
Government's response 
Clauses ll and 12 of the l3ill contain pr<Jvisions whicll will enable the Comm ission to 
carry (lU I the function > clllrU>ted to it 111\dct' Ci;tu,c 8(L) (b) and (c) which are essentially in 
the nature of preliminary enquiric, . 
The above are not to be con fused with the disciplinary proceedings and departmental 
enquiries which are heltl unde r the re levan t t'ules!legislm ions like All India Services 
(Discip line & Appeal) Rules and Central Civil Services (CCA) Rules. The Centra l Vigilance 
Commission even under the earlier Govern ment Resolution of 1964 did not conduct any 
5528! RS! F-S·A 

l2 
depanmental enqumcs itselr. The departmental enqumes are conducted by the 
Commissione r for Departmental Enquir ies who arc under the ~dmimstrative control of the 
Cemral Vigilance Commission. The Commissioner for Departmental Enquiries could take up 
enquiries only when so notified by the competent disc1plinary authority under the relevant 
disciplina ry rules. It is confirmed that there will be no change in Lhe nature of the 
departmental enquiries which will continue to be held on the same basis. 
SUGGESTION 
(xvi) According to the provis ions of the extant Vigilance MHnuul it is incumbent on the 
part of the adm inistration to refer the cases to the Commission at the firi>t stage 
and also after the conclusion oJ the enquiry and before the imposition of 
punishment. These are salutary conditions meant to safeguard the innocent 
officers and ch~k lack of objectivity in dealing with vigilance matters. Such 
consultation does not appear to have been provided for in the Bill. Reducing 
consultation with the Commission only to the initial stage virtually reduces the 
Commisison to a farce. Cases of misconduct which would warrant a punishment of 
dismissal or removal should not be allowed to be disposed of lightly with the 
imposition of stoppage of increment by three surges which would also the 'major' 
punishment. 
Tht: elaborate instructions which govern Lhe structure and functioning of the 
Cen tral Vigilance Commission on a non statutory basis should be given the 
requisite legal sanc tion throug h the present Bill. 
Government's respon se 
The point raisec! in this question is already covered in Clause 24 of the Bill. No further 
mc:!ification in the Bill dn this point appears to be necessary. 
SUGGESTION 
(xvii) The Bill dQes not provide for the Government consulting the Commission in the 
event of making any substantial changes or any new rules or regulation s 
governing the functioning of Lhe Commission. 
Government should consider to provide for th1s consultation with the 
Commission before any decision is taken by the Governmen t. 
Government's response 
Clause of the Bill already enable the Commission to make regulations and get this 
notified with the previous opproval of the Cen tral Governme nt. 1here appears to be no 
object ion to making a separate provision for consulting the Commissio n while making or 
amending Ruies relating to vigila nce and disciplinary matters. 
SUGGESTION 
(xviii) (i) The Cluase 8(1) may have to be elaborated to cover the Commision being 
empowered to order enquiries suo motu and cause such enquiries conducted 
by any agency including Lhe CBI. 
(ii) In the absence of a provision in Clause 8(1) (c), there could be difficulties in 
Lhe comm1ssion taking note of anonymous complaints , even through they 
may contain a large number of verifiable allegations. An alternative 
approach could be to define 'complaint'. to include anonymo us complaints. 
5528/RS/F-5 -B 

13 
Government's response 
(i) Under the Bill, the Commission has not specifically been empowered to order 
inquiries suo moto. In terms of Clause 8(1) (b) and (c). the Commission shall 
inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made either on a reference made 
by the Central Government or into any complaint. Therefore, a reference or ;t 
comp laint is a must enabling the Commission to inquire or cause an inquiry or 
investigation for offences committed by the public servam. ~pecified in this behalf 
under the Prevention of Corruptton Act, 1998. 
(ii) The Government has already issued detailed instruction to deal with anonymous/ 
pseudonymous complaints in consultation with the· then Central Vigilance 
Commission which stand presently under Clause 24 of the Bill. The need for 
further amendment to this clause is, therefore, not apparent. 
SUGGESTION 
(xix) In relation to Clause 8(1) ([). the posttton about c.ases not referred to the 
Commission is not clear. ls it that in such cases the CVC need not be consulted'! 
Most of the cases in the organisations originate with the investigations initiated by 
the Chief Vigilance Officers. According to the present instructions. once a 
vigilance case is registered, it ha> to be referred to the Commission for further 
action or closure. If these cases stop with the organisations, without the obligation 
of being referred to the Commission, the vigilance administration is most of the 
organisations might go haywire. 
Government's response 
There is no cause for the apprehension expressed in this question. This will be 
adequately taken care of under the functions entrusted to the Commission to exercise 
superintendence over the vigilance administration under Clause 8 (l) (g) of the Bill. 
SUGGESTION 
(xx) In relation to Cluase 9, the Committee has been apprised that the nature of the 
work in the Commission is such that viewpoints will have to be brought on record 
in writing and put forth clearly by everyone, Members and the Chairman as well. 
The advice has penal consequences, and will now be open even for judictal 
scrutiny. Therefore, decisions cannot be allowed to be taken in meetings. While 
matters of general interest and other matter s of policy may be left to be handled in 
meetings, in the cases relating to individual delinquent officers, the examination 
will have to be with full reference to all the facts, and individual members will 
have to record their views and assume full responsibility for what they say. How 
the Commission regulates its internal functioning is its business, and it is best left 
at that. 
As such in Clause 9, only sub-clauses (2) and (4) (a) & (b) may be retained . 
Government's response 
The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners are free to tour 
the entire country in order to acquaint themselves with the various issues relating to 
vigilance administration and also discharging their functions entrusted to them under Clause 
8(1) (g) of the Bill. However, Clause 9(1) only stipulates that the proceedings of the 
Commission shall be conducted at Delhi. Clause 9(3) of the Bill on ly enab les the 
uninterrupted and smooth functioning of the Commission. The Commission is competent to 
- --· 

13 
Government's response 
(i) Under the Bill, the Commission has not specif ically been empowered to order 
inquiries suo moto. ln terms of Clause 8(1) (b) and (c), the Commission shall 
inquire or cause an inquiry or investigat ion to be made either on a reference made 
by the Centra l Government or into any compla int. Therefore, a reference or :t 
comp laint is a must enab ling the Commission to inquire or cause an inquiry or 
investigation for offences committed by the public servant , specified in th is behalf 
under the Prevention of Corruption Act , 1998. 
(ii) The Government has already issued detailed instruction to deal with ano nymous/ 
pseudonymous complaints in consu ltation wfth the then Central Vigilance 
Commission which stand presently under Clause 24 of the Bill. The need for 
further amendment to this clause is, therefore, not apparent. 
SUGGESTION 
(xix) In relat ion to Clause 8(1) (f), the posttton about cases not referred to the 
Comm ission is not clear. Is it that in such cases the CVC need not be consulted ? 
Mos t of the cases in the organisations originate with the investigations initiated by 
the Chief Vigilance Office rs. According to the present instruc tions, once a 
vigilance case is registered , it has to be referred to the Commission for further 
action or closure. If these cases stop w ith the organisations , without the obligation 
of being referred to the Comm ission, the vigilance administration is most of the 
organisations might go haywire. 
Government's response 
There is no cause for the apprehens ion expressed in this quest ion. This will be 
adequa tely take n care of under the functions entrusted to the Commission to exercise 
superintendence over the vigilance administration under Clause 8 (1) (g) of the Bill. 
SUGGESTION 
(xx) In relation to Cluase 9, the Committe e has been apprised that the nature of the 
work in the Commission is such that viewpoints will have to be brought on reco rd 
in writi ng and put forth clearly by everyone, Members and the Chaiiman as well. 
The advice has penal consequences. and will now be open even for judicial 
scrut iny. The refore, decis ions cannot be allowed to be taken in meeting s. While 
matters of general interest and other matters of policy may be left to be handled in 
meetings, in the cases relating to ind ividual delinquent officers, the examination 
will have to be with full refere nce 10 all the facts, and individual members will 
have to record their views and assume full responsibi lity for what they say. How 
the Commission regulates its internal func tioning is its business , and it is best left 
at that . 
As such in Clause 9, only sub-clauses (2) and (4) (a) & (b) may be retained. 
Government' s response 
The Central Vigilance Comm issioner and the Vigilance Commissioners are free to tour 
the entire cou ntry in order tO acquaint themselves with the various issues relat ing to 
vigilance administration and also discharg ing their functions entrusted to them unde r Clause 
8(1) (g) of the Bill. However, Cl2use 9(1) only stipula tes that the proceed ings of the 
Commission shall be conduc ted at Delhi . Clause 9(3) of the Bill only enables the 
uninterrup ted and smooth functioning of the Commission . The Commission is compe tent to 

14 
decide ib inter nal pmce dur ~ unde r Cl:IL"C 21 of the Bill by framing suitable regulmio ns which 
will be notified by th~m with the previ ous approva l of the Central Govern ment. 
SUGGESTION 
(x\i) The jun'<licuon of the Commi,,ion a~ conceJ\cd in the present ~cheme would 
appear to be the '<arne :•~ env"aged in the provi,ions of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act. It may be of intcrc>t to note that certain in,tiruuons which rece ive 
substantial funding from the G over nmen t also attrac t the provi sio ns of the PC Act. 
The pre sent Gill prov ides coverin g to on ly those in ~t itutions which arc owned or 
controlled by the Government. It wo_!lld perh:ops be advisable tO make the 
JUrisdiction of the Commi"ion conform to the PC Act. 
Gover nment"s respon ~e 
Under the Government Resolution of 19M the jurisdiction and powers of the Central 
Vigilance Comm ission extended to ma llcr' to which the execut ive powers of the Union 
extends. The present Bill provides for covering of such public 'erv ant s who hltd already been 
subject to the jurisdi ction of the non-statu lOry Cen tr:ol Vigilance Commission. In the opi nion 
of the Gove rnm ent any anemp 10 expand thi> wou ld erode cffectivenes~ of the Central 
Vigilance C..ommi~~ion . 
SUGGESTION 
(xxi i) An important a'pcc t of the funct ioning of the Comm""io n does not seem to have 
been covered in the Bill. As Clnuse 8 of the Bill does not cloth e the Commission 
with the power to suggest change> in system s und procedures for adoption by t he 
dcparunent' in the ligh t of any facts which might have come to the notice of the 
Commission. it is desirable to provide for this explicitly for ;tmplifying the 
terminolog.y m ~ul>-clause (g) of Clause 8. 
Government's respon se 
As per earl ier deci~ i o n s of the Supreme Court , (Madav R<to Jivaji Scindia -vs-U nion of 
Lndia AIR 1971 SC 530 tHld Jayantilal Anmtl: ll Shodhan. vs.f'.N. Rana AlR 1964 SC 648), 
constitutional and statutory bodies like UPSC. C& AG and E lecuon Commission of India . are 
as much pan of the executive as the Government illiclf. In ~uch a context continuous inter­
actoon betwee n such bodie~ and the Go' ernment is nonnal Any ~uggestion for mod ifying a 
procedure or Government policy etc . receovcd from a l.latutory body like the Central 
Vigilance Commission shou ld be ca refully considered at an appropri ate level in the 
Governmen t by adopt ing with or without modification . Clause S(l)( g) of the Bi ll should 
e nabl e the Commiss ion to make ~ppropriatc su~estion~ to the Government from time to 
time. 
SUGGESTION 
(xxiii) It would be m the best intcr~'b of the proper operations or banks and financial 
institutions that t hese are kept o u t~i de the purview of the Del hi Special Police 
Establishm ent Act and the CVC. Boa rds of th<! ba nks/financia l inst itutions should 
be adequat e to decide whc:thcr a part icular dec ision wh ich went wrong, was a 
nom1al bus iness dec ision or a n"c of mala fide act io n. Once the institution decides 
that a particular case has a vigilance angle and refers it to the investigating 
agencies, the law should wkc it~ own course. In all other cases where tl1e 
concenred instttutions are clear that the action taken by an employee was a normal 
busines s decision. there should be no need for any outsi de agency to interfer e. 

15 
(xxiv) In relation to Clause 8(1)(b) the definiton of the Government Company (whose 
employees will be in the purv1ew of the CVC) should exclude the word "owned" 
and retain only the word "controlled". Financial institutions and banks are 
controlled by their respective boards allhough owned by the government. In such 
a situation, the roles of the government as an owner and controller should be 
separate Good corpoate govcrn;mce requires that fusion of these two roles be 
avoided and governance is lefl to independe nt boards who would take decision 
on consid eration of what is good and proper for following the objectives of the 
organisation and not by whnt the owner wishes or desires or considers preferable. 
Government's responses 
The comments on the above suggestions were sought by the Department of Personnel 
and Training from the Banking Division of the Department of Economic Affairs and the 
Department of Public Enterprises. The Banking Division of the Department of Economic 
Affairs· have furnished replies as under: 
"While Boards of banks/financial institutions should be empowered to decide 
whether decisions were taken bona fide or mala fide it might not be appropirate 
to exclude public sector banks and financial institutions from the purview of eve 
so long as the Government of India ha~ a minimum of 51% shareholding in such 
banks/financial institutions" . 
Jn this conne{:tion it may be pointed out that the Supreme Court in its Order 
dated 18.12.1997 in the case of Vineet Narain and others vs Union of Ind ia and 
others, has inter alia exprcsse<.l the view that where the accusation of corruption is 
based on direct evidence and it does nor require any inference to be drawn 
dependent on the dcci:.ion-making process, there is no rational basis to clnssify them 
<.li[ferently. The Supreme Court also further expressed the v1ew that there may be 
other cases where the accusation cannot be supported b} direct evidence and is a 
mauer of inference of corrupt motive for the decision, with nothmg to prove directly 
:lily illegal gain to the decision maker. Those are cases in which the inference drawn 
is that the decision must have been made for a corrupt motive because the dec1sion 
could not have been reached otherwise by an officer at that level in the hierarchy. 
This is, therefore, an area where the opinion of persons with 
requisite expe rtise in decision·making of th<ll kind is relevant and. mlly be even decisive in 
reaching the conclusion whether the allegation requires any inves tigation to be made. The 
Supreme Court, howeve r. has made it clear th ~t the final opinion is to be o( the CB I with 
the aid of that advice and note that of anyone else . 
In the light of the views cx pr~sscd by the Supreme Court as mentioned above it does 
not appea r tenable to agree to the ~uggcs ti ons made in the aforesaid suggestions, that the 
Boards of banks/financial institutions shou ld be empowered to decide whether decision were 
taken bona fide or mala fitle. 
SUGGF.STION 
(xxv) Sub-clause (2) of clause 8. while clearly mentioning the lev.!l of the officers in 
Central Government who will be subject to the CVC purview leave~ the level in 
respect of other compamcs that are owned or controlled by the Central 
Government undetermined. It h•t~ been stated in the sub-clause that Government 
may, be notification in the offici~! gaL.ette, specify this level from ume to time. 
As in the case of Central Gover nment offic.ials, it would be desirable to <pccify 
SS281RSIF~.A 

16 
the levels in respec t of other Government companies as well. On suggestion that 
has been made in this connection is that the level be confined to officers 
operating in the~e organisations at the board level or one or two levels below the 
board. 
The logic behind such a suggest ion is that whereas those operating at these higher levels 
should be subject to the purview of the CVC, other operating officers in the field remain, 
for vigilance purposes, only under the purview of the respective organisation's Board of 
Directors. 
. 
In the same genre another suggestion has been made that in public sector commercial 
enter prises, thei r Boards of Directors shou ld be entrusted with all the responsibilities of 
supervision of vigilance matters, it has thus been suggested that only Board Level Officers in 
the public sector enterprises should be brought under the purv iew of the Bill. 
Government's response 
The Banking DIVIsion of the Department of Economic Affairs was consulted and they 
have swred as under: 
"Present ly CVC's jurisdiction extends to officers of and above Scale m in public 
sector banks. ln public sector undertakmgs, CVC"s juri&dtction extends only to Board 
level functionaries. Ideally there shou ld be no distinction betwee n public sector banks 
and public sector undertakings in the matter of jurisdiCtion of eve. As a fi~t step, 
we have proposed that the officers of Scale Ill and IV in pub lic sector bunks may be 
excluded from CVC's jurisdictiOn. A proposal to this effect had been sem to the 
DOPT quite sometime ago"', 
In tbts connection, it may be pointed out tha: under the previous arrangement that wus 
existing, the CVC was a non-statutory orga nisation. A list contain ing the categories of Public 
servants rn respect of whom it was necessary to consult and obtain the advice of the then 
Commission in disciplinary and vigilance matters has been notified. This was lo ensure that 
there was appropriate :md aJequate consultation with the Commission to ensure objectivity 
111 the matter of inithtting and contin uing disciplinary proceedings, prosecution, etc. The 
jurisdiction of the present Central Vigilance Commission also extends to the Public servants 
as notified above. The powers available w Central Gover nment under clause 8(2}(b} are to 
enable the Central Government to continue to issue such notifications from time to time in 
consultation with the concerned Department/Organisations wherever the public interest so 
demands. At present. proposals received from various Mini>tries/Departments are under 
examination. 
In vtew of the position explained above , the Government , at present, does not find tt 
necessary to restrict the jurisdiction of tl1e CVC as has been suggested. 
16. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause conside ration of Centra l Vigilance 
Commission Bill, 1998 in its sitting held on 28th January, 1999 in the light of the various 
~uggestionsk:omments recctved and the Government's responses thereto. 
17. The Committee considered and adopted the Repo rt in its sitti11g held o n the 19lh 
February, 1999. 
S528/ RS I F-6-B 

17 
18. The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in 
the Bill are given below:-
Clause J 
18.1 Clause 3 provides that the Commission sha ll consist of a Central Vigilance 
Commissioner and not more than four Vigilance Commissioners as Members. The clause 
also provides that the Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners shall be 
(tppointed from amongst persons-
{a) who have been or are in an all-India Service or in any civil service of the Union or 
in a civil post under the Union having knowledge and experience in the matters 
relating to vigilance, policy making and admini~tration including police 
udministration; and 
{b) who have held office or are holding office in a corporation established by or under 
any Central Act or a Government company owned or controlled by the Central 
Government and persons who have expertbc and experience in ,finance including 
insurance and banking, law, vigilance ann investigations; 
Provided that, from amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner .tnd the Vigilance 
Commissione~, not more than three persom shall belong to the category of perst>ns 
referred to either in (a) or in (b). 
18.2 The Committee discussed at length the suggestions received on thi~ clause, namely 
(i)it was desirable to define the composition of the Commission m more specific terms as in 
the absence of specific earmarking of slots 11 was entirely possible that the compositiOn of 
the Commission might turn out to b~; such th:H it w<~s composcu of on ly offico;rs of All India 
Services; (ii) it was not desirable to dub various disciplines together if the composite 
character of the Commission was to be preserved; and (iii) 11 would be ideal to have a 
Vigilance Commissioner each from (a) one of the major departments of the Government, 
(b) PSUs, Finance and lnsurance Company, Dan king Sector etc., (c) persons with extensive 
legal background in personne l and other matters preferably with experience in handling 
matters relating to Pre'lention of Corruption Act and should be qualifie<l to be a Judge of a 
High Court with adequate practical experience and (d) persons with extcnMve knowledge 
and experience in investigating matters of col'l'uption, misuse of office and shou ld be drawn 
from central or state police t:Mablishment. 
18.3 The Committee recommends to Gover-nment that due care may be taken "hile 
appointing persons to the Commission to ensure that they may not belong to one particular 
servicetcategory referred to either in sub-section (a) or in sub-section (b) of sub-clause (3) of 
Clause 3. 
18.4 Subject to this the clause L~ adopted. 
C/11use 4 
18.5 Clause 4 provides that the Chairperson and other Member~ of the Central 
Vigilance Commission shall be appointed after obtaining the recommendation of a 
Committee consisting of the Prime Minister. the Minister of Home Affairs and the Leader of 
Opposition in the House of the People. 
18.6 The Committee, however, observed that in the last five decades there had been 
Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha only for eleven years. The Committee noted that 
according to rules , any party failing to get less than ten per cent of the total number of seats 

18 
in the House could not be recognised as a party and the Leader of such single largest pany 
in Opposition to the Government could not be recognised a~ Leader of Opposition. The 
Committee further noted that there migh t arise a situation when there would be no Leader 
of Opposition in either of the House.. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an 
appropriate explanafion may be added to this clause to suitably deal with such a situation. 
The Committee fL>t!ls that in such an eventuality the Leader of the single largest group In 
opposition to the Government in the Bouse of the People may be inclnded in the Committee 
recommending the names of Chairperson and Members or Centra l Vigilance Commission. 
18.7 Subject to this the clause is adopted. 
Clause 5 
18.8 Sub-clause (5) of Clause 5 provides that on ceasing to hold office the Chairperson 
and every other Member of Central Vigilance Commission shall be ineligible for 
reappointment in the Central Vigilance Commission and further emp loyment to any office of 
profit under the Government of India or the Government of a State. 
18.9 The Committee, ho»ever, recommends that alongwith these prOVISIOns, the 
Chairperson and Members of Central \'igilance Commission may also be made ineligible Cor 
the gubernatorial posts and diplomatic a~signmenl~ like Ambassadors, High Commissioners, 
A_dministrators of Union Territories etc. after ceasing to hold their respective offices. In other 
words, they may be debarred from holding any office und er the Government of India. 
18.10 Sub-clause (1) of Clause 5 further provides that the Central Vigilance Commission 
shall hold office for a term of four ye<trs from the date on which he enters upon his office or 
till be allains the age of sixty-five years. whichever is earlier. Sub-clause (2) of the clnusc 
provides that every Vigilance Commi~i oner shall hold office for a term of three years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attai11s the age of sixty five years, 
whichever is earlier. 
18.11 A qu~ry was made as to why different tenures had been provided for the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissione rs. In th is context an apprehension was 
expressed th at this would create seniority problems between Cen tral Vigilance Commissioner 
and Vigilance Commissioners. The Commiuee was informed that in the light of the fact that 
t.he Central Vigilance Commissioner would be the Chairperson of the Commission and in 
terms of salary and tenure would have superiority over the Vigilance Commissioners, he 
would enjoy primacy in the functioning of the Commission. In this context the representative 
of the Ministry informed the Committee that in view of the nature of work of the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners and the enormous amount of 
influence they would wield. their tenure could not be different than what had been prov1ded 
in the Bill. J le also informed the Comn11ttee that the problem of senior ity would not come 
because the pay of Centra l Vlgi l <<~lCC Commiss ione r was Rs. 30,00<Y- and the pay of 
Vigilance Commissioners was Rs. 26,0()()1. 
18.12 The representative of the Mmistry they suggested that the existing proviso the 
sub-clause (7) of Clause 5 needed amplification relating to retirement benefit in respect of 
previous 5ervices in case of Central Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance Commissioners 
having rendered servis;e in a corporation established by or under any Central Act or a 

19 
Government Company owned or controlled by the Central Government. Accordingly, the 
representative of the Mimstry proposed that after the first prov1s0, the folloYo'ing proviso 
may be added, namely:-
"Provided further that if the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance 
Commissioners is, at the time of his appointment, in receipt of retirement bcncfib in 
respect of any previous service in a corporation established by or under any Cemral 
Act or a Government company owned or comrolled by the Central Government lu:; 
salary in respect of the service as the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any 
Vigilance Commissioners shall be reduced by the amount of pension equivalent to 
retirement benefits" 
18.13 In !Ius context, it was stated that with the proposed amendment , the exi~ting 
second proviso would become the third proviso needing slight drafting .:hange , The 
Committee was also informed that the proposed amendment had been suggested by the 
Ministry of Finance, approved by Minister of Finance and drafted by Legislative 
Department. 
18.14 The Committee accepts the amendment~ submitted by the Mini~ry. 
18.15 The clause is adopted as amended. 
Clause 8 
18.16 Clause 8 provides for functiom and powers of the Commission. Sub-secton (c) of 
sub-clause (1) of clause 8 provides that the Commission shall inquire or cause an mqt11r, •.r 
investigation to be made into any compl~1int l>,gainst any official belonging to such c~rcgvrv 
o[ officials ~-peci fied in sub-clause (2) wherein it is alleged that he has committed an offcnv; 
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Sub-clause (2) says ·hat p.:rsons referred :o 
in sub-section (c) of sub-clause (1) are Group 'A' Officers of Cent.ral Government. ltc 
Committee felt that reference to All India Serv1ces Officers had , however, been exclud~ d 
from the purview of the above section. The Government m this context informed th..1t lh··1<' 
was no objection in including refercnc~ to officers belonging I• •h.: 'All India SeNe~> 
18.17 The Commillee, accordingly, reconunends that sub-section (a) of ~ub-clau<e tZ, may 
be suitably amended to include the reference to officers belonging to All India Se~·kes. 
18.18 A Suggestion had been made that in OtLase B wherever the Words "Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988'' occured. th1.: word> "and other related offence,' may he added 
thereafter. The reason adv3nced for the sugge!>t1on was that corruption cases often 1nclud<:d 
!PC Sections as well. 
18.l9 The Government had informed the Committee that the Prevention of Corruption 
Act, 1988 provided for the trial of a case wh1cb muy include offence~ othl.:f than those 
specified in the said Act but which was included under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1973. In 
view of this, the Government felt that there was no need to modify Clau~c 8 as suggested 
18.20 The Committee is, however, not sacisfied with the reply of the Gon,rnment and 
feels that is necessary to incorporate the suggested amendment. The ConuniUee, accordingly 
recommends that after the words "Prevention of Corruption Acl, 1988 wherever they occur in 
Clause 8, the words "and other related offe.nc~s" may be added thereafter. 
18.21 The clause is adopted as amended. 
SS2S/RSII"-i·A 

20 
Clause 20 
18.22 Clause 20 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of thts legtslation. A point was ratsed that the Bill did not 
provide for the Government tO consult the Commission in the event of maktng any 
~ubstantial cha nges or any new rule!V'regulations governing the functioning of the 
Commission. In this context a suggestion wa~ n:.:cived that the Government ~hould conside r 
to make an explicit prov ision in the Bill itself, to provide for this consultation with the 
Commission . 
18.23 ln this respect the Commi ttee was informed by the Government that Clause 21 
already enabled the Commossion to make regulations and notify the $amc with the previous 
approval of Central Government. The Government also informed the Commmee that they 
had no object ion in makmg a separate prO\i~ton for consulting the Commiss ion while making 
or amending the rules framed under clause 20, relating to vigilance and disctplinary matters. 
18.24 The Committee, accordingly, recommend s that clause 20 may be suitably amended. 
18.25 The clause is adopted as amended. 
19. Clauses 2, 6, 7, 9 to 19. 21 to 27 nre adopted by the Commillee without an) change. 
20. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Tille are adopted with some changes whicb 
nrc of consequential or drafting nature, namely '1998' and ·fort y Ninth' to be sub~tit uted by 
'1999' and 'Fiftieth' , respectively. 
21. The Committee recommend s that the Bill be passed after incorporating the 
umendmeols suggested by it. 
NhW DI>Ltu; 
F~bmary 25, 1999 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE, 
Chatrman, 
Commiccee 011 Home Affairs . 
55281 RS I F- 7·B 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
XVUI 
EIC HTEE!'\'TH MEETING 
The Commillce met at 3.30 P.M . on Thursday , the lOth December, 1998, in Commitu:e 
Room 'A' , Ground Floor . Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri M. Venkaiah Nijtdu 
3. Shri Prafull Goradla 
4. Shri S. Ramach~ndran Pillai 
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
lOK SABRA 
6. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
7. Shri Vijay Goel 
8. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
9. Maj. Gen . B.C. Khnnduri 
10. Shri Ravi Sitaram· Natk 
II. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
12. Shri Motilal Vora 
13. Shri Sudhir Girl 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. -"''ohd. Ali Asharaf Fatm1 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Committee that he had received a letter 
dated lOth December , 1998 from the Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha informing him tllat the 
Central Vigilance Commts~•on Bill 1998, as introduced and pending in Lok Sabha. has been 
referred by the 1-lon'ble Chatrman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Hon'ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha, to the Commiuee for examination and Report by 16th December, 1998. 
2.1 Members expressed their views on the reference. After some discussion, the 
Committee felt that it would not be possible for it to complete ex;rmination of the provision~ 
of the Centra l Vigilance Comm ission Bill, 1998 and submi t its Report within the stipulated 
time, i.e., 16th December, 1998. According ly •. the Comm iuee authorised its Chairman to 
21 

22 
request Hon'blc Chairman. Rajya Sabha to grant extension of time to it, upto the last day of 
the first week of the 1999 Budget Session of the Parliament, to .:nable il complete its work 
and present the Report on the Bill to Parliament. 
3. In this conte xt the Chairman observed tl1at a BiU replacing an Ord inance ~hould not 
be referred to the Standing Committee and asked to submit its Report wtthin a short time as 
that would amount to t~ king proforma approval of the Committee inasmuch a paiticu l ~r 
system or scheme had alre.,dy been brought into operation by promulgat ing the Ordinance . 
• 4. • • 5 . .. 
6. The C(lmmittee then adjourned at 5.(X) P.M. to meet again at 10.30 A.M. on Tue>day, 
15th December 1998. 
---- ------'1 
--- ----- - ---
• .... Omitted p<n·uon relah=-"" h.' <,I) me n1h.c-r maucr. 

, 
'XXI 
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th January, 1999, in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l . Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri H. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri S. Ramach andran Pillai 
7. Shri Jaoeshwar Misra 
8. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
9. Shri S. Viduthalai Yirumbi 
10. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Krishna Kumar Chnudhary 
12. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
13. Sbri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
14. Shri Pusbpadan Sbambbudan Gadhavi 
15. Shri Vidya Vishnu Datt 
Hi. Maj . Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
17. Sbri Ram Nagina Misbra 
lB. Sbri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
19. Sbri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
20. Shri lshvarbbai Khoda bhai Chavda 
21. Shri Motilnl Yor a 
22. Sh.ri Samar Choudhury 
23. Sbri Cbada Suresh Reddy 
24. Sbri Ramsheth Thakur 
25. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
SECRE TARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi. Under Secretary 
Shri Mahe sh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
·~unutc..."i of Nineteenth and Twentieth meclings of 1hc Committee relate to sornc other matter. 
23 
SS281RSIF-S.A 

24 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINL'ITRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSIONS 
I. Shri B. B. Tandon, Secretary 
2. Shri Harinder Singh, Joint Secret;~ry 
3. Shri Shankar Aggarwal. Direcwr 
2 AI the ouhet the Cha trman welcomed The Secretary and other oiTicer.o of Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievance~ and Pensions. In his opening observations the Chairman 
referred to the order of the Supreme Coun dated 18. 12.97 in the case of Vineet Naram .tnd 
Othen; vs. Umon of India mrtr alia dtrecting tliat statutory stmu~ should be conferred upon 
the Central Vigilance Commission; the issuance or Ordinance on 25.8.98 selling up a 
Statutory CVC; objections filed by the amicus amae m the Supreme Court relating to 
certain provisions or the Ordinance; the ts>uunce M the second Ordinance on 27 10.98; the 
introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha on 7 12.98 rcphtctng the Ordinances; and 
subsequent reference of the Bill to the Committee for exammatton and report. In this 
context the Chairman asked the SecreT<1fY whe1her the Government did not apply its mind 
while promu lgating the first Ordinance e~pect•lly tn regard to th~ composition of the CVC 
He, thereafter, rcque~ted the Secretary to make a pre,entation on the Bill . 
2.1 The Secretary (Personnel) appri~ed the Committee of the genesis of the institution 
of CVC and the hiswrical deve lopments leading the issuing of the Ordinance and the Bill 
replacing the same. 
2.2. The Secretary. then made a presentation on the various provisions of the BiU 
3. The Chairman and member~ put 'everal queMions and queries which mainly 
perrained to reasons for not taking the normal legi,lative route in setting up a Statutory 
CVC: multi-member charac ter of ('VC; pt imacv of Central Vigilance Commi~sioner in 
J~ ·isinn ll' 1-.tng p!U.:~SS; ~pp int tent (I s.~r~l.l ) nd t,tlt <1( C\'C. lhCtf indepcndCtlU: 
and unp:trtta hty let tns nnJ condnwns of '<I"Vicc. u ·l11 ibrlr \ o1 Cc, ral Vrl(ilance 
Commtssu.Jner and \'tgthnce Comm•~'tutter' m holthttg (tlttcc~ alter retirement· mter Ie 
seutOrit\ ;rnwnc:.t the u -.rral Commi~>ioncr and other Commt'>t,mers, pov.er tu remove 
dtHtcu1tte,, An~u"l R<·pon. and <upa t nt~ttdcnce over the Dtre•tvmte of Fnfor~cmcnt etc 
4 . The Secrctar' r ~., td.:d 1 :nam N •h.- '111<'''"'"' tnd qu,·ues. H wra alw 
,u)(g<.·,ted th;n the Comn tt tee mav rt·.:omm,..uJ , n mtendment 1 h. u t ,'' J\ '- , 
5(7) wh .. , "'·Juld b~ ,)1 a rcchnica l n,ttun· 1datmg to JC!trcme nt benefit 111 re, pecl of 
previous service :. in case of ever or AVCrs having rendered service tn a corpora tion 
established by or under ~ny Centra l Act or a Govt. company owned or controlled by the 
Central Government. 
5. At this stage certain busic objections lO the Bill were raised by some rnemben;. Those 
were brieny discussed. The Chairman observed that there was need for debaw and 
discussion on the various ideas expre~ed by the mcmbcn;. 
6. A Verbatim record of \he proceedings was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 "·"· to meet again at 11.00 " ·-"· on 
Thun;day. the 7th .lanu~ry , 1999. 
552St RS F-$-.8 

XXJJ 
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at li.OO A .M . on Thursday , the 7th January , 1999. in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor. Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri S. Ramachandr a n Pillai 
5. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
7. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumb i 
8. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shn Lal Bihari Tiwari 
12. Shri Vaidya Vis hnu Dull 
13. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshl 
14. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
15. Shrimati Meira Kumar 
16. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
17. Shri Nedurumalli Jana rdhana Reddy 
18. Shri lshvarbh ai Khodabhai Chavda 
19. Shri Motilal Vora 
20. Shri Samar Choudhury 
21. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
22. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
23. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C . Tripathi, Secretary-General 
Shri Sat i~h Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Slui Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Seth i, Under Secretary 
Sbri Mahesh C. Tiwar i, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri K. Madhavan, Former Joint Director. CD! 
2. Shri M.S. Venna, Honorary Advisor to Governor , RBI 
3. Shri S.K. Chowdhary, Former Chairma n. Coal Ind ia Ltd. 
25 

26 
2. The Chairman welcomed Sbri K. Madhavan and requested him to share his views 
with the.Committee on the Bill, especially the efficacy and effectiveness of the CVC, in the 
light of his experience in the CBI. Shri Madhavan, while welcoming the Bill initially made 
some general observations thereon. He stated that CBI and Police should be free from 
Governmental control and placed under an independent agency. Thereafter, he suggested a 
number of amendments in the various clauses of the Bill, particularly the Long Tit le, 
Clauses 2, 3, 8, 17, 25 & 26. 
2.1 Members put certain pointed questions and queries to the witness arising out of his 
presentation and submission which were replied to. 
2.2 The Chairman then directed Sbri Madhavan to send the written texts of the 
amendments proposed by him on the various clauses of the Bill. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman requested Shri M.S. Verma to make a presentation on the 
Bill and to express his views on the provisions thereof. Shri Verma inter alia state d that the 
jurisdiction of the CVC should not extend to business enterprises which were required to be 
run on commercial lines and earn profit. As far as overseeing the Banks and Financial 
Institut ions was concerned , the same could be taken care of by their respective Boards of 
Directors. He also suggested that only very senior level officers of the Banks and Financial 
Institutions should be brought under the purview Of the CVC and for that purpose a CUI off 
level may be indicated . Shri Verma furthe r suggested that a distinction should be made 
between 'ownership' and 'contro l' of corporations and companies by the Central 
Government and that CVC may exercise its jurisdiction in respect of those Companies which 
were only controlled by the Government instead of 'owned or controlled' as stated in the 
Long Title and other clauses in the Bill . Shri Verma then made specific suggestions for 
amendments in the long title, Clauses 3 & 8 of the Bill. 
3.1 The Chairman directed the witness to send the written texts of the amendments 
proposed by him on the various clauses of the Bill. 
4. The Chairman then requested Shri S .K. Chowdhary to express his views on the Bill. 
Shri Chowdhary shared with the Committee in brief his long experience with regard to the 
vigilance matters in Coal India Ltd. He then suggested that in commercial enterprises, their 
Board of Directors should be entrusted with all the responsibilities with regard to 
supervision of all vigilance matters. He also suggested that only Board level officers in the 
PSUs should be brought under the purview of the Bill. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P .M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 
18th January, 1999. 
I 

'XXIV 
TWENTY-FOURTH \IEETING 
The Committee mc.:t at lUlU 1\.M. on Thursduy, the 28th January, 1999 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground 1"\oor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEl\ffiERS PRES ENT 
I. Shri Pranab MukhcrJee-Chmrmnn 
RA.JY A SABHA 
2. Shri Honsr~j Bhardwaj 
3. Shri H. tlanumanthappa 
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri K. M. Saifull~th 
7. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
8. Shn Jancshwar M1sra 
9. Dr. Jagannath Mo~hra 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
ll. Shri Satya Pal Jam 
12. Shri La\ Bihan Tiwari 
13. Shri l'ushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
14. Shri Vaidya Vishnu D<ltt 
15. Shri Anam Kumar llegde 
16. Dr Swami Sachchidanand Han Saksho 
17. Maj Gen. B.C Khandun 
18. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
19. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayccd 
20. Shri l~hvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
21. Shri Motilal Vora 
22. Shn Samar Choudhury 
23. Slu i Mohan Singh 
24. Shri Chada Surcsh Reddy 
25. Shri Ramsheth l'hakur 
REPRESENTATIVES OF T11E MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
Al\1) PENSIONS 
Shri V. Laxm i Ratan. Addl. Secretary 
Shri D K. Samanlilray Director 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S;uish Kumar, Joint Secrctury 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Sbri Mahesh C. T1wari. Commottee Officer 
•Minutes ol 1\venly·thnd mccung_ of tht Con'llnltl.;( rcl\.11c~ to :.omc: 01hcr mau~.;r 
27 

28 
2. • • • 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
5. • • • 
6. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause conside ration of the Central 
Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 in the light of the various suggestions/comments 
received and the Government's responses thereto. 
Clause Z 
6.1 Clause 2 was adopted without any change. 
Clause 3 
6.2 Clause 3 provides tha t t he Commission shall consist of a Central Vigilance 
Commissioner and not more than four Vigilance Commi~sioners as Member~. The clause 
also provides that the Centr<tl Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners 
shall be appointed from amongst persons-
(a) who have been or are in an all-India Service or in any civil service of the 
Union or in a civil post under the union having knowledge and experience in 
the matters relating to vigilance. policy making and administration including 
police administration: and 
(b) who have held offi~e or are hold ing office in a corporation established by or 
under any Central Ac t or a Government company owned or controlled by the 
Centra l Government and persons who have expertise and experience in finance 
including insurance and banking, law. vigilance and investigations; 
Provided that. (rom amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the 
Vigilance Commissioners, not more than three persons shall belong to the 
category of persons referred to either in (a) or in (b). 
6.3 The Committee discussed at length the suggestions received on this clause, 
name ly, (i) it was desirable tO define the composition of the Commission in more 
spec ific terms as in the absence of 'pec ific earmarking of slots it was ent irely possible 
that the compos ition of the Commission might turn out to be such that it was 
composed of only officers of All india Services; (ii) it was not desirable to club various 
discaplines together if the composite character of the Commission was to be preserved; 
and (iii) it would be ideal to have a Vigilance Commissioner each from (a) one of the 
major departments of the Government, (b) PSU~. Finance and insurance Company, 
Banking Sector etc., (c) persons with extensive legal background in personnel and other 
matters preferably with experience in handling mailers relat ing to Preven tion of 
Corruption Act and should be qualif ied to be a Judge of a High Court with adequate 
practical expe rience and (d) persons with extensive knowledge and experience in 
inveMigating matters of ~orruption. misuse of office and should be drawn from central 
or state police establishment. 
6.4 The Committee recommended to Government that due care should be taken 
while appointing persons to the Commission to ensure that they did not belong to one 
... OmiHed portions relate to sornc other mat1e1 

\ 
f 
29 
part icular service/catego ry referred ot either in sub-section (a) or in sub-section (b) of sub­
clause (3) of Clause 3. 
6.5 Subject to th is the clause was adop ted. 
Clause 4 
6.6 Clause 4 provides that the Chairperson and other Members of the Central Vigilance 
Commission shall be appointed after obtai ning the recommendation of a Committee 
consisting of the Prime Minister, the Minister of Home Affairs and the Leade r of Oppos ition 
in the House of the People. 
6.7 The Committee, however, observed that in the last five. decades there had been 
Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha on ly for eleven years. The Comm ittee noted that 
accordi ng to rules, any party failing to get less than ten per cent of the total numbe r of seats 
in the Hou se could not be recognised as a party and the Leader of such single largest party 
in Opposition to the Government could not be recognised as Leader of Opposition. The 
Committee furth er noted that there might arise a situation when Lhere would be no Leader 
of Opposition in either of the !-louses. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommended that an 
appropri ate explanation should be added to this clause to suitably deHl with such a situaiion. 
The Committee felt that in such an eventua lity the Leader of the single largest group_in 
opposition to the Government in Lhc House of the People could be included in the 
Committe e recommending the names of Chairperson and Membe rs of Central Vigilance 
Commission. 
6.8 Subject to this the clause wa.s adopted. 
Clause 5 
6.9 Sub-clause (5) of Clause S provides that on ceas ing to hold office the Chairperson 
and every other Member of Central Vigilance Commission shall be ineligib le for 
reappointment in the Central Vigilance Commissio n and further employment to any office of 
profit under the Government of Ind ia or the Gove rnm ent of a State . 
6.10 The Committee, however, recommended that along with these provisions, the 
Chairperson and Members of Central Vigilance Comm ission shou!d also be made ine ligible 
for the gubernatorial posts and diplomat ic assignments like Ambassadors, High 
Comm issioners, Adm inistrators of Union Territories etc. after ceasing to hold thei r 
respective offices. ln o ther words , they shou ld be debarred from holding any office under 
the Government of India. 
6.Jl Sub -clause (1) of Clause 5 further provides that the Central Vigilance Commiss ion 
shall hold office [or a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or 
till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whicheve r is earlier. Sub-clause (2) of the clause 
provides that every Vigilance Commissioner shall bold office for a term of Lhree years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office or till he atta ins the age of sixty-five years, 
whichever is earlier. 
6.12 A query was made as to why different tenures had been provided for the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Comm issioners. In this context an apprehens ion was 
expressed that this would create seniority problems between Centw l Vigilance Commissioner 
and Vigilance Commis~ioners. The Committee was informed that in the light of the fact that 
Lhe Central Vigilance Comm issione r would be the Chairperson of the Commission and in 
terms of salary and tenure wou ld have superiority over the Vigilance Commissioners, he 
would enjoy primacy in the functioning of the Commission . In this context rhe representative 

30 
of the Ministry informed the Commiuee that in view of the nature of work of the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners and the enormous amount of 
influence they would wield, their tenure could not be different than what had been 
provided in the Bill. lie also inrom1ed the Committee that the problem of seniority would 
not come because the p;~y of Central Vigilance Commissioners was Rs. 30.0(.1()/. and the 
pay of Vigilance Commis~ioner was Rs. 26.000/-. 
6.13 The representative or the Ministry then suggested thlll the existing proviso to sub· 
clause (7) of Clause S needed amplification relating to retirement benefi t in resp~ct of 
prev ious services in case of Central Vigilance Commiss1oncr or Vigilance Commissioners 
having rendered service in u corplltation ,established by or under any Central Act or a 
Government Compnny owned or controlled by the Central Government. Accordingly, the 
representative or the Ministry proposed that after the fir.t proviso, the followmg prOVISO 
may be added, namely: 
"Provided further thai ii th.: Central Vigilance Comm1s~ioner or an~ Vigilance 
Commissioner is, at the 11me of his appointment, 111 rece1p1 of retirement benefit> m 
respect of any prev1ous service m a corporauon estabh~hed by or under any Central 
Act or a Government company owned or controlled by the Co;nual Government, 
his salary in respect of the service as the Cemral Vigll:mcc Commi~sioner or any 
Vigilance Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of pension equivalem to 
retirement benefits". 
6. 14 In this context, it was stmed that with the propo,cu amendment. the existing 
second proviso wr;~uld become the third proviso needing slight dntfting change. The 
Committee was also informed that the proposed ~mendment had been suggesteJ by the 
Ministry of Finance, appmved by Minister of Finance anti drafted by Legislative 
Department. 
6.15 The Committee accepted the amendment submiacd h} the Ministry 
6.16 The clause was adopted as amended. 
Clauses 6 and 7 
6 17 Oauses 6 ~nJ 7 wert.o adopted without any change. 
Clause 8 
6.18 Clause 8 prov1dc' for functions and powers of the Commission Sub-section (c) of 
sub-clause (1) of clamc 8 ptovides that the Commiss10n >h:•ll inquire or cause an inquiry or 
investigation to be made into any comp laint again~t ~n~ Mricial belonging to such C3tegmy 
of officials specified in sub-CI!Iusc (2) wherein it is alleged thttl he has committed an 
offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Sub·cl•w~c (:?.) says that persons 
referred to in ~ub-~ection (c) of sub-d;1uSe (I) are Group ·A' Ofricers of Central 
Government. The Commillce felt that reference to A.ll India Services Officers had, 
however. been excluded from Lhe purview of the <tbove ,ecuon . The Gove111ment in this 
context informed that there was no objecuon m Including reference to officers belonging to 
the 'All india Service>·. 
6.19 The Commillec. accord1ngly. recommended that wb·scction (a) of sub-clause (2 
may be suitably amended to include the reference to officer~ belonging to All lndi 
Services. 
6.20 A suggestion had been made that in Clause 8 wherever the words "Prevention of 

31 
Corruption Act, 1988'' occurcd, the word' "and other related offence~" may be added 
thereafter. The reason ttdvancecl for the ,uggestion was that corruption cases often included 
I PC Sections as well. 
6.21 The Government had informed the Committee thm th(; Prevention of Corrup tion 
Act, 1988 provtded for the tri;tl of a case wht'h may includ~ offences Other thtm those 
specified in the said Act but which wa~ mcludcd under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1973. ln 
vtew of this, the Government felt that there was no need to modif>• Clause 8 as sugges ted. 
6.22 The Commincc was. however. not sati,fted with the reply of the Government and 
felt that it was neces'<tr) to tncorpmate the sugges ted amendment. The Comm ittee, 
accordingly, rccommendecl that after the words '·Prevenuon of Corruption Act, 1988" 
wherever they occured in Clause 8. the words "und other related offences" may be added 
thereafter. 
6.23 The clause wus :tdoptcd as <~mended 
CJ:m.<es 9 IIJ 19 
6.24 Clauses 9 to 19 were mlopted wtthout any change. 
Chwse 20 
6.25 Clause 20 empowers the Ccntr:tl Government to make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the proviMons of tht' lcgi~I:Jtion. 1\ pou11 was ratscd that tlw Btll did not 
provide for the Government to conslllt the CommissiOn in the event of making ttny 
~ubstanti~l changes or any new ruleV'rcgulauon~ governing the funCtioning of the 
Cornmis~ion. ln this context a suggestion was re,eived that the Government should consider 
to make an explicit provision in the Bill use lf. to provide for this consultation with the 
Commission . 
6.26 In this respcc1 the Committee was informed b)• the Government that Clause 21 
already ena bled the Commission 10 make regulations and notify the same with the previous 
approval of Central Government . The Go\'ernment also infonned the Commi11ee that they 
had no objection an making a separate prov i ~ion for con:.ulttng the Commission while maktng 
or amending the rules framed under clttuse 20. rcluting to vigilum:e and disciplinary matter:.. 
6.27 The Conurullee. according!~, recommended that clau~c 20 may be suitably 
amended. 
6.28 The clau~e wa~ adopted as amended. 
ClauH•s 21 to 27 
6.29 Clause:. 21 to 27 were adopted without any change. 
Clause I. tile EmlL'Iiug Formula und tile Title 
6.30 The Commiucc adopted Clau:.c I. the Enacting Formul;t and the Title with some 
changes which were of consequen tial 0 1 drafting nature. n<tmely '1998' Hud ·Forty -ninth' to 
be substituted by '1999' and 'Fiftieth'. rc:.pectivcly. 
7. The Commntec then adjoumed at 12.45 t'.M. to meet at 3.00 r.M. on Monday, 11tc 
8th february, 1999. 

'XXVII 
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 19th February , 1999 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament Hou1se Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRF-SENT 
1. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj - in the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
3. Shri S. Ramachandra n Pillai 
4. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
5. Dr.(Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABBA 
6. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sarya Pal Jain 
8. Shri La\ Bihari Tiwari 
9. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
10. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
Ll. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
12. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
13. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Shri Motilal Vora 
15. Shri Samar Choudhury 
16. Shri Mohan Singh 
17. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
18. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Sec reta ry 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee 0 fficer 
2. • • 
3. • • 
4. • • 
5. • • 
6. • • 
7. • • 
8. • • 
9. • 
•Minules of Twenty.fifth and Twenty-:.ixth mee1ing$ of 1he Committee relate to some other maHer. 
•••Ontittcd ponions relale to ~me: other maner 
32 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

33 
10. • • • 
11. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Fifty-first Report on the 
Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 and the draft Fifty-second Report on the Notaries 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 and adopted them without any change. 
12. The Committee decided to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same 
in the Lok Sabha in the first week of the forthcoming Session, on a date to be decided by 
the Chairman. The Committee also decided to lay the Evidences tendered before it in 
connection with the said Bills, on the Table of the two llouses. Accordingly, the Committee 
authorised its Chairman to present/lay the Reports/Evidences in the Rajya Sabha. The 
Committee also authorised its Chairman to chodse another Member of the Committee from 
the Rajya Sabha (besides him) and two Members of the Committee from the Lok Sabha for 
presentation/laying of the Reports and Evidences in the two Houses. 
13. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
··•Omitted porlions relate 10 some other matter. 

--------------------------------.-.-.--.~~=c~==~====~r~~~ 
~· 44] 
:"'o. 44] 
ANNEXURE-I 
(See Para-2 of the Report) 
3 I lUI ciii -dulqil 
~h~ <Sa~ette of.~ia 
EXTRAORDINARY 
'1m II -----wl! 1 
PART 11--S~tlon I 
suNC$n 1\ sccnlf~m 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
"''f ~. 4•iHdl<, 3!TTli! 2S, 1998/'m, J, 1920 
NEW DEL Ill, TUESDAY, AUGUST 25, 199!YBHADRA 3, 1920 
~ 'UTI ~ ~ 'f! li't!m ~ ;;mil t l'iml) f<l; ~ 3{<'111 ~ ~ ~ if WI 'ill ~ I 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate 
compllaiion. 
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(Legislative Department) 
New Dtlhi, rht 25rh Augu . .rr, /99/VBhadra J, /920 (Saka) 
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION 
ORDINANCE. 1998 
No. 15 OF 1998 
Promulgated by the President in the Forty·n inth Year of ihc Republic of India . 
An Ordinance to provide for the constitution of a Central Vigilance CommiSSion 
to inquire or cause inquiries to be conducted into offences alleged to have 
been committed under the Preventi o n of Corrup tion Act, 1988 by certain 
categories of public servants of the Central Government. corporations 
established by or under any Central Act, Government companies, societies 
and local authorities owned or controlled by the Cent ral Government and for 
matters connected therewith or incidenta l thereto. 
Whereas Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that 
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate uction; 
NOW, THEREFOR£, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause ( 1) of article 
123 of the Constitution. the President is pleased to promulgate the following 
Ordinance:-
CHAPTER I 
PREI..IMISARY 
1.(1) This Ordinance may be called the Centra l Vigilance Comm ission 
Ord inance. 1998. 
(2) It shall come mto force at once . 
35 
Short title 
and comm· 
encement. 

DefinitiOns. 
ConMitu 
tion 
or Central 
V1gilancc 
Co mmi~sion . 
Appointment 
of Central 
Vag~lancc 
Com­
missioner 
and Vigilance 
Com· 
missioners. 
36 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (PART II-
l. In this Ordmance, unless 1he context otherwise requlles ,-
(o) "appointed day" means the date on which !he Commassaon IS conslltulcd 
under sub-section (/) of section 3; 
(b) "Central Vlg1lancc Commis sione r" means the c~ nt ral Vig1lance 
Commissioner appointed under sub-section (/) of section 4; 
(c) ''Commission" means the Central Vigilance Commission eo n ~ titut ed 
under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(d) "Delhi Special Police Eslablishment " ·means !he Delhi Spec;ial Police 
Estab!Uhmenl constituted under sub-section (/)of section 2 of the Delhi Special 25 of 1946. 
Police Establishment Acl, 1946; 
(e) "pre5Cribed'' means prescribed by rules made unde r this Ordinante; 
(f) "Vigilance Comm1ssioner" means a Vigilance Commissioner appo!Died 
under sub-section (/) of section 4 
CHAPTER U 
THE CI!I'TRAL VtGILANC£ COMMISSION 
3. (J) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this beha lf, there sha ll be 
consti tuled a body to be known as the Ccnlra l Vigilance Commission 10 exerc i~e 
the powers conferred upon, and 10 perform the functions assigned 10 11 under 
this Ordinance. 
(2) The Commission sha ll eonsis1 of-
(a) a Central Vigilance Commissioner 
(b) oot more than three Vigilance 
Commissione rs 
(c) Secretary to the Government 
of India in-charge of 
the Ministry of Personnel 
-Chairperson; 
- Members, 
-Member, 
ex-officio. 
(3) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Comm issioners 
shall be appointed from amongst persons who are or have been in an all India 
Service or in any civil service of the Union or in a civil post under 1hc Union 
having know ledge and experie nce in the matters rela ting 10 vigilance. policy 
making and administration including police administration . 
(4) The Central Governmen t shall appoint a Secretary 10 the Commi55ion on 
such terms and conditions as il deems lit to exe rcise such powers and discharge 
such duties as the Commission may by regulations specify m this behalf. 
(5) The headquart ers of the Commission shall be at New DeihL 
4. (J) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners 
shall be appointed by the President by warranl under his hand and seal; 
Provided that every appomtment under this sub-secuon shall be made after 
obtainin g the recommendation of a Committee consisting of-

37 
SEC. I) THE OAZETIE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
(a) the Prime Minister 
(b) the Minister of Home Affairs 
(~) the Leader of the Opposition 
in the House of the People 
Chairperson; 
Member; 
Member; 
(2) No appointment of a Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance 
Commissioner shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the 
Committee. 
5. (I) Subject to the provisions of ~ub·sections (J) and (4). the Central Vigilance 
Commis.~ioner shall hold office for a term of four years from the date on which 
he enters upon his offioe or till he attains the age of sixty-five years. whichever 
is earlier . 
(2) Subject to the provtsions of sub·sections (J) and ( 4), every Vigilance 
Commissioner shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty·five years, whichever 
is earlier. 
(J) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner shall, 
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or 
some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according 
tO the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule. 
(4) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance CommisSioner may, by 
writing under his hand addressed to the Presidem. re~ign his office. 
(5) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commisstoncr may be 
removed from his offioe in the manner provided in section 6. 
(6) On cco~ing to hold office, the Central Vigilance Commissioner and every 
other Vigilance Commissioner shall be ineligible for-
{a) reappointment in tbe Commission. 
{b) ! ,rthcr t:mpm)r"" cnt to "' ,. JCC ot' prufit undtr the Gc.ncrnmcnt o: 
India or the Gcwcrnmcnt .,( a ~tate. 
(7) The salary and ,cl!cw• . mcc~ pa\ahlc tu o~nd the oth<r conditi11n~ of scrvrc< 
of-
(•) the C~ntral \'igdance ('\It ntS<:vnCr shall be the ~arne JS tho<c Of the 
Chairman uf the L'nllm Public Scrvi<:c C<>mmissJOn; 
II>) th• Vigilan~c Commr>5ioncr 'hall b, the same "' thn'e of ~ Member of 
he Vnion .. IJ"'lii.: <icP·•ce Comml~s •o n: 
Provided that if the Cemral Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance 
Commissioner is, at the time of his appointment, in receipt oi a person (other 
than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State. his salary m respect 
of the service as the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance 
Commissioner shall be reduced by 1 he amount of that pension including any 
portion of pension which was commuted and pension equivalent of other forms 
of retirement benefits excluding pension equivalent of retirement gratuity: 
Provided funher thnt the salary. allowances and pension payable to, and the 
other conditions of service of. the Central Vigilance Commissioner or ;my 
Vigilance Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appoioment. 
Terms and 
other 
condition 
of servtcc 
of Central 
Vigilance 
Com· 
missioner 

Removal of 
Central 
Vigilance 
Com­
missioner 
and 
Vigilance 
Com­
missioner. 
Power to 
make rules 
by Centrill 
Government 
for staff. 
Functio~s 
and powers 
of Cenrtal 
Vigilance 
Commis~ ­
ioncr. 
38 
THE GAZ.ETTE OF J:-DIA EXTRAORDINARY (PART II-
6. (J) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner shall be removed from his office 
only by order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour after the 
Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the President, has. on inquiry. 
reported that the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance 
Commissioner. as the case may be. ought on such ground be removed . 
(2) The President may Sllspend from office the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner in respect of whom a reference 
has been made to the Supreme Court under sub-section {I) until the President 
has passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such 
reference. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the President may by order 
remove from office the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance 
Commissioner if the Central Vigilance Commissioner or such Vigilance 
Commissio ner. as the case may be,-
(a) is adjudged an insolvent, or 
(b) has been convic ted of an offence which. m the opi nion <>f the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) engages dunng his term of office in any paid employme nt outside the 
duties of his orficc; or 
(d) is. in tht opimon of the Prestdent, unfit to continue m office by rea<on 
of infirmity of mind or body; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as IS likely to affect 
preJudicially hts functions as a Central Vigtlance Commissioner or a Vigilance 
Commissioner; 
(4) Tf the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner is 
or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract or agreemen t 
made by or on behalf of the Government of India or participate -S in any way m 
the profit thereof or in any benefit or emol ument arising therefrom o therwise 
than as a member and in common with the other members of un incorporated 
company, he shall. for the purposes of sub-section (/), be deemed to be guthy 
of misbehaviour. 
7. The Central Government may by rules make provision wuh respect to the 
number of members of the staff of the CommiS-<ion and the ir conditions of 
service. 
CHAPTER Ill 
Ft:,..cnoNs AND PoWERs or- TI<E Ce..''TR."~ V1vt~ANCE CoMMISSION 
8. (1) The functions o.nd powers of the CommiSsion shall be tu-
(a) exercise superintendence over the functioning of the Oelh1 Special 
Police Establish ment insof<•r as it relates to rhc investigation of offences alleged 
to have been commined under the Prevention of Corruption Act. 1988; 49 of 1988. 
(b) inquire or cause an inquiry or mvestigation to be made on a reference made 
by the Central Government wherein it is alleged !hat a public servam being an 
employee of the Central Government or a corporation established by or under 
any Central Act, Government company, society and any local authori ty owned 

49 of !988. 
40 of 1988. 
49 of 1988. 
lS of 1946. 
49 of 1988. 
49 of 1981>. 
39 
Stc. I] THE GAZ.Il'rrE OF INI)IA EXTRAORDINARY 
===== 
or controlled by that Government h~s commincd an offence under thc 
Prevcnnon of Corrupuon Act. !988; 
(c) inquire or cause an mqlllry or invc,ugntion co be made into any complaint 
against any official belonging to such category of officia l ~ specified In sub·~ec t ion 
(2) wherein it IS alleged that be has cummincd an offence under the prevention 
of Corrupuon 1\ct. 191!8. 
(d) grant approval or otherwosc for the conduct of invesngation into 
allegations of corrup tion under the Prcvcntoon of Corruptton Act, 1988 against 
the persons mentioned in ~cction 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment 
t\ct 19'6 in accordance with the regulauon$ made m th1s behalf; 
(e) review the progress of mve$tigations conducted by the Delhi Special Pohcc 
Establishment into offence~ alleged hJ have been committed under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 198R, 
(/) review the progres.• of applications pending with the competent autbontics 
!or sanction or prosecuuon under the Prevention of Corrupllon Act I98S, 
(g) tender advtec to the Central Government, corp<>rattons established by or 
under anv C'.:ntral Act, Government companies. socicues and locul authoritk' 
owned or contwllcd by the Central Gtwernment on such ma11er< '" may be 
referred to 1t b)· that r.o,·crnmcOI <aid Government companies. 'odcties and 
local authonuc~ owned or controlled by the Central Go,ernmcnt or othctw,;c, 
(h) exercise superintendence over the vigilance adminmration or the vanou' 
Mutistries or the Ccntrill Government oo corporations cstabli~hcd by or under 
an) Central A.r. Go,e!Jlmcnt compatuc~. societies and local authorities owned 
or conuolled b) that Go,·crnment. 
(2) The persons reicrrcd to in L.l•u•• (q or sub·sewon (1) arc ,,~ follows.­
(a) Group 'A' offtccrs or the Central Government; 
(b) such le,)'l of officers or the corporations Cst3sblished by or under any 
Central Act, Government companies. soc1etics and other local authorities. 
owned or controlled by the Central Government. as that Government may, by 
notification in the Offic1a.l Guzeue. specify in this behalf: 
Provided that till such time a notification os is~ued under ohos clause. all 
officers of the said corporations. companies. •ocietics and local authonncs shall 
t>e deemed 111 be the persons n:fcrr•d tu in cause (c) of sub-sewoo (1). 
9. (I) The proceedings or the Commission shall be conducted at "' 
hcad<juartcrs. 
1.?) The Commtssion shall obscnc such rules or procedure in rcprd to thr 
transacllon of the business ns may be pro•ided bv regulation• 
(J) The Central Vigilance Comoms.roncr, or. if for uny reason he is unable til 
•ttcnd anv mcetmg of the Commis.iun. the scniormost Vigilance Commissioner 
present at the meeting. >hall preside •t the mcctong 
(~) No act or procccdmg or the Commi>Sion shall be mvalid merclv by reason 
tlf-
(a) any vac.>n<y in, or any ddcct in the con,utution of. the Comm.s!<ion. or 
Proceed mg.' 
of Com· 
mtssion. 

Vigilance 
Com­
missioner 
to act as 
Central 
Vigilance 
Com­
missioner 
in certain 
circum­
stances. 
Power 
relating 
to inquiries. 
Proceedings 
before 
CommisSIOn 
to be 
judicial 
proceedings. 
Expenses 
of Com­
mission 
to be 
cbllrged 
on tbe 
Conso­
lidated 
Fund of 
India. 
40 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY IPA•l II-
(b) any defect in the appointment of a perroo acttng as the Centml 
Vig1lance Commissioner or as a Vigilance Comm1ssioncr; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commi,sion not afiecting the 
merits of the case. 
lO. (I} In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Central Vigilance Commissioner by rc•,on of his death. resignation or 
otherwise, the President may. by notificauon, authorise one of the Vigilance 
Commissioners to act as the Central Vigilance Commissioner until the 
appointment of a new Central Vigilance CQmm1ssioner to fill ~uch vacancy. 
(2) When the Central Vigilance Commissioner is unable to discharge ltis 
functions owing to absence on leave or otherwise, such one of the Vigilance 
Commissioners as the President may. by notifieauon. authorise m this l>chali. 
shall discharge the functiOns of lhc Ccntrnl V1g1lance Commissioner untd the 
date on which the Central Vigilance CommlSSioncr resumes ht> duties. 
11. The Comnussion shall, while conductmg any 1nquiry referred to in clauses 
(b) and (c) of sub-section {I) of section 8, have all the powers of a CiVll Court 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in particular. in 5 of !90R. 
respect of the following matters. namely:-
{a) Summoning and enforcing the anendancc of any person from an) pan 
of India and examining him on oath, 
(b) requiring the discovery <~nd production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on aff1davits. 
(d) requisitioning nny public record or copy thereof from an~ court or 
office; 
(e) issuing commissions ior the examination of witnesses or documents; ~ n d 
(}) any other mauer which may be prescribed. 
tl. The Commi~sion shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 and 2 <>f 197~ 
every proceeding before the Commiss1on shall be dccmed to be a judtcial 
proceeding within the meaning of ;cction• 193 and 228 and for the purpo~cs of 4.~ of 1860. 
section 196 of the Indian Penal Code. 
CllAPTER IV 
EXPESSES 1\'<D A,.r;L AL Rti'ORT 
13. TI1e expenses of the Commission, including any salaries. allowances and 
pensions payable tO or in respect of the Central Vigilance Commissioner. the 
Vigilance CommiSsioner<. Secretar) and the staff of the Commiss1un. shall be 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 

25 to 1946. 
45 of 1860. 
41 
SEc. l) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
14.(1) It shall be tl1e duty of tile Commission to present annually to the Annual 
President a reporr as to the work done by the Commission. report. 
(2) The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall contain a separate part on 
the functioning of the Delhi Specia l Police Establishment insofar as it relates to 
sub-section (J) of section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. 
(3) On receipt of such report. the Pres ident shall cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER V· 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15. No suit, prosecution or 0 1 her legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Commission, the Central Vigilance Commi~sioner. any Vigilance Commissioner. 
the ex officio Member, the Secretaly or against any staff of the Commission in 
respect of anything which is in good faith done or inteuded to be done under 
this Ordina nce. 
16. The Central Vigilance Commissioner. every Vigilance Commissioner, the 
Secretary and every staff of the Commi~sion shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Panel Code. 
17.(1) The repOrt of the inquiry undertaken by any •gency on a reference 
made by the Commission sha ll be forwarded to the Commi,;,~ion. 
(2) T he Commission sha ll on receipt of such repon and after taking into 
consideration any other factors relevant thereto, adv ise the Central Government 
and corporations established by or under any Centra l Act, Governme nt 
companies, societies and local authorttics owned or controlled by tha t 
Government. as the case may be, as to the further course of action. 
(3) The Central Government and the corporations established by or under any 
Central Act, Government companies, soc ieties and local authorities owned or 
contro lled by that Governmen t , as the c<1se may be, shall C(>nsider the adv ice of 
the Commission and take appropr iate action: 
Provided that where the Central Government, any corporation establ ished by 
or under any Central Act. Government company. society or local authority 
owned or contro lled by the Central Government, as the case may be. does not 
agree with the advice of the Commiss ion. it may for reasons to be recorded in 
wrjting commun icate the same to the Commissio n. 
18. The Commission may call for reports, returns and statements from the 
Centra l Government or corporat ions established by or under any Central Act, 
Governmen t companies, societies and local author ities owned or controlled by 
that Government so as to enab le it to exercise general supervision over the 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
Central 
Vigilance 
Commissioner, 
Vigilance 
Comrrussioner 
and naff to 
be public 
servants. 
Repor1 of 
any mq uiry 
made on 
reference by 
Commission 
to be 
forwarded to 
that 
Commission. 
Power to call 
for 
infom1arion. 

Power to 
gi\'C 
directions. 
Power to 
make ru!c.. 
Power to 
make 
rcgulattons. 
Notificmion. 
rule. etc. I to 
he litid 
before 
Parliament. 
TliE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {PART It-
vigilance llnd nnti·corruption work in that Cinvcmmcnt and in the said 
corporations, Government companies. societies and local authorities. 
19. The Commission shall from time to time give directions to the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment for the purpose of discharging the responsibility 
entrusted to it under sub-section (/\ sccuon 4 of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment 1\ct, 1946: 25 of 194o. 
Provided that the Commission shall not exercise its powers tn such a manner 
so as to require the Delhi Special Pohce Establishment to investigate or dispose 
of a particular case only in a particular manner. 
20.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying i•tto effect the provisions of this 
Ordinance. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provistons. such rule'S may provide for-
(a) the number of members of the staff and thc1r condilions of '<!tvJce under 
section 7; and 
(b) any other p<lWCr of the civil court to be prcscr il>cd under clause (j) of 
section 11 ~ 
(c) any o ther matter which may he prescr ibed. 
21. (1) The Commission may. with the prcviou; approval of the Cen tral 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette. make rcgulauons not 
mco n~istcn~ WJLh this Ordinance and the rules made thereunder to provide for 
all matt ers for which prov1sion is expedient fo< the purposes of giving effect to 
the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gencraltty of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) the duties and the powers of the secre tary under sub-secuon (4) of 
sec tion 3; 
(b) the grant of approvn l for the conduct "r mvcstigauon under clause (d) 
of sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Commissio n under sub·~cction (2) 
of section 9. 
22. Every notifi cation issued and every rule made by the Central Government 
and every regulation made by rhe Commission under this Ordinance sh~ll be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made. before each House of 
Parliament, while it is iu session. for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, <md if. before 
tbe expiry of the session immediately following the se.ssion or tbe successive 
sc~siom: aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or tbe rule or regulation. or botl1 Houses agree that the notification 
or the rule or regulation should not be mnJe. the notificatiou or the rule or 
regulation shall thereaf ter have effect only in s•1dt modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; -~o. however th&t any such rnodificauon or 
annulment sh<Jll be without prejudice to the vahdity of anything previously done 
under that notificmion or rule or regulation. 

46 of 1973. 
43 
Stc. I] THE GAZETIE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
23.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Ordinance, the Central Governmen t may. ~ order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Ordinance. remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made afler 1he expiry of a period of 1wo 
years from the date of commencement of !his Ordinance. 
(2) Every order made under !his scc1ion shall , as soon as may be. af1cr i1 i~ 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
24. With effec1 from 1he appoin1cd day !he Central Vigilance Commi s.~ion set 
up by the Resolution of the Governmem of India in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs No. 24/7/64-A VD dated the 11th February. 1964 (hereafter referred to 
in this section as the existing Vigilance Commission) shall, insofar as its 
functions are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, continue to 
discharge the said functions and,-
(a) all actions and decisions taken by the existing Vigilance Commission 
in~ofar as such actions and decisions arc relatable to •!he functions of 1 he 
Commission cooslituled under !his Ordinance (hereaf1cr referred to m 1his 
sect;on as !he new Commission) shall be deemed 10 have been 1aken hy 1he new 
Commission; 
(b) all proceedings pending before the cxis1ing Vigilance Commission, insofltr 
as such proccedinss rc!a1e 10 the functions of the new Commiss•on. shall ~ 
deemed to be 1ransferrcd tO the new Comm ission nnd shall be dealt with in 
accordance with !he provisions o f this Ordi nance ; 
(c) !he employees of 1he existing Vigilance Commission shall be deemed to 
have become the employees of lhc new Commission on the same terms and 
condi1ions; 
(d) all the assets and liabilities of !he existing Vigilance Commission shall ~ 
transferred to the new Commission . 
25. 1\olwilhstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange Regulation 
Act, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force.-
(a) the Central Government shall nppoim a Director of Enforcement in the 
Dircctorar.e of Enforcement in 1hc Minis1ry of Finance on the recommendation 
of the Comrnincc consisting of-
(i) the Central Vigilance Commissioner -Chairperson; 
(ii) Secretary to the Government of India in-charge- Member: 
of the Ministry of Hl)mc Affairs in 1hc 
Central Government 
(iii) S<:cretary to 1hc Govemrncm of India in-charge- Member; 
of the Ministry of Personnel in 1he 
Central Government 
(iv) Secretary to the Govemmc111 of India in-charge- Member; 
of 1he Depanment of Revenue. Ministry of 
Finance in the Ccn1ral Government 
(b) no person below !he rank of Additional Secretary 10 the Govcmmenl of 
India shall be eligible for appoiniDlCnt as a Director of Enforecmenl; 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Provisions 
relating to 
existing 
Vigilance 
Commission. 
Appomtmeots. 
etc., of 
officers of 
Directorate 
of 
Enforcement. 

Amendment 
of Act 25 of 
19~. 
Definit ion. 
44 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (PART 11-
(c) a Director of Enforcement shall continue to hold office for a period of not 
less th:t.n rwo yean from the date on which he assumes office; 
(d) a Directo r of Enforceme nt shall not be transferred except with the 
previous consent of the Committee referred to in clause (a); 
(e) the Committee referred to in clause (a) sha ll recommend officers for 
appointment to the posts of the level above the Deputy Director of Enforcement 
and also recommend the extension or curtailment of the tenure of such officers 
in tlte Directorate of Enforceme nt; 
(f) on receipt of the recommendation under clause (c), the Central 
Government shall pass such order as it thinks · fit to give effect to the said 
recomme ndation. 
26. In the Delhi Special Police Esta blishment Act, 1946, with effect from the 
appointed day -
(a) after section 1, the following section shall be in~ertcd, namely: ­
"JA. Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defected in the 
Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1998. shall have the meanings, 
respectively, assigned to them in that Ordinance." 
(b) for section 4, the following sections shall be substitut ed, namely:-
Superintendenee "4. (/) The superintendence oi the Delhi Special Police Establishment in so 
and far as it relates to investigation of offc•tccs alleged to have been committed 
administration under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. shall vest in the Commission. 49 of 1988. 
of Spectal Police (2) Save as otherwise prov ided in sub-section (1), the superirnende nce of the 
Establishment said police establishment in aU other matters shall vest '" the Central 
Committee 
for 
appointment 
of Direc tor. 
Government . 
(J) The admi nistratio n of the said police estab lishment shall vest in an officer 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as 
the Director) wbo shall exercise in respect of that police establishment such of 
the powers exer ciscable by nn Inspector -Genera l of Police in respect of the 
police force in a State as the Central Government may specify in this behalf 
4A.(Z) The Central Govern ment shall appoint t he Director on the 
recomme ndation of the Committee consisting of-
(a) the Central Vigilance Comm issioner -Chairperso n; 
(b) Secretary to the Governmen t of India in-charge 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 
Central Government - Member; 
(c) Secre tary to the Government of India in-charge 
of the Ministry of Personnel in the 
Central Government - Member . 
(2) While making any recommendation under sub-section (I), the Commlltee 
shall consider the views of the Director. 

61 of 1951. 
49 to 1988. 
49 of 1988. 
45 
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
(3) The Committee shall recommend a panel of officers-
(a) on the basis of seniority, integrity and experience in investigation of anti­
corruption cases; and 
(b) chosen from amongst officers belonging to the Indian Police Service 
constituted under the All-India Services Act, 1951, 
for being considered for appointment as the Director. 
4B. (1) The Director shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
rn the rules relating to his conditions of service, continue to hold office for a 
period of not less than two years from the date on which he assumes office. 
(2) The Director shaH not be transferred except with the previous consent of 
the Committee referred to in sub-section (/) of section 4A. 
4C. (1) The Committee referred l<l in section 4A shall, after consulting the 
Director, recommend officers for appoimment to the posts of the level of Joint 
Director and above and also recommend the extension or curtailment of the 
tenure of such officers in the Delhi Special Police Establishment. 
(2) On receipt of the recommendation under sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall pass such order as it thinks fit to give effect to the said 
rceommendation ~ 
(c) after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, namely :-
"6A (1) The Delhi Special Police Establishment shall not conduct any inquiry 
or investigation into any offence alleged to have been committed under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 19S8 except with the previous approval of the 
Commission where such allegation relates to,-
(a) tbe employees of the Central Government of the level of Joint Secretary 
and above: 
(b) Such officers as are appointed by the Central Government in the 
corporations established by or under any Central Act, Government compa nies, 
societies and local authorities owned or controlled by the Government. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1}, no such approval 
shall be necessary for cases involving the arrest of a person on the spot on the 
charge of accepting or attempting to accept, any gratification other than legal 
remuneration referred to in claus.e (c) of the J:;xplanation to section 7 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act 1988." 
Terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
Director. 
Appointment 
for posts of 
Joint Direc­
tor and 
above, exten­
sion and 
curtail-
ment of their 
tenure, etc. 
Approval of 
Commission 
to conduct 
inquiry or 
investigation. 

THE GAZETTE. OF INDIA EXTRAOROINAR)\PAKl II~LC. I) 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See Section 5(3}] 
Form of oath or affirma1ion 10 be made 
Commiss ioner or Vigilance Commi ssioner:-
by the Central Vigilan;:e 
"! , A.B., having been <tppolnted Cen tral Vigilance Commissooncr 
(or Vigilance Commissioner) of 1he Cen1ral Vigilance Commission do 
swear in 1he name of God 
solem nly affirm 
that I will bear true faith and allegiance 10 the Conslitutaon of India as by law 
established , 1hat I will uphold 1he sovereignty and in1egrity of India. that I will 
duly and faithfully and tO the besl of my ability. knowledge and judgment 
perform the du1ies of my office withoul fear or favour, affcc1ion or ill·will and 
that l will uphold the Constitu tion and I he laws." 
K.R. KARt\ YAK AN. 
President. 
RAGHBIR SINGH. 
Stcretllry to the Government of India . 

ANNEXURE -It 
(See Para-2 of the Report) 
~!.lT\0'1 
EXTRAORDINARY 
'lUll ··~ 1 PART n~'itc:tion 1 
lllfm~m" ~ 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
~· 47] 'I$ ~. Qljfldi(, ~ 27, 1998~ 5, 1920 
No. 47) NEW OELID. T UES DAY, OCTOBER 27, 1998/K ARTIK A 5, 1920 
~ 'IWT .q m '13 "ffi;m e ;;mn ~ ~ Ill; ... ~ *""' ~ -Q; ~ .q ~ ;;n ~ , 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it ntay be med as a separate 
contpilolion 
MINI STRY OF L AW, J USTICE AND COM PANY AFFAI RS 
(Legislative Department ) 
N~w Ddht, rlrt 27rh Ocrober, 1998/Kartika 5. 1920 (Saka) 
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE CO MMISSION (AMENDMENT) 
ORDrNANCE, 1998 
No. 18 OF 1998 
Promulgated by the President in the Forty-ninth Year of the 
Repu blic of India 
As Ordinance to amend the Cent ral Vigilance Commission Ordinance. !998 
WrrEREAS the Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance. 1998 was 
promulgated by the President on the 2Stb day of August. 1998; 
AND WHER P.I\S Par liament is not in session and the President is satisfied that 
circumstances exist which render it necessa ry for him to take immcdi" te action ; 
Kow. nu!R£r-ORE, in exercise of the po"ers conferred by clause (I) of anicle 
123 of the Constit ution. the President is pleased to promulgate the following 
Ordinance:-
!. (1) This Ordinan ce may be called the Central Vigilance Commission Short title 
(Amendment) Ordinance. 1998. and 
(2) It sha ll be deemed 10 have come into force on the 2Sh day of August, 
1998. 
47 
c-ommence· 
ment. 

Amendment 
or section 3. 
Amendment 
of sect ion 8. 
Amendment 
of section IS. 
Amendment 
of section 21. 
Amendment 
of Act 25 of 
1946. 
48 
THE GAZETTE OF INDI A EXTRA ORDINARY{PAAT 11-SEc . 11 
l. In section 3 of the Centra l Vigilance Comm ission Ordinance. 1998 
(hereinaft er referred to as the principal Ordinancc).-
(o) in sub·section (2).-
(t) in cla use (b). for the word "three", the w)rd "four" shall be substituted; 
(ii) clause (c) shall be omitted; 
(b) for sub·section (J). the fo llowingsub·scctionshall be substituted. namcly:­
"(J) The Cen tral Vigilance Commi s~icntc r nnd the Vigilance Co mmi~sioners 
sha ll be appointed from among.~t persons-
(a) who have been o r .arc in an all· India Service or in any civil service 
of the Union or in a civil post under the Union having knowledge and 
experie nce in the matters relating to vigilnnce. policy making and 
adm inistration includi ng police administration; and 
(b) who have held office or arc holding office in a corporat ion 
established by or under any Central Act or a Government company 
owned or cont rolled by the Cen tral Governm ent and persons who have 
expertise and experience in finance including insurance and banking, 
law, vigilance and investigations : 
Provided that, from amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner and 
the Vigilance Commissioners . not more than three person~ shall belo ng to 
the category of persons referred ro either in clause (a) or in clause (b)." 
3. In section 8 of rhe principal Ordinance. in sub·sect ion (/). clause (d) shall 
be omined. 
4. In section 15 of the pri11cipnl Ordinance . the words "the tx·offlcio 
Member". shall be omincd. 
S. In section 21 of the principal Ordinance. in sub·scction (l). clause (b) shall 
be omined. 
6. Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. 1946. as inserted 
by clause (c) of section 26 of the principal Ordinance, shall be omitted. 
K.R. NARAYANAN, 
President. 
RAG HBI.R SII\GH, 
Secre/nry IO life Govemmen/ of India. 
Ord. 15 of 
1998. 

ANNEXURE -Ill 
(Stt para - 2 of the Report ) 
As trrrRooccEo '" LOK SABHA 
7th December. 1998 
Bill No. 149 of 1998 
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION BILL. 1998 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PR eU MI~ARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commenceme nt. 
2. Definitions . 
CHA PTER II 
CEr<TRAL VoctLANCE CoMMiSSION 
3. Constitution of Central Vigilance Commission. 
4. Appointment of Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance 
Commissioners . 
5. Terms and other conditions of service of Central Vigilance Commissioner . 
6. Removal of Central Vigilance Commis.~ioner and Vigilance Commissioner. 
7. Power to make rules by Central Governme nt for staff. 
CHAPTER Ill 
FuNCTlONS ANO roweRS or- TtJe CENTRAL V JC ILANCE CoMMISS ION 
8. Functions and powers of Cenual Vigilance Commission. 
9. Proceedings of Commission. 
10. Vigilance Commissioner to act as Central Vigilance Commissioner in certain 
circumstances . 
11. Power relating to inquiries. 
12. Proceedings- before Commission to be judicial proceedings . 
CHAPTER IV 
ExPENSES AND ANNUAL REPORT 
13. Expenses of Commission to be charged on tbe Consolidated Fund of India. 
14. Annual report . 
CHAPT ER V 
M ISCELLJ\Nt:.:Ot;S 
15. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
16. Central Vigilance Commissioner. Vigilan<-e Commissioner nnd staff to be 
public servants. 
17. Report of any inquiry made on reference by Commission to be forwarded to 
that Commission. 
18. Power to call for information. 
19. Power to give direc tions. 
20. Power to make rules. 
21. Power to make regulations. 
22. Notification, rule, etc .. to be laid before Parliament 
23. Power to remove difficulties. 
24, Provisions relating to existing Vigilance Commission. 
25. Appointments. etc . of officers of Directora te oi Enforcem ent 
26. Amendment of Act 25 of 1946. 
27. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE 
49 

Short title 
nnd com -
mencemenL 
Dcfinnions. 
Bill ~o. 149 of 1998 
THE CE~'TRAL VIG!LAKCE COMM ISSION BILL. 1998 
A 
BILL 
ro provide for rile comtirwion of 11 Central Vigilance Commission to inquire or 
cartSe inquiries to be conducted into offences alleged ro ha••e b~en commilltd 
undu 'the Prevention of Cot7upnon Act, /988 by curum caregontl of public 
servants of tht Central Go••ernmelll. corporations tstablrshed by or under Ill!) 
Central Act, Go\ltrnmem conrpamts, socteJies and local mllhorrtlf.t owne<l or 
crmtrolled by the Central Go,•ernmelll and for nrtrtters connected tlrerewulr or 
Incidental tlreretQ. 
BE it enac ted by Parliamcur in the Forty-ninth Year of the repub lic of India as 
follows: -
CH;\PTER I 
l'RH IMI,.ARY 
I. (/) This Act may be called rhc Cent ral Vigilance Comm ission Acr. 1998. 
(2) It shall be deemed to hav e come into force on rhc 25rh day of August. 
1998. 
2. In this Act, unless the comcxt orhcrwisc requirc$,-
(a) "appOllllcd dny" mcnns the date on whrch the Commission is 
constit uted under sub-sec tion (J) of sect ion 3; 
(b) "Central Vigilance Commiss ioner " meuns the Central Vigilance 
Commissio.ner appoin ted under sub-section (/) of sectio n 4; 
(c) ''Commission" means the Central Vigilance Commission constituted 
under sub-section (/) or section 3; 
50 

25 of 19~ 
51 
(d) "Delhi Special Police Establishment'' means the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment constituted unaer sub·scct ion {J) of section 2 of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act. 19~; 
(e) "prescribed'' means presc ribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) "Vigilance Commissioner" means a Vigilance Commissioner 
appointed under sub·section (/) of section 4. 
CHAPTER II 
CENTRAL V IGILANCE COMMISSION 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notificat ion in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalr. there shall ~ 
constituted a body 10 be known as the Central Vigilance Commission to exercise 
the powers conferred upon and to perform the £unctions assigned to it under th1s 
Act. 
(2) The Commiss1on shall constst of-
(a) a Cent ral Vigilance Commiss ioner -Chairperson; 
(b) not more than four Vigilance Commissioners -Members. 
(J) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners 
shall ~ appointed from among.~t pe~ons-
(a) who have been or arc in an all-lnd10 Service or many civil sen ice of 
the Union or in a civil post under the Union having knowledge and 
experience in the mauers relating to vig1lancc, polic) making and administ· 
ration including police administration; and 
(b) who have held orrice or arc holding office in n corporation 
established by or under any Central Act or a Government company owned 
or controlled by the Central Government and persons who have expertise 
and experience 1n finance including insurance and banking. law, vigilance 
and investiga tions: 
Provided that. from amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner and 
the Vigilance Commiss1oners. not more than three persons shall belong to 
the category of persons referred to either in clause (o) or in clause (b). 
( 4) The Central Government shall appoint n Secretary to the Commission on 
such terms and conditions as it deems fit to exercise such powers and discharge 
such duties as the Commission may ~ regulations specify in this behalf. 
(5) The headquarters of the Com m1ssion shall be at New Delhi. 
4.{1) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners 
shall be appointed by the Pres iden t by warrant under his hand and seal : 
Provided that every appointment under this sub·sccrion shall be made after 
obtaining the recommendation of a Committee consisting of-
(o) the Prime Minister - ChaiTperson; 
(b) the Minister of Home Affairs -Member , 
(c) the Leader of the Opposi tion in the House of the People -Member. 
(2} No appointment of a Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance 
Commissioner shall be invalid mcrel~ by reason of any vacane) tn the 
Committee. 
5.(1) Subject to the provisions of sub·sections (J) and (4), the Central 
Vigilance Commiss ioner shall hold office for a term of four years from the date 
on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty·fivc years. 
whicheve1 is ear lier. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub·sections (3) and ( 4), the every Vigilance 
Commissioner shall hold otrice for a rern1 oi three years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office or till he auains the age of sixty·five yenrs. whichever 
is earlier . 
Constitution 
of Central 
Vigilance 
Commission. 
Appointment 
of Central 
Vigilance 
Commission· 
cr and Vigi· 
lance Com· 
m1ssioners. 
Terms and 
other condi· 
lions of ser· 
vice of Cent· 
ral Vigilance 
Commis· 
sioner . 

Removal of 
Central Vigi­
lance Com· 
missioner and 
Vigilance 
Commis­
sioner. 
52 
(3) The Central Vi&ilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commtssioner shall, 
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the Prestdcnt. or some 
person appointed in that behalf by him. an oath or affirmation according to the form 
set out for the purpose in the Schedule . 
(4) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner may , b)' 
writing under his hand addressed to the President, rcsfsn his ortice . 
(5) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner may be 
removed from his oHicc in the manner provided in seclion 6 
(6) On ceasing to hold ol£ice, the Central Vigilance Comm issione r and every other 
Vigilance CommiSSIOner shall be in ineligible for-
(a) reappointment in the Commission; 
(b) further employment to any office.of profit under the Government of 
India or the Government of a State . 
(7) l'be salary and the allowances payable to and the other conditions of servtcc of­
(a) the Central Vigilance Commhsioner shall be the same as those of the 
Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission: 
(b) The Vigilance Commissioner shall be the t.ame as those of a Member of 
the Union Public Service Commission: 
Provided that if the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commis­
sioner is, at the time of hts appomtment, in receipt of a pension (other than a 
disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Govern· 
ment of India or under the Government of a State, his salary in respect of the 
service as the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner shall 
be reduced by the amount of that pension including any portion or pension which 
was commu ted and pens ion equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits 
excluding pension equivalent of retirement gratuty: 
Provided further that the sa lary. allowances and pension payable to, nnd the other 
conditions of service of, the Central Vigilance Commissio ner or any Vigilance 
CommL~sioner shall not be varied to hi> disadvantage aher his appointment . 
6. (1) Subject to the provisaons of sub-section (J). the Cen1ral Vigilance 
Commissioner or any Vigilance Commi!..~ioncr shall be removed from hts office only 
by order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour aher the Supreme 
Court, on a reference made to it by the President, bas, on inquiry. reported that the 
Centnl Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner. as the ca<e may be, 
ought on such ground be removed. 
(2) The President may suspend from office the Central Vigilance Commissioner or 
any Vigilance Commissioner in respect of whom a reference has been made to the 
Supreme Court under sub-section (/) until the President has passed orders or receipt 
of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
(J) Notwithstand ing anything con tau1ed in sub -section (!). the President may by 
order remove from office the Central Vigilance Commissioner or nny Vigilance 
Commissioner if the Cen tral Vigilance Commissioner or such Vigilance Commis ­
sioner, as the case may be-
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involved moral turpitude; or 
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid emplo)·ment outside the 
duties of his office, or 
(d) is, in the opinion of the President. unfit to continue in office by reason 
of infirmity of mind or body, or 
(t) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a Cen1ral Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance 
Commissioner. 

49 of 1998. 
49 or 1988. 
49 of 1988. 
49 of 1988. 
49 of 1988. 
53 
(4) U the Central Vigtlance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commis.s1oner is 
or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract or agreement 
made by or on behalf of the GQvernment of India or participates in any way in 
the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom Otherwise 
than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated 
company, he shall, for the purposes of sub·section (J). be deemed to be guilty 
of misbehaviour. 
7. The Central Government may l>y rules make provision with respect to the 
number of members of the staff of the Commission and their conditions of 
service. 
CHAPTER Ill • 
F uNCTIONS AND POWERs OF THE CENTRAL VJCil.ANCE CoMMt;sJON 
8. (}) The functions and powers of the Commission shall be to-
(a) exercise superintendence O\'Cr the functioning of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment insofar as it relates to the investigation of offences alleged to have 
been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act. 198S: 
(b) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made on a reference 
made by the Cent ral Government wherein it is alleged that a public servant 
being an employee of the Cen1ral Governmen t or a corporation established by 
or under any Cent ra l Act, Govemmc nt company. society and any local authori ty 
owned or contro lled by tha t Government. has committed an offence under the 
Preve ntion of Corr upt ion Act. 1988; 
(c) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made into any complamt 
apains1 any officia l belong ing to such category of officials specificu in sub·~cction 
(2 wherein it is alleged that he has commined an offence under the Prevention 
o Corruption Act, 19S8: 
(d) rev1ew the progress of invcsugations conducted by tbc Delhi Special Police 
Establishment into offences alleged to have been commitled under the Prcvcn· 
tion of Corruption Act. 1988; 
(e) review the progress of applications pending with the competent authonttcs 
for sanction of prosecution under the Prcvcnt•on of Corruption Act, 1988; 
(f) tender adv«:e to the Ccntul Government. corporations established by or 
under any Central Act. Government companies, societies and local authorities 
owned or controlled by the Central Government on such matters as may be 
referred to it by that Government, said Guvcmmcm companies, s~•cicues and 
local authori ties owned or controlled by the Central Government or otherwise; 
(g) exercise superintendence over the vigilance administration of the var~ous 
Minist ries of the Central Government or corporations established by or under 
any Central Act. Governme nt compAnies, societies and local nuthoritic' owned 
or contro lled by that Governme nt. 
(2) The perso ns refe rred 10 in clause (c) of sub-sec tion (" nrc os follows:­
(a) G roup 'A' officers of the Central Governme nt ; 
(b) such level of officers of the corpo rations established by or under 
any Central Act, Government companies, societies and other local 
authorities, owned or controlled by the Central Government, as that 
Government may. by noufication in the Official Gazette, spec•fy in this 
behalf: 
Provided that till such time a notification is issued under this crause. all 
officers of the said corporatiOns. companies, societies and local authorities shall 
be deemed to be the pcr..ons referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (/). 
9. (I) The proceedings of the Commis~ion shaU be conducted ar us 
hcadquaners . 
(2) The Commission shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 10 the 
transaction of the busines.~ as may be provided by regulations. 
Power 10 
make rules 
by Cent ral 
Governmen t 
for staff. 
Functions 
and powers 
of Central 
Vigilance 
Commission. 
Proceedings 
of Commis · 
sian. 

Vigilance 
Commissioner 
to act as 
Central 
Vigilance 
Commissioner 
in cercain 
circumstances. 
Power 
relating to 
inquilics. 
Proceedings 
before 
Commission 
co be judicial 
proceedings. 
Expenses of 
Commission 
co be 
charged on 
the Consoli· 
dared Fund 
of India. 
Annual 
report. 
54 
(J) The Cencral Vigilance Commissioner, or, if for any reason he is unable to 
aucnd any meecing of the Commission, chc seniom10sc Vigilance Commissioner 
presenc ac the meecing. shall preside at che mcecing. 
(4) No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason 
of-
( a) any vacancy in. or any defecc in the conscirurion of. chc Commission; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person accing as chc Ccncral Vigilance 
Commissioner or as a Vig~lance Commissioner; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of chc Commission not affecting the 
mcrics of the case. 
10. (I) In the event of the occurencc of any vacancy in chc office of che 
Cencral Vigilance Commissioner by reason of his death, resignation or 
ocherwisc, che Presidcnc n1ay be notification, authorise one of chc Vigilance 
Commissioners to •cc as che Central Vigilance Commissioner uncil che 
appointment of a new Central Vigilance Commissioner co fill such vacancy. 
(2) When the Central Vigilance Comnusstoner is unable to discharge his 
functions owing co absence on lcnvc or otherwise. such one of the Vigilance 
Commissioners as the Presidcnc muy. by nottfication. authorise in chis behalf, 
shall discharge che functtons of chc Central Vigilance Commissioner until the 
date on which the Central Vigiloncc Commissioner rc~umes his ducies. 
11. The Commission ; hall. while conduccing any inquiry referred to in clauses 
(b) and (c) of sub-seccion (I) of section 8. have all the powers of a civil court 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 and in particular, in 5 of !908. 
respecc of the following maners, Mmcly:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the ancndancc of any pe!'l<on from any 
part of India and examining him on oach; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or 
office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the exammacton of "-llncs.<es or 
documents; and 
(f) any ocher maucr which may be prescribed. 
12. The Commission shnll be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapcer XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 and 2 of 1974. 
every proceeding before the Commission ~hall be deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding wichin the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of 
section 196 of che Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860. 
CHAPTER IV 
ExPENSEs ""'o ANNUl\~ REI'ORT 
13. The expenses of the Commission. including any salaries, allowances and 
pensions payable ro or in respect of the Central Vigilance Commi~sioner, the 
Vigilance Commissioners. Secretary and chc staff of the Commission. shall be 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
14. (1) It shall be Che duty of che Commission to present annually to the 
President a report as co che work done by chc Commission. 
(2) The report referred to in sub-section (/) shall contain a separate part on 
the functioning of the Delhi Special Police Escablishment insofar as it relates to 
sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Escablishmcnt Act, 1946. 25 of 1946. 
(J) On receipt of such report, the President shall cause che same to be l;lid 
before each House of Parliament. 

45 Ol 1860. 
25 of 1946. 
55 
CHAPTER V 
MtsC6LLANtous 
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Commission, the Central Vigilance Commissioner. any Vigilance Commissioner, 
the Secretary or against any staff of the Commission in respect of anything 
wbich is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
16. The Central Vigilance Commissioner, every Vigilance Commissioner, the 
Secretary and every staff of the CommiSl;ion shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meanmg of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
17. (7) The report of the inquiry undertaken by any agency on a reference 
made by the Commission shall be forwarded to the Commission 
(2) The Commisston shall, on receipt of such report and after taki.ng into 
consideration any other factors relevant thereto. advise the Central Government 
and co.rporations established by or under any Central Act. Government 
companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by that 
Government, as the ca<e ma~ be, as to the further course of actton. 
(3) The Ccnt:ral Government and the corpo rations established by or under any 
Central Act. Govcmmeut companies. socieucs and other local authorities owned 
or controlled by that Government, a.• the case may be, shall consider the advice 
of the Commission and take nppropriate action: 
Provided that where the Central Government. any corporation C$tablished by 
or under any Central Act, Government company, society or local authority 
owned or controlled by the Central Government. as the case may be, docs not 
agree with the advice of tbe Commission. it may, for reason~ to be recorded in 
writing, communicate the sume to the Commission. 
18. The Commission may call for reports. returns and statement~ from the 
Central Government or corporations established by or under any Central Act, 
Government companios, societie$ and other local authorities owned or 
controlled by that Government so as to enable tt to exercise general supervision 
over the vtgilancc and anti-corr uption work in that Governmen t and in the said 
corporations, Government companies. societies and local authorities. 
19. The Commission shall from time to time give directions to the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment for the purpose of discharging the responsibility 
entrusted to it under sub-section (/) of section 4 of the Delhi Special Pobcc 
Establishment Act. 1946: 
Provided that the Commission shall not exercise its power. in such a manner 
so as to require the Delhi Special Police Establishment to investigate or dispose 
of a particular case only in a particular manner. 
20. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rule.~ for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:­
( a) the number of members of the staff and their conditions of service 
under 
section 7; 
(b) any other power of the civil court to be prescribed under clause (/) 
of section 11: and 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
21. (/) The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Govcm.ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Aet and the rules made thereunder to provide for all 
matters for which provision is expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act. 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
Centro! 
Vigilance 
Commissioner. 
Vigilance 
Commissioner 
and ~taff to 
be public 
servants. 
Report of 
any inquiry 
made on 
reference by 
Commission 
to be 
forwarded to 
that 
Commission. 
Power tO call 
for 
information. 
Power to 
give 
dirccrions 
Power to 
make rules. 
Power to 
make 
regulations. 

46 of 1973. 
56 
(2) In part icular, and wihout prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matlers, 
namely:-
( a) the duties and the power~ of the secretary under sub-section (4) of 
section 3; and 
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Commission under sub-section 
(2) of section 9. 
22. Every notification issued under clause (b) of sub·secllon (2) oi section 8 
and every rule made by the Centra l Government ~nd every regulation made by 
the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued 
or made, before each House of Parliament. whde it is in session. for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions. and if, before the expiry of the session immediatel y 
following the session or the successive scssltms aforesaid. both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the notification or the rule or regulation, or both 
Houses agree that the notification or the rule or regulation should not be made, 
the notification or the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in suc h 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so. however, that any such 
modification or annulment sha ll be witho ut prejudice to the validity of anyt hing 
previously done under that notification or rule or regu lation . 
23. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving clfcct to the provisions of this Act. the 
Central Government may. by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act. remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be mnde after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall. as soon as may be after it i$ 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
24. With effect from the appointed day the Central Vigilance Commis~ i on set 
up by the Resolution of the Government of lndi n in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs No. ?417164-A VD dated the lith Februar y, 1964 (hereaf ter referred to 
in this section as the existing Vigilance Comm ission) shall. insofar as its 
functions arc not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. continue to 
discharge the said functions and ,-
(a) all actions and decisions taken by the cxtsting Vigilance 
Commission insofar as such actions and decisions arc relatable to the 
functions of the Commission constituted under this Act (here after referred 
to in this sectio n as the new Commission) shall be deemed to have been 
taken by the new Commission: 
(b) all proceedings pending before the existing Vigilance Commission. 
insofar as such proceedings relate to the functions of the new Commission. 
shall be deemed to be transferred to the new Commission and shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
(c) the employees of the existing Vigilance Commission shall be 
deemed to have become the emp loyees of the new Commission on the 
same terms and conditions; 
(d) all the assets and liabilities of the existing Vigilance Commission 
shall be transferred to the new Commiss ion. 
25. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange Regulat ion 
Act, 1973 or any other law for the time being in foree,-
(a) the Central Government shall appoint a Director of Enforcement 
in the Directorate of Enforcement in the Ministry of Finance on the 
recommendat ion of the Committee consisting of,-
(i) the Central Vigilance Commisstoner Chairperson; 
(ii) Secretary to the Government of India in-
charge of the Ministry of Home Affnirs in the 
Centra l Government - Member; 
Notification 
rule. etc .. to 
be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
Power to 
temovc 
difficulties . 
Provisions 
relating to 
cxalSting 
Vigtlancc 
Commission. 
Appointments, 
etc ., of 
officers of 
Directorate 
of 
Enforc.::ment . 

Amendment 
of Act 25 of 
1946. 
Interpretation 
sec tion. 
49 o f 1988. 
57 
(iii) Secreta ry to the Government of India in· 
charge of the Ministry of Personne l in the 
Central Government Mcm~r; 
(iv) Secretary to the Government of India in· 
charge of the Department of Revenue, 
Ministr y of Finance in the Central - Member; 
Government 
(b) no person below the ran k of Addi tional Secretary to the 
Govc>nment of India shall be eligible for appointment as a Director of 
Enforcement; 
(c) a Director of Enforcement shall continue to hold office for a 
period of no t less than two years fro m the date on which he assumes 
office; 
(d) a Director o f Enforcement sin all not be transferred except with the 
previous consent of the Commiuce referred to in clause (u): 
(e) the Comm ittee referred to i1l clause (a) sha ll recommend officers 
for appointment to the posts of the level above the Deputy Director of 
Enforc eme nt and also recom mend the extension or curtailment of the 
tenure of such officers in the Directorate of Enforcement; 
(j) on receip t of the recommendation under clause (~). the Central 
Government shall pass such order a~ it thinks fit 10 give effec t 10 the said 
reco mmenda tion. 
26. In the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. 1946. with effect from the 
appoin ted day-
(a) after section 1. the following sec tion shall be inserted , namely:­
"lA. Words and exp ressiO n ~ used herem and not defined but defined 
in the Central Vigilance Commission Act. 1998. s hall have the meani ngs. 
respe ctively, assigned to them on that Act."; 
(b) for section 4. the following sc,tions shall be substi tuted. nnmcly :­
"4. (I) The superintendence of the Dclht Special Pollee Establishment insofar 
as il relates to in'(cstigation of offence' alleged w have been committed under 
the Preventi on of Corrupuon Act, 1988. shall \CSt in the Commtssion . 
(2) Save a~ otherwise provided nt ~ub · scc t iun (/). the superinte ndence or the 
said police establishment on all other maucrs shall vest in the Centra l 
Government. 
(3) The administration of the said police CJ:tablishmcnt shall vest in an oHicer 
appo inted in this behalf by the Centr nl Governme nt (hcremaftcr referred to as 
the Director ) who shall exercise in respect of that police establishme nt such of 
the powers excrc i ~a ble by an lnspectO~· G encral of the Police in respect of the 
police force on a State as the Central Government may specify in this behalf. 
4A. (/) The Cent ral Gove rnment shall appoint the Director on the 
recommendation of thc Committee consisting or-
(a) the Central Vigilance Comm issioner Chairperson; 
(b) Secretary 10 the Governm ent of India in· 
charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 
Central Government - Member; 
(c) Secre tary tO the Government of India on· 
charge of the Min i~tr y of Personnel in the 
Central Government - )\1cm~r. 
(2) While making any recommendation under sub-section (J). the Committee 
shall consider the v iew~ of the Director . 
• 
Superintendence 
and 
administration 
of Special 
Police 
Establishment. 
Committee 
for 
appointmem 
of Director . 

Terms and 
condic ions of 
service of 
Direccor. 
Appointment 
for pom of 
Joint 
Director and 
above, 
extension 
and 
cure ailment 
of their 
tenure. ere. 
Repeal 
saving. 
and 
58 
(3) The Committee shall recommend a panel of offlcers-
(a) on the basis of senioricy. integricy and experience in the 
investigation of anti-corrupt ion cases: and 
(b) chosen from amongst officers belonging to che Indian Police 
Service constituted under chc All-India Services Ace, 1951, 
for being considered for appoincmenc as che Direccor 
4B. {1) The Direccor shall, nocwichscnnding anyching co chc concrary contamcd 
in the rules relating to his condicions of service, concinuc to hold office for a 
period of not less than cwo years from.t hc dace on which he assumes office. 
(2) The Director shall not be transferred except with the previous consent of 
the Commiuee referred to in sub-section (1) of section 4A. 
4C. (J) The Committee referred to in section 4A shall, after consulting the 
Director, recommend officers for appointmcnc to che poses of chc level of Joint 
Director and above and also recommend che cxtcn<i<ln or curtailment of the 
cenure of such officers in tbe Delhi Special Police Estnblishmcnc. 
(2) On receipt of the recommendation under sub-section (/). the Central 
Government shall pass such order 3S it thinks fit to give effect to the said 
recommendatton " 
27. (/)The Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance. 1998, and the Cencral 
Vigilance Commissoon (Amendment) Ordinance. 1998 are hereby repealed 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or an)' action taken under the 
Cenlral Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1998. as amended by the Centra l 
Vigilance Commission (Amendment) Ordinance, 1998. shall be deemed to hnve 
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(Su <ection 5(3)1 
Form Qf oath or affirmation to be maue by the Central Vogilunce 
Commissioner or Vigilance Commissioner:-
••[. A.B., having been appointed Cencral Vigilance Conu u b~oo n cr (or 
Vigilance Commissioner) of the Central Vigtlance Commis.~oon d<l 
swear in the name of God 
solemnly affirm 
chat I will bear true faith und allegiance to the Constitution of India "' 
by law established, th:oc I will uphold chc sovereignty and integrity of 
India, that T will duly and faithfully and I(> the best of my ability, 
knowledge and judgment perform the uucics of my office withouc fe(lr ur 
favour, affection or ill-will and that 1 '-'ill upht.>ld che Conscitutiun .ond the 
laws.•· 
61 of 1951 
Ord. 15 of 
1998. 
Ore. 18 of 
1998. 
Ont. 15 of 
1998. 
On! 18 of 
1998 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In pursuance to the recommendati o ns of the Commiltcc on Prevention of 
Corruption headed by Shri K. Sanrhan am . the erstwhile Central Vigilance 
Commission was set up vide Resolution No. 2417/64-A VD dated the llth 
Febr uary, 1964. The said Resolution inter alia provide d that the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner would be au·achcd to the Ministry of Home Affi1irs 
(now !be Ministry of Personnel , Public Grievances and Pensions). but in the 
exercise of its powers and functions it will not be subordinate to any Ministry/ 
Department and will have the same measure of independe nce and autonomy as 
the Union Public Service Commission. Paragraph 3 of the said Resolution also 
stipulated that the Cen tral Vigilance Commissioner will be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal and that he will not be removed or 
suspended from the office except in the manner provided for the removal or 
suspension of the Chairma n or a Member of the Union Public Service 
Commission. This Resolution was amended in November, 1995 deleting the 
prov ision relating to appointment of tlte Cent ral Vigilance Commissioner by the 
Preside nt by warrant under his hand and seal. 
2 . In September , 1997, the Government constituted an Independent Review 
Committee (IRC) comprisi ng Shri B.G. Deshmukh. Shri S.V. Giri and Shri 
N.N. Vohra tO suggest measu res for stre ngthening inter alia, anti-corrupt ion 
activities as part of its efforts against -corruption . One of the rc.commcndations 
made by the IRC was that the quest ion of conferr ing statutOry sta tus tO the 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) alongwith the restoration of the provision 
relating to appointmenr of the Central Vigilance Commissioner being made 
unde r the hand and seal of the Presiucn1 may be considered by the 
Government . The fRC also recommended that the Central Vigilance 
Commission sho uld be made responsible for the efficient functioning of the CB!. 
3. Subsequently, the Supreme Court vide its order dated 18th December. 1997 
in Criminal Writ Pctiuons Nos . 340-343193-Vinect Narain and others versus 
Union of India and others (generally known as Jain Hawala case} had imcr alia 
give.n directions that statutory status should be C011ferred upon the Centra l 
Vigilance Commission. Several consequences of the conferment of such status 
were also dkectcd by the Supreme Coun to follow. 
4. While the activo on the formulation of the suitable legislation for the 
conferment of statutory status to the CVC was under way.-thc then Chief 
Vigilance Commissioner in position resigned and hence appointmen t to senior 
posts in Public Secto r Undertaki ngs. National ised Banks and Financial 
Institutions could not be finalised and mndc. Besides. matters relating to grant 
of sanction of prosecution of certain categories of public servants also rema ined 
pending in such a situation. In view o·f the urgency involved in the maucr and 
keeping in mind the fact that the next Session or Parliament was likely to take 
place not earlier than Novetnber, 1998. the Government decided 10 put the 
proposed law in place through an Ordinance . Acording ly, the Central Vigilan ce 
Commiss ion Ordinance. 1998 (Ord. l5 of 1998) was promulgated by the 
President on the 25th August. 1998. 
5. Subsequent to the promulgation of the Ordi nance on the 25th August, 
199-8, the amiws curiae in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 38/97 in the Supreme Court 
filed certain written objections objecting 10 certain prov ision of the Ordinance. 
In order 10 rectify the position and after obtain ing the views of the Attorney 
General for India, the Presidcm pronnolgated the Central Vigila nce Comm ission 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1998 (Ord. 18 of 1998) on the 27oh October, 1998. 
6. The Cen tral Vigilance Commission Ord inance, 1998 as amended by the 
Cen tral Vigilance Commission (Amendment) Ordinance, 1998. inter trlia 
providcs-
(i} for the constitution of a Centro! Vigilance Comm ission consisting of a 
Central Vigilance Commiss ioner as Chairperson and not more th"n four 
Vigilance Commissioners as Memb ers ; 
59 

60 
(ii) that the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance 
Commissioners shall be appointed from amongst persons-
(a) who have been or are in an all India Service or in any civil 
servic,e of the Unio 11 or in a civil post under the Union having 
knowledge and experience in the matters relating to vigilance. pol icy 
making and administration including police administration; 
(b) who have held office or are holding office in a corpo ration 
established by or under any Central Act or a Government company 
owned or controlled by the Central Government and persons who 
have expenise and experience in finance including insurance and 
ban king. law. vigilance and investigations; 
subject to the condition that from amongst the Central Vigilance Commiss ioner 
and the Vigilance Commissioners, not more than three persons shall belong to 
the categories of persons referred to either in clause (a) or clause (b) above; 
(iii) that the Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance 
Commissioners shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his 
hand and seal and their appointment shall be made after obtaining the 
recommendations of a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister as 
Chairperson, the Minister of Home Affairs and the Leader of the 
Opposition in the House of the People as Members: 
(iv) that the term of the Central Vigilance Commtssioner shall be for a 
period of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or 
tiU he attains the age of 65 years whichever is earlier: 
(v) that the term of a Vigilance Commissioner .shall be for a period of 
three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or rill he 
atta ins the age of 65 years whichever ts earlier: and 
(vi) that on ceasing to hold office. the Central Vigilance Commtssioner 
and every other Vigilance Commissioner shall be ineligible for 
reappointment in the Commission and further employment to any office of 
profit under the Government of India or the Government of a State . 
7. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinances, 
NEW D ELHI; KADAMBUR M.R. JANARTHANAN, 
The 24th November, 1998. 

Q 1"-r------~----~~====~======~------------------------------------------------------ -- --,-
1 
I 
I I 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of leiter No. 371/54/98-A VD. Ill dated 27 November, 1998 from Shri 
Kadambur M.R . Janarthana n, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel. 
Public Grievances and Pensions to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha .) 
The President, having been informed of the subject mater of the Central 
Vigilance Commission Bill. 1998 re<:ommcnds the introduction and consideration 
of the BiU in Lok Sabba under anicle 117(1} and (3} of the Constitution. 
61 

~REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
,::> 
~<;) .~•se (2) of clause 8 of the Bill empowers 1he Cemral 
~'l" ,.S b no1ifica1ion in lhe Official Gazeue, lhe level of 
.s:> ,., q ,."' <,llshed by or under any CcniTal Act. Govcmmem 
~ 'Q~ s" ,..§ cr local aulhorilics. owned or con1rolled by lhe 
~ 4.,: c;: 
"v :$'(. ,;, ~ ,o ~ 
..._'1" !-. "' "" rO ~ (. o.,~'\,~v<; 
~ "' <; -.; _.., ·" ~c, lhe Cenlral Government 10 make rules. bv . ' • ~ ". -""* ~- • 
.;:"~" ~"' o .,~ o;,~,.c; d- for the purpose of carrying inlo effect the 
'<-" ;:;:~"' $J0 J:;-"'. i' ~~ <;> .,o'"', The various mauers in relation to which 
d- ;.,~ ..,:§' ,/' ~ ,t' iif ~--; ~merated in detail under various i1cms of 
.;:'\ 0l", l:o ~ b' ~ 0<!> b '-
0 
,., •c mainly to the number of members of 
•. ~ 0 ~ <$ ,.c; • '><:' ~ 0 ~ <.'- ~der clause 7, any addilional power of 
~...,(.too.~ tf.l~ tl ~ 
-."' '$' ._o <(;> 0c; "'"' .§' .,., ..Sl ~a use (f) of clause It; and any 01hcr i:j' ~"' <J ·~ <$' .,., .. 0~ SS' 0 ' 'b d -.5:J' ,o v rt>c;:. , ~ ~ • s;; , "' ~o ,0~. prescn c . 
"> ~ ~ ~ 's G'' .:;' " ~· '<S 
'? ,.<:. " ~0 <$' ff ~ " .,~ ~ . ~ "" ~ 
v ~<$' ~<$' '> v0 ,.q .,c:. ~'> <...O <. <q' ;f . .,' ~"'tral Vigilance Commission, wilh 
<-<-" ~"'. c:."' 6' .._o~ o!>. '"' .,., ~<-'" -~ ,., o''"' n em to make regula tions by -; 0 <..... ~ v ~ ") ~.., ..) (., -~ ~"<'· ' • 
0 ~"'. ·:::."'. o"~ 0~ :<:>"' .,q ~ b' ff §" il ~' ,.,o~~~ wilh the proposed enac1mcnt 
., .:.~~o~" i,:S> 0~ "·~' 0~ .:t"' Q;
0 
9."'"' ;«(!, ,_<.·' <."' 0 l?atlcrs for which provision 1S 
q .,o"' <,; -A 0 ""-,.,o"' ,.,., ""' "''> ~ "' §""' "'"' .,<> ,provisions of 1 he propose d 
">;·,)-''"' " " "' '<) ~- "' <. ~ " ' I I b M"' . .,<i ~ ... ;s- .._o -."' 9."' !§' ,s,• 1 sue 1 regu a11ons may e 
~ ,o" ~"'., ,:;;:"' ·-$' -;,1> ~ <; """· ;:/ ~(;' .,4' -.."'" 'Jems of sub-clnuse (2) of q_ '"'~ ' t. H ~ " - :-..: c; ':'-.~ ll:- ~ ;s' ~ ~ ff q> . ., .. <!> c,"' " . $' "'"' -"of 1hc Secre1ary under 
,- " 0 ~ ;...::' §' !>. c} .,:. "~ '1' d b I C . . v'-' ~ q" ,:; rO 0 l;i :7 $-"' ~· <C y 1 \C 00\0\ISSIOn 
·<:' " ·" v '>. <; <:>: "' • ' ~'W ·~ d..'J tl ~\J ..:> :;:<:- (I ~ "0\.J 
')~ "\o(.;r:,...:; ~~"' '~ 
~ 'il>-' ~~ c., ·fJ 0.:::;_"-c ~ ,o 0" ;.."'! ~ .i!) ~ ~ ... 1(.;\.J fJ ~ ,,'"0 ~~ ~- 0 ~ ~ c;, 
.... "' ,,.-- ". <-' <$ . ~ o<~ <:' o'' ,. ~ -"' b' l:i 0 ~,;:;, ·~~ ~v -~ -~ 
~ ~ !-(. ....,Q.v t;Q' 
'-""·~"'" o' "' .<...""' 
~ ~-
61 
de by lhe Cemral 
Centra l Vigilance 
"arliament. The 
or regulations 
ivc details or 
1rovisions in 
< a normal 
'ace til~ 
ilanu 
•d 
I 

.._ I ~ 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
I. Sub-clause (4) of clause 3 of the lllll provides for appoinamcnt of a 
Secretary to the Commission 011 such terms and cond itions 3$ the Cent ral 
Governme nt deems fit Sub-clnlJsc (7) of clause S of the Bill provide$ for 
salaries. allowances and pension.' payable to or an respect of the CcntTal 
Vtgilnnce Commis.~ioner and the Vigilancc Commissioners. Clause 7 of the Bill 
provides for appointment of members of the starr of the Commission and their 
conditions of service . 
2. For the Central Vigilance Commission ihe Budget provtsion for the year 
1998·99 is rupees four crorcs and forty-four lakhs. The Budget EMimatcs 
projected for the year 1999-2000 are rupees four crores forty three lakhs a.nd 
tlunecn thousand . 
3. After the proposed Bill becomes an Act. there would apparently be 
increase in the expenditure since four Members. apart from the Chairpersons 
nrc proposed to be appointed in the Ccntral Vigilance Commission . In addition. 
their personal staff. etc.. will also be appointed 
4. Recu rring expendi ture towards pay and allowances. etc .. of the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners under sub-clause (7) of 
clause 5 and of Secretary under sub-clause (4) of clause 3 and the staff of the 
Commission under clause 7 arc esumated approximately rupees fifty lakhs per 
annum. Roug h esrimutes of non·recumng cxpendirure on items such as 
furniture, office equipment. vehicle. etc., would be approximately of the order 
of rupees fifteen lakhs At Ibis stage. at as not possible to give precise details of 
lhe expenditure to be incurred. 
5. The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 
62 

MEMORANDUM REGARD ING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Paragraph (b) of sub-clause (2) of clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Gove rnmen t to specify. by noti£ication in the Official Gazette , the level o f 
officers of corporat ions established by or under any Central Act, Government 
companies , societies and other local authorities, owned or contro lled by the 
Centra l Government . 
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Govemtlt<mt to make rules, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of carrying into effect tbe 
provisions of the proposed enac tment. The various matters in relatio n to which 
>uch rules may be make have bee n enumera•ed in detail under various items of 
sub -clause (2) of that clause. These relate mainly to the number of members of 
the staff and their conditions o f service under clause 7, any additional power o f 
a civil court to be prescribed under sub-cla use (f) of clause 11; and any o ther 
matter which is required to be, or may be, prescr ibed. 
Clause 21 of the Bill also empowers the Centra l Vigilance Commission, with 
the previous approva l of the Central Government, tO make regulat ions, by 
norific<otion in the Official Gazette not inconsistent with the proposed enac tment 
and the rules made tllercunder to provide for all matter~ for which provisio n is 
expedie nt for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the propo sed 
enactm ent. Tile various matters in relation 10 which such regulations may be 
made have been enumerated iol detail under various items of sub-clause (2) of 
that clause. These relate mainly to tbe duties und powers of the Secretary unde r 
sub-clause (4) of clause 3: and the procedure to be followed by the Com mission 
unde r sub-clause (2) of clause 9. 
Every notification issued under clause 8(2)(b} or rule made by the Central 
Gove rnme nt under clause 20 or every regulation made by the Cent ral Vigilance 
Commission under clause 21 is required to be laid before Parliament. The 
matters in respect of which notificati on may be is~ued or rules or regulatio ns 
may be made are genera lly matters of proced ure or administrative details or 
matters in respect of which it is not pract icable to make detailed provisio ns in 
the Bill itself. The delega tion of legislative power is, therefore. of a norrnal 
character . 
Memorandum explaining tile modiflcaJion.>· comained in rhe Bill ro replace rhe 
Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1998 tmd tlte Central Vigilance 
Commission, (Amendment} Ordinance, 1998. 
The Centr al Vigilance Commission Bill. 1998 which seeks to repeal and 
replace the Central Vigilance Com mission Ordinance , 1998 and the Cent ral 
Vigilance Commission (Amendment) Ordi nance, l998 proposes to make the 
following modificatio n in the provisions contained in the said Ordinances;-
Clause 22 of the Bill inrer alia pro"ides that every notification issued shall be 
laid before Parliamen t. Since only notificat ions which involve delegat ion -of 
legislative character arc required to be laid before 'Parliament and only 
notification issued under clause 8{2)(b) of the Sill is of legislative character the 
requirement as to laying is necessary only with respect to this clause. 
Accordingly it is propose.d to modify clause 22. The said modification is of 
drafting nature. 
63 
L:"i -----

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT PROM ntE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTAuusu~,,. Acr, 1946 
{25 OF l946) 
• • • 
4. (1) The superintendence of the Delhi Special Police Establishment shall 
vest in the Central Government . 
(2) The administration of the said police establishment shall vest in an officer 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government who shall exercise in 
respect of that police establishment such of the powers exercisable by an 
[nspector-General of Police in n:.spcct of the police force in a State 
Government, as the Central Governmen t may specify in this behalf . 
• • 
Supc.natc.ndencc 
•nd 
admmistrataoa 
of spoaat pot;.. 
c..sllbhshment. 