PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 143
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2009
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 24  FEBRUARY, 2010)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  FEBRUARY, 2010)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 24  FEBRUARY, 2010)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  FEBRUARY, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2009
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 24 TH FEBRUARY , 2010)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 ND FEBRUARY , 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-277

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—29
CHAPTER -I
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 1—2
CHAPTER -II
BACKGROUND AND NECESSITY OF B ILL .................................................................... 3—6
CHAPTER -III
JURISDICTIONAL  I SSUES ............................................................................................. 7—11
CHAPTER -IV
OTHER I SSUES ........................................................................................................... 12—22
CHAPTER -V
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE C ONSIDERATION OF B ILL .......................................................... 23—29
CHAPTER -VI
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE
— A T A G LANCE ...................................................................................................... 30—36
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F M EETINGS O F C OMMITTEE ........................................................... 37—65
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 67 —99
(i) The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 .................................................. 69—96
(ii) List of the Witnesses who appeared before the Committee .......................... 97—99

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31st August, 2009)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
♣6. Vacant
7. Shri Brijesh Pathak
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri Tariq Anwar
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
16. Shri Naveen Jindal
17. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat)
18. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
19. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
20. Shri L. Rajagopal
21. Shri Nilesh Narayan Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Shri A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
26. Shri Ravneet Singh
27. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
28. Shri Harsh Vardhan
29. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
30. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
1
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
♣ Due to demise of Shri Janeshwar Mishra, Member, Rajya Sabha on 22nd January, 2010.
1 Shri Neeraj Shekhar nominated w.e.f. 14th October, 2009 vice Shri Akhilesh Yadav who was nominated to the Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty-third Report on the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
(Annexure I).
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred ♣ the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009, as
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 7th  August, 2009 and pending therein, to the Committee on
14th September, 2009 for examination and report within three months i.e. by 13th December, 2009.
3. It is relevant to mention here that an identical Bill viz. the Land Ports Authority of India
Bill, 2008, introduced in the Fourteenth Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2008, was referred to the
previous Committee by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 31st December, 2008 with the direction
to report by 15th February, 2009. The previous Committee had considered the Bill in three sittings
i.e. on 9th, 16th and 23rd January, 2009. As the previous Committee needed more time to complete
the examination of the Bill, it sought extension of time upto 31st March, 2009 from Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for presenting its Report, which was granted.
3.1 Due to announcement of dates for General Elections to the Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the then
Committee could not complete all stages of consideration of the 2008 Bill and present its Report
thereon by the extended date. With the dissolution of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha on 18th May, 2009,
the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2008 lapsed.
4. The Committee considered the 2009 Bill so far in five sittings held on 3rd and 13th November,
1st, 16th and 30th December, 2009. The Committee heard the official presentation of the Home
Secretary on 3rd November, 2009. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of
Ministries of Home Affairs, Intelligence Bureau (IB), Commerce and Industry, Finance, External
Affairs, Railways, Defence and other agencies in its meetings held on above dates. List of
witnesses who appeared before the Committee is at Annexure-II. In view of the inadequate time
available to complete all stages of consideration of the Bill, Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, on the
request of the Committee, granted for presenting its Report on the Bill upto the first day of the
Budget Session 2010.
4.1 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on 30th
December, 2009.
5. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 9 February, 2010 and
adopted the same.
♣ Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 46383 dated 14th September, 2009.

6. The Committee has made use of the following documents in the finalization of the Report:—
(i) Background Note on the LPAI Bill, 2009 and other relevant material received from the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
(ii) Oral evidence tendered before the previous Committee and present Committee.
(iii) W ritten replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the queries raised by
the Members.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable
contributions made by the witnesses who deposed before it and facilitated the Committee in
formulating its views on the Bill.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman
9th February, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
1.0 The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on
7th August, 2009, provides for establishment of the Land Ports Authority of India (LPAI) for the
development and management of facilities for cross-border movement of passengers and goods at
designated points along the international borders of India and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
1.1 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
1.1.1 According to the Statements of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, there are several designated
entry and exit points on the international borders of the country through which cross-border
movement of persons, goods and traffic takes place. Good border management is mandated by
India’s security concerns and, to this end, it is important to put in place systems, which address
security imperatives while facilitating trade and commerce. Existing infrastructure available with
customs, immigration, other regulatory agencies and auxiliary services at these designated entry and
exit points are generally not sufficient. The regulatory and support functions are also available either
under one roof or in an integrated manner. There is no single agency responsible for coordinated
functioning of various Government authorities and service providers. The Bill therefore, aims at
establishing Integrated Check Points at entry and exit points on international land borders through
a plan scheme to regulate cross-border movement of persons and goods and also address security
imperatives.
1.1.2 The Integrated Check Posts shall be sanitized zones with dedicated passenger and cargo
terminals comprising offices of concerned authorities and adequate facilities and amenities in a
single complex equipped with state-of-the-art modern amenities.
1.1.3 The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 aims to establish the Land Ports Authority of
India to undertake the construction, management and maintenance of Integrated Check Posts. The
Authority would inter-alia plan, develop, construct, manage and maintain Integrated Check Posts,
regulate the functions of various agencies working at such Check Posts, coordinate with various
Ministries and Departments concerned of the Government of India and other agencies for regulating
the entry and exit of passengers and goods and establish necessary service facilities.
1.2 SALIENT FEATURES OF THE BILL
1.2.1 The salient features of the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 are briefly as under:—
(i) The Bill seeks to establish the Land Ports Authority of India to undertake the
construction, management and maintenance of Integrated Check Posts;

2
(ii) The LPAI shall consist of:—
• Chairperson;
• a Member, (Planning and Development) and a Member (Finance);
• not more than nine members, ex-officio, to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the officers, not below the rank of the Joint Secretary
to the Government of India, representing Ministries/Departments concerned;
• the Chief Secretary or his nominee of the respective State where the ICPs are
located;
• the representatives, one each of traders and workers to be appointed by the
Central Government, may be co-opted on case to case basis wherever necessary;
and
• such other representatives as the Central Government may co-opt for functional
purposes;
(iii) The Authority would, inter-alia, plan, develop, construct, manage and maintain
Integrated Check Posts, coordinate with various Ministries and Department concerned
of the Government of India and other agencies for regulating the entry and exit of
passengers and goods and establish necessary service facilities;
(iv) The LPAI would plan, develop, construct and maintain terminal and ancillary buildings,
service facilities etc., and to establish such other facilities as may be required for
facilitating trade and traffic;
(v) The Bill enables the LPAI to involve the private sector, for management and
maintenance of such non-sovereign functions of the ICPs, which may be feasible
without compromising security imperatives;
(vi) The Integrated Check Post shall be a sanitized zone with dedicated passenger and
cargo terminals comprising adequate customs and immigration facilities, security and
scanning equipments, health and quarantine facilities, passenger amenities like waiting
areas, restaurants, rest rooms, duty-free shops, parking, warehousing, container yards,
offices of transport and logistics companies, banks and financial services, dormitories
for drivers, and all related facilities like service stations and fuel stations, in a single
complex, equipped with state-of-the-art modem amenities.

3
CHAPTER-II
BACKGROUND AND NECESSITY OF THE BILL
2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note, explaining the reasons for introducing
the Bill, made the following submissions:-
* The infrastructure available with the Customs, Immigration and other regulatory
authorities at the existing border crossing points on our land borders are generally
inadequate. The supporting non-sovereign facilities are also either inadequate or absent
and all regulatory and support functions are generally not available in one premise. Even
where the facilities are located in close proximity, there is no single agency responsible
for coordinated functioning of various government agencies/service providers.
* To overcome such bottlenecks at such border crossing points and with a view to
facilitate legitimate cross-border trade and commerce and movement of passengers, it is
proposed to develop ‘Integrated Check Posts’ (ICPs), which are envisaged to provide
required facilities for such movements in a coordinated manner to enable better
administration of sovereign and non-sovereign functions.
* The institutional arrangement to oversee the planning, construction and maintenance
of the ICPs is envisaged in a statutory body viz. Land Ports Authority of India
(LPAI).”
2.2 INTEGRATED CHECK POSTS (ICPs) AND LPAI
2.2.1 Giving the genesis of the ICPs, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that
the problem of inadequate infrastructure was discussed at length at various levels viz. Committee
of Secretaries (CoS), National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS), Inter-Ministerial Working
Group (IMWG) and finally the Cabinet Committees. The idea of ICPs was first mooted in the
meeting of CoS in October, 2003. The need for setting up an autonomous agency to oversee the
construction, management and maintenance of integrated check posts was discussed in the meeting
of Cabinet on Security in January, 2004, wherein the CoS directed the Department of Border
Management to set up an Inter-Ministerial Working Group (IMWG) to recommend inter-alia the
nature and structure of an autonomous agency to undertake the task of planning, constructing and
maintaining the ICPs. An Inter-Ministerial Working Group (IMWG) was accordingly constituted
comprising representatives from Ministry of External Affairs, Customs, Ministry of Commerce,
Intelligence Bureau, NSCS, SSB and State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The IMWG
on l0th January, 2005 considered various alternatives and submitted its report recommending for
a statutory authority as the most suitable model for an agency to oversee and regulate construction,
management and maintenance of the ICPs. The ‘approach’ of IMWG was approved by CoS on
27th April, 2005.
3

4
2.2.2 Dwelling upon the LPAI further, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that
the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), on 23rd November, 2006, accorded ‘in principle’
approval to the following proposals:—
(i) The setting up of the Land Ports Authority of India as a statutory body under the
Department of Border Management and framing of proper legislation for this purpose;
(ii) The setting up of ICPs at thirteen locations on the international borders;
(iii) The setting up of an Inter-Ministerial Empowered Steering Committee (ESC) headed
by the Secretary (Border Management) in the MHA, as an interim arrangement till the
LPAl comes into being; and
(iv) The S teering Committee would function as a precursor of the proposed Authority and
one of its principal task was the drawing up of legislation for setting up of the
authority.
2.2.3 The Ministry further stated that while approving the proposal for setting up of the Land
Ports Authority of India, the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) directed that the best element
of the Public Private Partnership (PPP) model may be suitably integrated to deliver high quality of
services and value for money. Efforts were accordingly undertaken to develop the ICPs. However,
while developing the project for ICPs, it became apparent that the PPP model would not be
practical or feasible at that stage.
2.2.4 The Committee was also informed that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA), however, in its meeting held on 6th November, 2008, observed that the procedures related
to the PPP model required substantial time for completion and there might be concerns about how
sovereign functions on strategically sensitive borders would be discharged in the PPP model. It was
further stated that the CCEA, therefore, accorded approval to the following proposals:—
(i) ICPs would be constructed with Government funding, while enabling/authorizing the
ESC/LP Al to assign non-sovereign functions for development/management in the
private sector.
(ii) There would be an outlay of Rs.635 crore in the Eleventh Five Year Plan for
developing the ICPs.
2.2.5 The following table shows the locations, State and Border of the proposed ICPs in
Phase-I and Phase-II.
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. No. ICP Location State Border Estimated Cost
12 3 4 5
Phase-1
1 Raxaul Bihar Indo-Nepal 120
2 Wagah Punjab Indo-Pakistan 150

5
12 3 4 5
3 Moreh Manipur Indo-Myanmar 136
4 Petrapole West Bengal Indo-Bangladesh 172
5 Dawki Meghalaya Indo-Bangladesh 50
6 Akhaura Tripura Indo- Bangladesh 60
7 Jogbani Bihar Indo-Nepal 34
Phase-II
8 Hili W est Bengal 1ndo-Bangladesh 78
9 Chandrabangha West Bengal Indo-Bangladesh 64
10 Sutarkhandi Assan Indo-Bangladesh 16
11 Kawarpuchiah M izoram Indo-Bangladesh 27
12 Sunauli Uttar Pradesh Indo-Nepal 34
13 Rupaidiha Uttar Pradesh Indo-Nepal 29
2.3 REFERENCE OF BILL TO EARLIER COMMITTEE
2.3.1 The draft legislation for setting up the Land Ports Authority of India was approved by the
Cabinet on 3rd July, 2008. As stated in the preface, Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2008 was
introduced in the Fourteenth Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2008 and referred by Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs on 31st December, 2008. The Committee considered the LPAI Bill, 2008 in three sittings.
During the consideration of the Bill by the previous Committee, the following issues were raised:-
(a) Priority had been given to trade and commerce over the security concerns of the
country;
(b) In the Public Private Partnership (PPP) model, non-sovereign functions were proposed
to be assigned to the private sector which was a matter of concern and thus not
acceptable;
(c) Keeping in view the lethal terrorist activities threatening the national security, the PPP
model was not acceptable;
(d) State Governments had not been consulted on the proposed formation of the Authority
and identification of the designated points along the land borders of the country;
(e) Security issues connected with movement of passengers and goods across the LoC
had not been addressed;
(f) Mechanism to check smuggling of Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICNs) from across
the borders had not been spelt out;

6
(g) As multiplicity of Ministries/Departments/Authorities were involved in the proposed
ICPs, their views needed to be heard before endorsing the Bill.
2.3.2 The then Home Secretary tried to address the security concerns expressed by Members and
made some observations with regard to the process of consultation undertaken by the Ministry
while formulating the Bill.
2.3.3 The earlier Committee decided that in order to do justice to the examination of the Bill, it
would be necessary to seek written comments of all the State Governments and to record oral
evidence of the Secretaries of the concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India
along with the officials of the agencies to be involved in the proposed Land Ports Authority. The
Committee, accordingly, sought extension of time upto 31st March, 2009 from Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha for presenting the report on the Bill and also to accord permission to seek the views
of the State Governments thereon, which were acceded to.
2.3.4 As already mentioned in the Preface, the then Committee could not complete the
examination of the Bill by the extended date as General Elections had been announced. Thus it
could not present its Report and with the dissolution of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed.
2.4 REFERENCE OF 2009 BILL TO PRESENT COMMITTEE
2.4.1 The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 was introduced on 7th  August, 2009 in
Fifteenth Lok Sabha. This Bill was referred to the present Committee by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 14th September, 2009 for examination and report within three months i.e. by 13th
December, 2009. The LPAI Bill, 2009 and its earlier version are identical. The Members of the
Committee, in the meeting held on 1st December, 2009, felt that it would need more time to
examine the critical aspects of the Bill, and the remainder of the period, available at its disposal,
would be inadequate to complete the remaining stages of its consideration. The Committee,
therefore, unanimously decided that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha may be requested to grant it
extension of time for presentation of the Report on the Bill. Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha granted
extension of time to the Committee upto the first day of the Budget Session 2010.

7
CHAPTER-III
JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES
3.1 One of the important issues repeatedly raised by the Members of the Committee was the
rationale for allocating the Bill to the Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Border
Management). The Committee was of the view that, in view of the thrust of the Bill for creation
of infrastructure, for facilitating and encouraging cross-border trade and commerce, the Bill should
have been appropriately piloted by the Ministry of Commerce or Finance rather than the Ministry
of Home Affairs. The Committee’s perception emanated in the light of the deliberations and
decisions of the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS), Committee of Secretaries (CoS),
Inter-Ministerial Working Group (IMWG), Inter-Ministerial Meetings and Cabinet Committees,
related to creation of infrastructure, facilities and amenities in the Integrated Check Posts along the
international land borders of India and promotion of trade and commerce therein.
3.2 GENESIS
3.2.1 The Committee learnt that the idea of four major ICPs on Indo-Nepal border i.e. Jogbani
and Raxaul (in Bihar) and Sunauli and Rupaidiha/Nepalganj Road (in UP) was mooted in the meeting
of CoS in October, 2003. It was stated in a NSCS Report that these four check posts accounted
for 87% of Nepal’s bilateral trade with India and 50% of its third-country trade. It was pointed
that townships, which had emerged around these check-posts lacked in basic infrastructure and
civic amenities. Infrastructure at the check-posts was also abysmal and essential equipments for
the efficient discharge of functions were lacking. The state of back-linkages (roads) to the check-
posts was appalling. It was further pointed out that the infrastructure on the Nepalese side was
better than that on the Indian side. The NSCS report inter alia recommended the establishment of
integrated check-posts for housing all essential and support services in a single complex at each
of the identified check points; upgradation of infrastructure in the associated townships and
improvement of road and rail linkages. It needs to be mentioned that the NSCS Report inter alia
recommended the establishment of integrated complexes under the overall supervision of a nodal
agency i.e. Department of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs. What is noteworthy is
the fact that this recommendation of NSCS finds mention in the minutes of CoSs meeting dated
29th October, 2003, whereas a new Department of Border Management was created in the Ministry
of Home Affairs in January, 2004.
3.2.2 Then came the Report of the Inter-Ministerial Working Group which was adopted by it on
27.12.2004 and subsequently approved by the Home Minister. Some points contained in the
conclusions and recommendations of the IMWG Report are worth mentioning and which are
summarized as under:—
• A statutory body viz., Land Ports Authority of India may be set up and all Integrated
Check Posts be brought under its purview;
7

8
• It would be essential that the LPAI act only as a facilitator and regulator and not
directly engage in construction, management or maintenance of any facility. These
needs to be specified in its mandate itself. The LPAI would be the landlord owning
the infrastructure and exercising regulatory functions, whereas services would be
provided by private operators;
• Till a statutory authority comes into being, it is proposed that a mechanism in the
shape of a Steering Committee may discharge all the functions pertaining to project,
development and implementation.
3.2.3 In the Inter-Ministerial meeting held on 5th June, 2006, at the Planning Commission, the
then MoS for Commerce stated that in view of the poor infrastructural facilities existing at the
check posts along international borders, there was an urgent need to construct Integrated Check
Posts (ICPs) at major crossing points along the borders. He observed that though the decision to
construct ICPs along the borders was taken long back, not much progress had been made. In the
said sitting, the then Additional Secretary (Commerce) suggested that the construction of seven
ICPs along Indo-Bangladesh border (Hili, Chandrabangha, Petrapole, Sutarkhandi, Dawki, Akhaura
and Kawarpuchiah), three ICPs along Indo-Myanmar border (Morch in Manipur, Pangshu Pass in
Arunachal Pradesh and Zowkhathar in Mizoram), four ICPs along Indo-Nepal border (Jogbani,
Raxaul, Sunauli and Nepalganj Road) and one ICP along Indo-Pakistan border (Wagah in Punjab)
should be prioritized.
3.2.4 The Additional Secretary (Commerce) stated that the check post at Nathula along Indo-
China border had already been developed under ASIDE Scheme of Ministry of Commerce. He
offered to provide Rs.30 crore during the year 2006-07 from the Ministry of Commerce to
kickstart the project of construction of ICPs along the international borders. He also offered that
the Ministry .of Commerce would manage the ICPs till the constitution of LPAI under Department
of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs.
3.2.5 When the Cabinet Committee on Security accorded ‘in-principle’ approval on 23rd
November, 2006, to the setting up of Land Ports Authority of India and ICPs at thirteen locations
on the international borders, the bases for identification of thirteen ICPs were volume of trade,
traffic, revenue generation and strategic importance in that order.
3.2.6 The Committee also noted that in the same genre the underlying theme of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 was on facilitation of bilateral
trade and commerce.
3.2.7 Be that as it may, the chronological developments leading to the introduction of the Bill and
preliminary examination thereof propelled the Committee to go at length to understand as to what
was the exact intention of the Government in bringing this Bill before Parliament. The Committee
thus devoted a considerable amount of time spread over several sittings to understand the issue in
a clear manner. In sittings after sittings, the Home Secretary could not convince the Committee as
to how the Bill sought to address the security imperatives at our borders and what was the raison
detre for the subject being assigned to the Ministry of Home Affairs when exfacie it appeared to
the Committee that the whole exercise which started way back in 2003 and culminated in the shape
of the Bill in 2008 and then in 2009 were intended to create class infrastructure and facilities in

9
one complex at designated entry and exit points, in our international land borders for promotion of
bilateral land trade with our neighbours.
3.2.8 During the meeting of the Committee held on 3rd November, 2009, the Addl. Secretary
(Home) explaining the rationale of the Bill stated that:
“the need for discussion on the issues related to construction of integrated check posts
(ICPs) along our borders with Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Myanmar was primarily
triggered by Ministry of Commerce based on its analysis of volume of trade and potential
of bilateral trade with these neighboring countries and evolving measure like establishing
ICPs for smooth and secured flow of trade and commerce.”
3.2.9 The Home Secretary informed the Committee at its said meeting that:
“This is purely for building up an infrastructure in that place to facilitate trade and also
to make a more secure trade because today we do not have the type of facilities which are
there... all these 13 (ICPs) which have been picked up to cover roughly 80 per cent of
today’ s official land trade between India and neighbouring countries. That is why we have
picked this.”
3.2.10 The Committee felt that the origin of the Bill was intrinsically connected with better
management of trade and commerce at the four check posts in the Indo-Nepal border as decided
in the meeting of CoS held on 29th October, 2003. Even the basis of selection of the 13 ICPs was
the volume of trade and commerce. The Committee, therefore, felt that the piloting of the Bill by
the Minister of Home Affairs appeared inappropriate as the jurisdiction of Ministry of Home Affairs
lay primilarily on internal security.
3.2.11 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written reply to the queries made by the Members over
the primary concern in bringing the Bill, gave the following justification for piloting the Bill:—
“the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) and Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in
the various meetings since 2003, had also discussed the situation and had recommended to
set up Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) at major entry points on international land borders.
It was envisaged that these ICPs would house all regulatory agencies like immigration,
customs, border security, etc. together with support facilities in a single complex equipped
with all modern amenities. In the meeting of the NSCS, under the Chairmanship of the
Cabinet Secretary held on 8.1.2004, it was decided that the Department of Border
Management (DoBM) would set up an Inter Ministerial Working Group (IMWG) comprising
representatives of the NSCS, MEA, Ministries of Finance (Department of Revenue),
Commerce and Road Transport and Highways, Intelligence Bureau, SSB and State
Governments, to recommend the nature and structure of an autonomous agency to undertake
this task.”
3.2.12 It was also stated that the IMWG considered various alternatives and recommended a
statutory authority as the most suitable model for an agency to oversee and regulate construction,
management and maintenance of ICPs.
3.2.13 The Committee was further informed that the CoS considered the report of IMWG on
27.4.2005 and approved the approach suggested. The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), in its

10
meeting held on 23.11.2006, also accorded ‘in principle’ approval to the setting up of Land Ports
Authority of India (LPAI) as an autonomous agency under the Department of Border Management,
and framing of proper legislation for this purpose.
3.2.14 On the justification of entrusting the work of the Land Ports Authority of India Bill 2009
and the setting up of the Integrated Check Posts to the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Home
Secretary added that the main reason for assigning the subject to the Home Ministry was that under
the Government of India (Allocation of Business Rules) 1961 (as amended from time to time), the
Department of Border Management had been allotted to that Ministry.
3.2.15 Clarifying the concerns raised by the Members of the Committee at its meeting held on 16th
December, 2009, the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce made the following submissions:—
* The Department of Commerce is extremely supportive of the Bill and they have been,
in the past, spending money in building some of the infrastructure at the land customs
stations.
* The Department of Commerce has been consulted all along in various stages of
drafting of the Bill and has provided inputs to Ministry of Home Affairs.
* It is high time that the Land Ports Authority (LPAI) is set up early because on the
land borders, besides border trade/commerce, a lot of other aspects need to be looked
into.
* The trade across the border is only a very small portion of the bilateral trade between
India and the neighboring countries. The main concerns on the borders are about either
smuggling or other security-related matters as the borders are very porous.
* Movement of persons and goods across the borders are not merely the concern of the
Department of Commerce; it also concerns many Departments of the Government. It
is, therefore, appropriate that the Department of Border Management have been
entrusted with the work of LPAI. It has much greater control over the security-related
maters. That is the considered view of the Department of Commerce.
Observation of the Committee
3.2.16 The material on record and the oral evidence given before the Committee, lead it to
believe that the very idea of setting up of ICPs was conceived to address the felt need for
effective and efficient regulation of trade and commerce along the international borders.
Even the criterion for selecting the ICPs is based inter alia  on the volume of trade and
commerce and its future potential. Even though the Home Secretary has repeatedly tried
to convince the Committee on the justification of the Home Ministry handling the Bill,
which was supported by the Commerce Secretary, the Committee is, however, not convinced
with their arguments mainly because the security and strategic considerations, as
highlighted by both the Secretaries, are not reflected in the text of the Bill, even though
the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill does proclaim that it is important to put
in place systems at the designated entry and exit points on the international borders, which
address security imperatives while also facilitating trade and commerce.

11
3.2.17 It needs hardly be stated that the spirit of the Bill, as articulated in the Statement
of Object and Reason, needs to be reflected in the text thereof and in the present case it
is regretfully absent. It is for anyone to conclude whether it is a genuine oversight or the
actual intention of the Ministry of Home Affairs has got reflected in the text as presently
worded and that the SOR is to lend legitimacy to the allocation of the Bill to the Ministry
of Home Affairs.
3.2.18 The Committee further deliberated on the subject. It felt that if the Bill has to be
handled by the Ministry of Home Affairs, as claimed repeatedly by them and supported by
the Ministry of Commerce, amongst other Ministries, then the security aspects have to be
properly reflected in the long title and the text of the Bill. The Committee has, therefore,
suggested amendments in the long title and the clauses of the Bill so that the spirit of the
Statement of Object and Reason is reflected in the main text. The Committee’s
recommendations in that respect are contained in Chapter V .

12
CHAPTER-IV
OTHER ISSUES
(i) Private sector participation in non sovereign functions
4.1.1 The Committee was given to understand that under the Public Private Participation (PPP)
Model in the proposed Authority, private players would be permitted to open and operate hotels,
parking lots and other areas of non-sovereign functions. The Members of the Committee expressed
concern over private sector participation even in non-sovereign functions of the proposed Land
Ports Authority and its likely adverse effect on the security of country.
Response of the Government
4.1.2 Responding to the concern of the Members of the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs
in its written reply made the following submissions:—
“The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in its meeting held on 23.11.2006
approved the proposals for setting up of Integrated Check Posts (ICP) at 13 locations on
international borders and the setting up of a Land Ports Authority of India (LP AI), as
an autonomous agency under Department of Border Management and framing up of
appropriate legislations for the purpose of bringing all ICPs within its purview. The CCS
approved the proposals with the direction that the best elements of PPP model may be
integrated suitably and efforts be undertaken to develop the ICPs accordingly. However,
while developing the project of ICPs, it became apparent that the PPP model would not
be practical or feasible at this stage. Subsequently, the issue was examined and deliberated
in the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), in its meeting held on 6.11.2008.
The CCEA noted that the procedures related to PPP model ‘required substantial time for
completion and there might be concerns about how sovereign functions on strategically
sensitive borders may be implemented in the PPP model. CCEA accorded approval to
undertake the construction of ICPs with Government funding while enabling/authorizing the
ESC/LP AI to assign non-sovereign functions for developing/management in the private
sector. The Bill seeks to empower the LPAI to this effect.
Even in case of non-sovereign functions, where private participation is considered,
security imperatives will always be prioritized and Standard Operating Procedures, as
applicable to such situations, will be strictly followed.
4.1.3 Responding to the query of members as to how participation of profit-oriented Private
Sector in the non-sovereign functions, would not affect the security of the country, the Home
Secretary, during the course of oral evidence before the Committee, in its meeting held on 3rd
November, 2009, clarified as under:—
12

13
“...We said the non-sovereign functions…It could be a restaurant; it could be a book shop;
it could be parking facilities, etc. But, even when we entrust non-sovereign functions to the
private parties, there will still be a security vetting of the people or the companies to whom
these works are given... what 1 am saying is that rather than Government running a
restaurant, if there is somebody who knows this business, we will give it on lease. So, what
the Land Ports Authority will do is to construct, say, a thousand square feet of earmarked
space for a canteen facility. Then, they will invite tenders, or whatever it is, on various
terms and conditions and then give it to somebody who will run the canteen.”
4.1.4 Responding to a query as to whether there would be any mechanism to check the
antecedents of the people to be employed, to discharge non-sovereign functions, the Home
Secretary stated as under:—
“Security vetting will definitely be done for each individual person as well as the company
or the agent who participates in the bidding. Both will be security vetted by the security
agencies before it (contract) is given. That will be done because the last thing that we want
is some undesirable or anti-national elements taking control of a canteen. We will definitely
take care of that aspect.”
Observation and recommendation of Committee
4.1.5 The proposal to set up hotels in the ICP premises under the PPP model and such
other activities may be a security threat. The Committee is of the firm view that the
Government should involve only PSUs in all such activities in the LPAI. It needs hardly be
emphasized that in the overall scheme of ICPs, overriding objective must be the security
of the country. The Committee has accordingly proposed certain amendments in the
relevant clauses of the Bill which are included in Chapter V of the Report.
(ii) Consultation with States
4.2.1 The ICPs are proposed to be located at thirteen locations in as many as nine states, namely
Assam, Bihar, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, U.P. and West Bengal. Therefore, it is
imperative that the Ministry of Home Affairs should have detailed consultation with the concerned
States not only as the concerned States would be called upon to provide the basic infrastructure
for ICPs, including land, but would also be primarily instrumental in ensuring secure and safe
ambience for efficient and effective functioning of ICPs within their respective States. This being
the case, the Members of the Committee wanted to know whether State Governments and other
agencies had been consulted by Ministry of Home Affairs before drafting the Bill.
4.2.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written reply, made the following submissions:—
“The ICPs are being developed at existing locations of Land Customs Stations (LCSs)/
Immigration Check Posts which are already functional. These are notified by appropriate
authorities under the Customs Act 1962/the Foreigners Order, 1948 read with the Foreigners
Act, 1946 and are well settled places of entry and exit on the international border. The
proposals of ICPs are basically to develop these existing entry/exit points in a more
systematic manner. Formal consultation with the State Government has not been considered

14
necessary at this stage. However, the State Governments are actively associated in the
implementation process, which commences with the site-selection and land acquisition for
the 1CPs. Representatives of State Governments have, as and when necessary, participated
in the meetings of the Empowered Steering Committee (ESC), which is an interim inter-
ministerial body under the Secretary (Border Management), overseeing work on ICPs,
pending the setting up of the LP AI State Government concerned will have a major role to
play in the development of the ICPs, once the LP AI becomes functional since they are all
represented as members of LPAI through their Chief Secretary or his nominee under Clause
3(3)(d) of the Bill.
4.2.3 During the oral evidence tendered before the Committee in its meeting held on
3rd November, 2009, the Secretary, Border Management, added:—
“As we have submitted in our written response, consultation with these State
Governments, at this stage, was not required because we were discussing the existing
facilities. But once we started taking it further, consultation with the State Governments
would take place at every stage, whether it was at the stage of acquisition of land, or
discussion of the kind of projects that we have to do, etc. We are involving them at every
stage.”
4.2.4 The Home Secretary further clarifying on the issue, submitted that the State Governments
were very much in the scene. The design of the new Petrapole Integrated Check Post had been
developed in consultation with the State Government. For Moreh also, it was done in consultation
with the State Government. The land acquisition was almost completed in that sense. In Wagah,
the land had been acquired and handed over to the Central Government by the State Government.
4.2.5 The Committee sought written views/comments of concerned State Governments on the
Bill. However, till date only five State Governments viz. Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, J&K,
Nagaland, and Sikkim have furnished their comments. The Governments of Nagaland, Uttarakhand,
J&K have no objection to the Bill. The Government of Sikkim has no comments to offer. The
Government of Himachal Pradesh suggested some amendments in Clauses 8(1), 10, 12 and 16
which are as under:-—
(i) In connection with the decision regarding time and place of meeting of the Authority
and formulation of rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings (including quorum at such meting), as may be provided by regulations, under
Clause 8(1), the participation of the nominees of State Government may be
considered.
(ii) A provision to provide employment to the local residents be made in the regulations
to be framed, under clause l0 in the appointment of officers and other employees of
the Authority.
(iii) In clause (12) (1) participation of the State Police in border guarding duties at the
integrated check post may be considered, in consultation with the State Government.
(iv) A provision may be included in clause 16 to the effect that while acquiring land for
the authority, under National Highways Act, 1956, due regard shall be paid to the local
land laws.

15
Observation and recommendation of Committee
4.2.6 In a federal country like ours, the States should be consulted and involved at every
stage of establishment of the proposed Land Ports Authority of India and Integrated Check
Posts along with the land borders of India. The Committee is constrained to note that the
Ministry of Home Affairs did not consider it necessary to hold formal consultations with the
concerned State Governments before piloting the Bill. The Ministry of Home Affairs ought
to have held detailed consultation with the concerned States not only because these States
would be tasked to provide land, basic infrastructure for ICPs, but would be primarily
instrumental in ensuring secure and safe ambiance for efficient functioning of ICPs within
their jurisdictions.
4.2.7 As already discussed earlier, the Committee had sought the views of all the
concerned States and out of those States only five had responded. The Committee notes that
out of five States, four have supported the Bill and one has not offered any comment. As
regards the States which have not responded, the Committee presumes those are supportive
of the Bill.
(iii) Identification of the ICPs
4.3.1 The Government proposes to set up thirteen Integrated Check Posts, namely, Raxaul,
Wagah, Petrapole, Moreh, Dawki, Akhaura, Jogbani in the first phase and Hili, Chandrabangha,
Sutarkhandi, Kawarpuchiah, Sunauli, Rupaidiha/Nepalganj in the second phase. Some Members of
the Committee wanted to know the mechanism adopted for identification of the thirteen ICPs at
the designated points on the borders and also whether Government was considering to set up more
ICPs in addition to the proposed ones. Members also sought to know the status of check posts
in Adusa in Baramulla, Srinagar-Salamabad-Muzafarabad Road and Poonch-Chakandabad.
Response of Government
4.3.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written reply, made the following submissions:—
• Integrated Check Posts (ICPs), having fully integrated infrastructure and facilities at
one place, was a long felt need;
• Initially 13 locations, which are already functional as entry/exit points on the
international borders have been identified;
• V olume of trade, traffic, revenue generation {Petrapole (West Bengal) and Raxaul
(Bihar)} and in some cases, strategic importance of their location for the country
{Moreh (Manipur), Kawarpuchaiah (Mizoram) and Akhaura (Tripura)} have been the
factors while identifying their initial location;
• These 13 ICPs are proposed to be constructed on borders with Nepal, Bangladesh,
Pakistan and Myanmar;
• Seven locations of the ICPs on India-Bangladesh border have been identified in a study
based on the visit of NSCS team in September, 2004.

16
• Four ICPs on India-Nepal border have been recommended by the Ministry of External
Affairs based on the study conducted by RITES.
• One ICP each at Moreh (India-Myanmar Border) and Wagah (India- Pakistan border)
have been included keeping in view the volume of trade, traffic and strategic
importance.
• More ICPs would be required in due course depending on the volume of goods/
passengers traffic.
4.3.3 The Home Secretary, further explaining the position during the oral evidence stated that the
Bill was not to regulate the entire land border which was 15000 kilometers. The Bill was designed
to set up infrastructure, Integrated Check Posts at the land customs stations in India. He further
clarified that the thirteen points did not figure in the Bill. The Home Secretary also informed the
Committee that Government was only improving facilities at the existing land customs stations.
Observation and recommendation of Committee
4.3.4 The Committee notes that the thirteen locations of ICPs along the land borders of
India have been identified and prioritized on the basis of some studies, criteria and
recommendations of other concerned Ministries. The Committee, however, recommends that
the Government should examine setting up of more ICPs at an appropriate stage, after
assessing the requirement, giving primacy to the security imperatives, besides the volume
of trade and other relevant considerations.
(iv) Multiplicity of Authorities and Synergy among various agencies
4.4.1 Since large number of authorities i.e. Home Affairs, External Affairs, Revenue, Commerce,
Road Transport and Highways, Railways, Defence, Agriculture and Cooperation, Law and Justice
are involved in the overall functioning of the proposed LPAI, the Members of the Committee sought
clarifications about the role of the Authority in the proposed set up.
4.4.2 Responding to the query of the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written
submission, made the following submissions:—
• The LPAI was envisaged as a statutory institutional mechanism which would plan,
develop, manage and co-ordinate the facilities provided at the ICPs.
• While each of the statutory agencies would be functioning in their respective spheres
under the laws governing them, the LPAI would be the overall coordinating agency.
• The LPAI would also be responsible for planning, developing, managing and
coordinating the facilities required for providing non-sovereign facilities, such as
restaurants, parking, etc.
• There is no ambiguity in the role envisaged for the LPAI and the functions to be
discharged by various agencies.
4.4.3 The Home Secretary while deposing before the Committee on 3
rd November, 2009 further
clarified as under:—

17
“The Land Ports Authority is in effect something like the GMR of Delhi Airport. It is for
running of the port, for water, electricity and all that infrastructure, you can say. The
infrastructure is provided by this agency, for construction, etc. Otherwise what happens is,
the customs people will go and set up a small office with four chairs and a table;
immigration people will set up a small office with two people. At some places like
Sutrakhandi, you will have customs office in one small building; you pass through customs,
walk another kilometer, you will find another small building and there immigration people
would be sitting. Now, we would like everything, under one roof, so that the flow of people,
traffic and goods is coordinated so that it becomes modern and also which facilitates
movement of goods and people in a smoother way.”
4.4.4 The representative of the Ministry of External Affairs, also clarifying the position to the
Committee, in its meeting held on 3
rd November, 2009, stated that as under:—
“The main problem that had been faced at the existing land customs stations, was lack of
coordination between different agencies. In the case of Attari and also in the case of
Bangladesh border, one common complaint was that the electricity bills were not paid and,
therefore, x-ray machines were not working. There was a question as to who was supposed
to pay the bill. The Budget should be from the Customs or the Immigration or the BSF or
anyone else. Because of some problem, the. whole operation would get affected.”
4.4.5 Further explaining the gravity of the problem, he stated:
“this sort of problems lead to frequent complaints from the neighbouring countries. Like in
the case of Bangladesh, they would  say, ‘You are not improving the infrastructure. It is
purposefully being done to affect our exports to India. This kind of negative impression
gets created and the present proposal tries to smoothen the overall coordination. Essentially
somebody is willing to foot the bill for all the agencies and ensure that there is a smoother
flow of people and traffic.”
Observation and recommendation of Committee
4.4.6 The Committee hopes that when the proposed LPAI becomes operational and the
various agencies involved in the system start discharging the functions, there would be
adequate coordination and harmony amongst them. Synergy amongst various agencies would
enhance the accomplishment of the objectives. Therefore, the Committee urges upon the
Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure that each of these participating agencies does function
in smooth manner and there is clearly demarcated jurisdiction, power and responsibility
amongst them.
(v) Security along the LoC
4.5.1 In regard to the Trade facilitation Centres at the LoC in J&K, the Home Secretary informed
the Committee that it had not been notified because the Government of India’s position is PoK is
part of Indian territory. The Members of the Committee raised security related issues at these
centres at the LoC. The Committee, accordingly, sought to know from the Ministry the steps being
taken for checking illegal trade of narcotics and sophisticated arms and ammunition across LoC.

18
4.5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written reply stated that the overall security at the LoC
was handled by the Indian Army in a multi-tier arrangement which included a forward tier of troop
deployment, deployment of surveillance devices, construction of fencing along the LoC and a
second tier deployment in conjunction with the fence. The entire length of 734 kms of fencing
along the LoC had been completed by the Ministry of Defence. In addition, 14 battalions of the
Border Security Force (BSF) were deployed along the LoC. The Ministry further stated that the
collective measures taken by the Indian Army and the Border Guarding Force were aimed at dealing
effectively with the security aspect of the movement along the LoC.
4.5.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs also made the following submissions:—
• During the meeting of the Prime Minister of India with the President of Pakistan on
the sidelines of 63
rd UN General Assembly Session on 23 rd September, 2008, it was
agreed by both the leaders to commence cross LoC trade from 21 st October, 2008.
Consequently, cross LoC trade on Srinagar-Muzaffarabad and Poonch-Rawalakote axis
commenced on 21 st October, 2008. Till 29 th October, 2009, 959 trucks have crossed
over to PoK and 1513 trucks have crossed over to our side. On Poonch-Rawalakote
axis, till 29
th October, 2009, 864 trucks have crossed over to PoK and 1053 trucks
have crossed over to our side.
• The cross LoC trade is mainly based on barter system and is being done on zero duty
basis as the trading is from Indian Territory (POK) under Pakistan’s control.
• While firming up the modalities of cross LoC trade, it was felt that trade between J&K
and PoK would be symbolic and of small volume.
• With the increase in trade, particularly from March, 2009, a need has been felt for
providing better infrastructure at the Trade Facilitation Centres; upgradation of roads
and bridges; allowing telecommunication facilities across the LoC for traders; legalized
mode of financial transactions to replace the barter system; whole body Truck Scanner
from security angle; making the list of items to be traded more specific.
• Representations have been received to increase the number of trading days per week
in view of increase in volume of trade. The issues are being considered in consultation
with other Ministries and Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
4.5.4 Elaborating on the security imperatives at the LoC, the Director, IB stated as under:—
“We are very acutely aware of the need for adequate security measures at each and every
land check-post. I may refer to the two trading posts in Jammu and Kashmir, i.e., Kaman
and Chakandabad. You are very right, Sir, we are always on the watch that in the garb of
trade whether the militants from across would try to infiltrate weapons, ammunition and
other items to aid the terrorists who are already in our country... So, this is something on
which we will have to maintain a vigil all the time because whether it is in Jammu and
Kashmir or it is in Attari, I am afraid, 1 know for a fact that the 1S1 and the militants
still try to infiltrate. So, we assume that the infiltration of material will take place and,
therefore, there is need for adequate precautionary measures.”

19
4.5.5 Deliberating on the issue, the Home Secretary informed the Committee on 3 rd November, 2009,
that about the LoC trade on Indo-Pak border, there was a problem because, even though the
Customs people were there, it was an informal arrangement. Government did not want to issue a
formal notification because PoK was considered as part of India. Almost day-to-day, some sort of
barter trade was taking place. He further stated that there was a lot of confusion in that. A little
bit of hawala was taking place. The Home Secretary further added that the Government was trying
to see how best it can sort this out by opening banks on either side so that a formal letter of credit
was there.
4.5.6 Dwelling upon the issue, the Foreign Secretary apprised the Committee about the decision
of the Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan for expansion of people-to-people
contact, commerce and economic co-operation as an effective platform to develop and strengthen
bilateral relations and to commence the trade along the LoC on the Srinagar-Muzaffarabad and
Poonch-Rawalkot routes in October, 2008. Twenty-one items of trade were identified both ways
for duty-free passage.
4.5.7 Speaking on the security implication of trade and travel across the Line of Control, the
Foreign Secretary stated as under:—
• The cross LoC measure, as we have devised, are primarily confidence building
measures between the two sides.
• In the current security climate, the concerned Ministries of the Central and State
Governments have to be very vigilant.
• The MEA is in touch with the organizations concerned and would work together with
them.
• There is no denying that there has been some positive impact of these measures on the
local people because they have been in touch after many, many years.
• On the political front also, this would have had a salutary impact had it not been for
the Mumbai terror attacks.
• The positive impact is also evident from the demand to include more items from both
sides in the trade across the LoC. But we have to be constantly vigilant from the
security point of view because, from time to time, our suspicions are raised because
of certain events or certain activities of unlawful elements.
• Across the Line of Control, endemically, and, in fact, almost constantly, we have had
to be vigilant about the infiltration and about the activities of elements which are sent
across the Line of Control from the Pakistan--occupied Kashmir and by the Pakistani
agencies concerned in order to  foment trouble and violence on our side.
• Travel is now permitted under an Entry Permit that is provided to the  applicant after
due verification by the designated authority on each side. This includes verification of
the address of the applicant as well as the person whom he or she intends to visit.
4.5.8 The Secretary, Department of Revenue (Ministry of Finance) explaining about the problems
being tackled on the customs front submitted as under:—

20
“This is a joint situation where we have trade facilitation centers. They are not called
customs outpost. Staff mans those centers and they do have an x-ray scanner. In the
arrangements at the inter-Ministerial level that have been worked out, eventually Ministry
of Defence is supposed to put up a big scanner. In the meantime, scanning does takes place.
We have noticed that the fruits and vegetables are not necessarily only of PoK origin and
this issue has been taken up at inter-Ministerial level and that is why the Ministry of
Commerce is tackling it because you cannot apply the rules of origin in this situation. This
is not international bilateral trade. So, we are taking these steps and we do control to the
extent possible in each truck load. This is on the customs side. The loads increase at times
and go down. So, we have our own problems managing it but, given that they are CBMs
we do  on our side, through inter-Ministerial consultations, tackle the problem as they arise
and the goods of Chinese origin, the fruits and vegetables as discovered have importance.
It is not only that. It could be goods which are in other parts of India but not ethnic to
PoK, which were coming. All this measures have been taken and we are tackling the issue.
That is all I wanted to say at this juncture on cross LoC trade issue.
Observation and Recommendation of Committee
4.5.9 It is incumbent upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure foolproof surveillance
and security at LoC even while Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) are underway. The
Committee advises the Government that modern equipments, including scanners must be
put in place to keep vigilance over the movement of persons and goods along the LoC. The
Committee is of the view that broad intelligence sharing is required for information
gathering, analysis, decision/policy formulation for ensuring the security and sovereignty of
the country.
(vi) Cross-border crimes
4.6.1 India has a large track of porous border with Nepal, Bangladesh and Myanmar. The
Members of the Committee expressed their concern over transhipment of arms from countries like
Pakistan and China into Bangladesh and then taking the riverine route to India. The Members felt
that the influx of arms and ammunition was turning the country into huge catchment of illegal
weapons. They also expressed concern over the operation of fundamentalist and insurgent groups,
jeopardizing the internal security.
4.6.2 Responding to the concern of the Members, the Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written
reply, made the following submissions:
• As a general policy of the Government, one border-one Border Guarding Force has
been adopted.
• The Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) are responsible for the security of their respective
borders. BGFs are keeping strict vigil on their respective borders.
• Effective domination of the border by carrying out round the clock surveillance like
patrolling, laying naka, establishment of observation posts.
• On the India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan sectors, measures like erection of
fencing and floodlighting, construction of border roads to facilitate border patrolling,

21
and regulation/monitoring the movement of people and curtailment of cross-border
crime.
• Constant liaison with the civil administration, customs, intelligence agencies and police
and joint operations are carried out regularly based on intelligence inputs.
• On the Indo-Nepal border, constant vigil is maintained and cross-border crimes are
checked by effective intelligence inputs from both the civil administration and
intelligence agencies along with their counterparts in Nepal.
• There are institutional mechanisms to address the security and crime related problems
through Home Secretary-level talks, Joint Working Groups and Border District
Coordination Committees and intelligence sharing.
4.6.3 Further explaining the steps taken on the Indo-Bangladesh Border, the Home Secretary
stated that as regards the smuggling of arms and ammunition from across Bangladesh border,
Government had taken up fencing and floodlighting of the Indo-Bangladesh border, which had been
done partially. In one of the borders, almost complete fencing had been done and to that extent,
there was a considerable reduction in infiltration as well as smuggling. He, however, agreed that
movement/infiltration of the people was still reported and on Bangladesh border, there were still a
large number of areas which were unfenced.
4.6.4 On the porosity of the Indo-Nepal Border, the Foreign Secretary explained the steps taken
in the matter as under:-
“The Nepal border is an extremely porous border. It has an open border, and the common
people and residents on both the sides, have traditionally moved freely across this open
border. What has happened is that we have had concerns which have been particularly
evident and have become more serious in recent years through the appearance and increased
level of activities, in these particularly open border areas, by all elements engaged in anti-
national activities against India, and by people who have indulged in smuggling of arms
and ammunitions, and bringing in fake currencies. So, we have a Border Management
Regime with Nepal, not only at the ground level, but also with the Government in
Kathmandu. ... regarding porousness of the border, the need to improve security, and
conveying our security concerns to the Nepalese Government in suitably serious and
effective way, these are being done constantly.”
Observation and recommendation of Committee
4.6.5 The Committee, taking note of anti-national activities being carried out across the
border, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should come forward with a
sustainable mechanism in the LPAI Bill, 2009 to address the security imperatives and for
prevention of cross-border crimes. Unless that was done, LPAI would not serve the purpose
for which it was proposed to set up.
(vii) Mechanism to check movement of Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN)
4.7.1 During the consideration of the Bill, the Members sought to know whether there was any

22
mechanism in the proposed LPAI system to check the movement of Fake Indian Currency Notes
(FICN).
4.7.2 Replying to the Committee’s query, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed as under:—
“In so far as the proposed ICPs were concerned, they would be suitably technology-enabled
(X-ray machine, scanner etc.) to detect FICN being carried either by persons or in goods
crossing the borders. Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) are keeping strict vigil on their
respective borders. Effective domination of the border by carrying out round the clock
surveillance like patrolling, laying naka, establishment of observation post is  done. Further
on the India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan sectors, erection of fencing and flood
lighting, construction of border roads to facilitate border patrolling also seek to regulate/
monitor the movement of people and prevent illegal cross-border activities including
transportation of FICN. Constant liaison is maintained with the civil administration,
customs, intelligence agencies and police and joint operations are carried out regularly
based on intelligence inputs.”
Observation and recommendation of Committee
4.7.3 The Committee is not convinced by the response of the Ministry. Inspite of all these
steps having being taken, smuggling of FICN continues unabated and on a large scale. The
Government has not come forward with a roadmap to effectively deal with this menace. The
Committee is of the view that adequate mechanism must be put in place to check the inflow
of FICN in the country because such activities not only pose a serious threat to national
security but also possess tremendous potential to wreck the national economy from inside.

23
CHAPTER-V
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
5.1.1 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Land Ports Authority of India
Bill, 2009 in its sitting held on 30th December, 2009, wherein the Home Secretary, the
representatives of the Home Ministry and other concerned Ministries, the Secretary, Legislative
Department and the Law Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs were present. The observations/
recommendations of the Committee on the various clauses are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
Statement of Objects and Reasons
5.1.2 The Committee, in the first instance, mulled over a proposal to substitute the word
“regulate” by the word “coordinate” in para 3, line 4 of the Statement of Objects and Reason of
the Bill. Some Members were of the view that since the Land Ports Authority of India had to
regulate activities of various agencies, from time to time, the word “regulate” was the appropriate
word and it should remain in the SOR. It was argued in favour of the former proposal that in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 11 (2) (k) of the Bill, the Authority will co-ordinate and
facilitate the working of agencies who have been engaged to undertake various activities at the
integrated Check Posts, in accordance with the respective laws, for the time being in force. As
per Clause 12 (3), the customs, immigration, quarantine and other officials shall coordinate with
the Authority for the effective discharge of its functions. It was thus argued that the role envisaged
for the Authority was not that of a ‘regulator’ but of a ‘facilitator’ and ‘co-ordinator’.
5.1.3 The word ‘regulate’ used in the ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’ sought to create an
erroneous impression as though the Authority would act as a super regulator of authorities who
perform their functions in accordance with the respective laws.
5.1.4 On reconsideration, the Committee agreed that the word ‘regulate’ used in- para 3,
line 4 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons should be substituted by the word
‘coordinate’. Consequentially, in line 5 of the said para, the word ‘also’ may be inserted
before the word ‘coordinate’.
5.1.5 The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may
circulate a revised Statement of Objects and Reasons before the Bill is taken up for
consideration in the Lok Sabha.
Long title
5.1.6 The Committee is of the view that the spirit of the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Bill should be reflected in its Long Title. The Committee, therefore, suggests that in
the first line of the Long Title, before the words ‘for the development’, the words “to put in
place systems, which address security imperatives and” may be inserted.
23

24
5.1.7 The Long Title is adopted, as amended.
Clause 2
5.2.1 The clause provides for definitions of certain terms used in the Bill.
5.2.2 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3
5.3.1 The clause deals with the constitution of the Land Ports Authority of India and provided
for its composition.
Sub-clause 3(b)
5.3.2 The Committee feels that sub-clause 3(b) needed some drafting change. The
Committee recommends that the existing sub-clause 3(b) may be substituted by the
following:—
“Two Members, one Member (Planning and Development) and one Member (Finance)”
Sub-clause 3(d)
5.3.3 The Committee feels that the nominee of the Chief Secretary of the concerned State
Government should not be below the rank of Secretary to the Government of the State. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that in sub-clause (3)(d), after the word ‘nominee’ the
following words may be inserted:
“not below the rank of Secretary to the Government”
Sub-clause 3(e)
5.3.4 The Committee recommends that the existing sub-clause 3(e) may be substituted by
the following:
“the representatives, one each of traders and workers to be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst the representative bodies of trade and workers;”
Sub-clause 3(5)
5.3.5 The Committee feels that knowledge and experience in security-related matters
should also be prescribed for a person to be eligible for being considered for appointment
as Chairperson of the Authority. The Committee accordingly recommends that the word
“security” may be inserted before the word “transport”.
Clause 4
5.4.1 This clause lays down the grounds of disqualification for being appointed as a Member of
the Authority. If the Central Government is of the opinion that a conviction and sentencing to
imprisonment for an offence of a person involved moral turpitude, or he has such financial or other

25
interest in the Authority as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions
as a member, such a person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member as such.
5.4.2 Some M embers of the Committee were of the view that the determination of the said
grounds of disqualification was dependent upon the opinion of the Central Government which at
times could be subjective and defeat the purpose of the clause. Those Members felt that adequate
safeguards should be provided in this clause to rule out the element of subjectivity in forming an
opinion by the Central Government. One of the suggestions which came up during discussion was
that the words “in the opinion of the Central Government” could be tempered by adding the words
“to be recorded in writing”.
5.4.3 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should address the concern of the
Committee in the matter and come out with suitable formulation at the time of piloting the
Bill in Parliament.
5.4.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clauses 5 to 7
5.5.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clause 8
Sub-clause (1)
5.6.1 Some Members were of the view that sub-clause (1) was vaguely worded as it was not
clear as to where (places) the Authority could meet. The Committee feels that the word
‘places’ should be clarified to mean that the Authority can meet at such places where ICPs
are located or where the registered office of the Authority is located. The Committee
recommends that this aspect may be taken care of while framing regulations.
5.6.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 9
5.7.1 The clause lays down the circumstances, which shall not invalidate the proceedings of the
Authority. The Committee observes that there should be a time limit within which the
vacancies in the Authority should be filled up. The Committee, accordingly , recommends
that a provision may be inserted in the clause to provide that no vacancy in the Authority
shall remain unfilled for more than six months.
5.7.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 10
5.8.1 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 11
5.9.1 As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the proposed Authority has to put

26
in place systems at the Integrated Check Posts which address security imperatives while also
facilitating trade and commerce. The Committee notes that this aspect is missing in the clause
which delineated the functions of the Authority. The Committee accordingly recommends
the following amendments in sub-clauses (1) and (2).
Sub-clause (1)
5.9.2 The Committee recommends that the word “sanitise” may be inserted before the
word “develop”.
sub-clause (2)
5.9.3 The Committee recommends that the following may be added as the first item:—
“(a) put in place systems which address security imperatives at Integrated Check Posts”.
Items (h) and (i)
5.9.4 With a view to making security arrangements better and comprehensive at
Integrated. Check Posts, the Committee recommends that the words “watch and ward at
various sensitive installations” appearing in item (h) may be substituted by the words “the
security of Integrated Check Posts”.
5.9.5 The Committee also recommends that the word “plying” occurring in item (h) may
be substituted by the word “movement”.
5.9.6 Likewise, the Committee recommended that the word “plying” also appearing in item
(j) be substituted by the word “movement”.
Items (m), (n) and (o)
5.9.7 The Committee discussed item (m) which enabled the Authority to form one or more
companies under the Companies Act, 1956 or under any other law relating to companies for
efficient discharge of functions assigned to it. In this context the Committee noted that item (o)
also empowered the Authority to set up ‘joint ventures’ for the discharge of any of the functions
entrusted to it.
5.9.8 The Committee is of the view that as the Authority could set-up joint ventures, there
was no necessity for empowering it to form companies also, for the efficient discharge of
any of its functions. The Committee accordingly recommends omission of item (m).
5.9.9 As already stated earlier, security is the prime concern at the designated points along
International Borders of India where Integrated Check Posts are proposed to be set up.
Keeping that in view, the Committee recommends that a suitable proviso be inserted in
item (n) to ensure that sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any
private entity. Accordingly the Committee recommends that the following proviso be
inserted in item (n):—
“Provided that the sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any
private entity”.

27
5.9.10 Likewise, the Committee is of the view that the Authority should set up ‘joint
ventures’ only in public sector as involvement of private sector enterprises in the border
areas for discharge of functions of the Authority, will not be desirable. The Committee
therefore, recommends that in item (o), the words “in the public sector” be inserted after
the words “joint ventures”.
5.9.11 The Committee also recommends that consequent upon its recommendations for
addition and omission of certain items in sub-clause (2), the existing items (a) to (p) be
renumbered accordingly.
5.9.12 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 12
5.10.1 Sub-clause (2) of the clause empowers the Authority to seek the assistance of Armed
Forces, Central Para-Military Forces or State Police, whenever considered necessary to do so for
ensuring peace and security at an Integrated Check Post. The Committee is of the view that the
said sub-clause is deficient inasmuch as the Authority by itself cannot seek such assistance
and has to follow the procedure established by law.
5.10.2 The Committee, therefore, with a view to making the sub-clause self-contained,
recommends that the words “as per the provisions of the law”, be added at the end.
5.10.3 The clause is adopted as amended.
Clauses 13 to 15
5.11.1 These clauses, dealing with property and contract, are adopted without any change.
Clause 16
5.12.1 This clause provides that any land acquired by the authority for discharge of its functions
shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and the same may be acquired for the Authority
under the provisions of the National Highways Act 1956 or any other law for the time being in
force.
5.12.2 A point was raised that the process of acquisition of land for the Authority should involve
the concerned State Government and the notification for acquiring of land may be issued after
obtaining the consent of the concerned district authorities of the State.
5.12.3 The Committee accordingly recommends that the issue raised by it should be
considered by the Government and if necessary, suitable provision may be inserted in the
clause.
5.12.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted
Clauses 17 to 18
5.13.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.

28
Clause 19
5.14.1 This clause empowers the Authority to determine and charge fees or rent, not being a
statutory levy under any other Act, as may be provided by regulations, separately for each
Integrated Check Post with the previous approval of the Central Government.
5.14.2 The Committee is of the view that since the Authority is a statutory body consisting
of, amongst others, nine members, ex-officio, to be  appointed by the Central Government
from amongst the officers, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of
India, representing concerned Ministries, the requirement of obtaining previous approval of
the Central Government, for determining and charging fees or rent etc., may be done away
with. The Committee is of the view that the Authority should be fully empowered in that
regard.
5.14.3 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the word “with the previous approval
of the Central Government” be omitted.
5.14.4 The clause is adopted as amended.
Clauses 20 to 31
5.15.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clause 32
5.16.1 This clause empowers the Central Government to supersede the Authority.
5.16.2 The Committee feels that the word “defaulted” appearing in sub-clause (1)(b) need
not be qualified by the word “persistently”. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
word “persistently” appearing in sub-clause (1)(b) may be omitted as being unnecessary.
5.16.3 Sub-clause (4) provides for laying of a full report of any action taken under this clause and
the circumstances leading to such action, to be laid before both Houses of Parliament ‘at the
earliest opportunity’. The Committee is of the view that the said expression is open-ended,
vague and needed to be made specific.
5.16.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause (4) may be amended so that it
is in tune with clause 36 which is based on the standard formulation for laying of papers on
the Table of the Houses and specified the period within which rules, regulations and notifications
to be issued under the proposed Act are to be laid before each House of Parliament.
5.16.5 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clauses 33 to 37
5.17.1 These clauses are adopted without any change.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
5.18.1 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which

29
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely the figures and the word, ‘2009’ and
“sixtieth” to be substituted by “2010” and “Sixty first”, wherever these occurred.
5.18.2 The Committee adopts the Bill subject to the changes proposed and suggestions made
in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee recommends that the Government may bring
forward the amendments suggested while piloting the Bill for consideration in Parliament.
Other suggestions relating to rules/regulations may be kept in view while framing those.
5.18.3 The Committee recommends that the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 be
passed as amended.

30
CHAPTER-VI
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES
The material on record and the oral evidence given before the Committee, lead it to
believe that the very idea of setting up of ICPs was conceived to address the felt need for
effective and efficient regulation of trade and commerce along the international borders.
Even the criterion for selecting the ICPs is based inter-alia  on the volume of trade and
commerce and its future potential. Even though the Home Secretary has repeatedly tried
to convince the Committee on the justification of the Home Ministry handling the Bill,
which was supported by the Commerce Secretary, the Committee is, however, not convinced
with their arguments mainly because the security and strategic considerations, as
highlighted by both the Secretaries, are not reflected in the text of the Bill, even though
the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill does proclaim that it is important to put
in place systems at the designated entry and exit points on the international borders, which
address security imperatives while also facilitating trade and commerce.
It needs hardly be stated that the spirit of the Bill, as articulated in the Statement
of Object and Reason, needs to be reflected in the text thereof and in the present case it
is regretfully absent. It is for anyone to conclude whether it is a genuine oversight or the
actual intention of the Ministry of Home Affairs has got reflected in the text as presently
worded and that the SOR is to lend legitimacy to the allocation of the Bill to the Ministry
of Home Affairs.
The Committee further deliberated on the subject. It felt that if the Bill has to be
handled by the Ministry of Home Affairs, as claimed repeatedly by them and supported by
the Ministry of Commerce, amongst other Ministries, then the security aspects have to be
properly reflected in the long title and the text of the Bill. The Committee has, therefore,
suggested amendments in the Long Title and the clauses of the Bill so that the spirit of
the Statement of Object and Reason is reflected in the main text. The Committee’s
recommendations in that respect are contained in Chapter V .
(Para 3.2.16, 3.2.17 and 3.2.18)
PRIV ATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN NON-SOVEREIGN FUNCTIONS
The proposal to set up hotels in the ICP premises under the PPP model and such
other activities may be a security threat. The Committee is of the firm view that the
Government should involve only PSUs in all such activities in the LPAI. It needs hardly be
emphasized that in the overall scheme of ICPs, overriding objective must be the security
30

31
of the country. The Committee has accordingly proposed certain amendments in the
relevant-clauses of the Bill which are included in Chapter V of the Report. (Para 4.1.5)
CONSULTATION WITH STATES
In a federal country like ours, the States should be consulted and involved at every
stage of establishment of the proposed Land Ports Authority of India and Integrated Check
Posts along with the land borders of India. The Committee is constrained to note that the
Ministry of Home Affairs did not consider it necessary to hold formal consultations with the
concerned State Governments before piloting the Bill. The Ministry of Home Affairs ought
to have held detailed consultation with the concerned States not only because these States
would be tasked to provide land, basic infrastructure for ICPs, but would be primarily
instrumental in ensuring secure and safe ambiance for efficient functioning of ICPs within
their jurisdictions.
As already discussed earlier, the Committee had sought the views of all the concerned
States and out of those States only five had responded. The Committee notes that out of
five States, four have supported the Bill and one has not offered any comment. As regards
the States which have not responded, the Committee presumes those are supportive of the
Bill. (Para 4.2.6 and 4.2.7)
IDENTIFICATION OF THE ICPS
The Committee notes that the thirteen locations of ICPs along the land borders of
India have been identified and prioritized on the basis of some studies, criteria and
recommendations of other concerned Ministries. The Committee, however, recommends that
the Government should examine setting up of more ICPs at an appropriate stage, after
assessing the requirement, giving primacy to the security imperatives, besides the volume
of trade and other relevant considerations. (Para 4.3.4)
MULTIPLICITY OF AUTHORITIES AND SYNERGY  AMONG VARIOUS AGENCIES
The Committee hopes that when the proposed LPAI becomes operational and the
various agencies involved in the system start discharging the functions, there would be
adequate coordination and harmony amongst them. Synergy amongst various agencies would
enhance the accomplishment of the objectives. Therefore, the Committee urges upon the
Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure that each of these participating agencies does function
in smooth manner and there is clearly demarcated jurisdiction, power and responsibility
amongst them. (Para 4.4.6)
SECURITY ALONG THE LOC
It is incumbent upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure foolproof surveillance
and security at LoC even while Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) are underway. The
Committee advises the Government that modern equipments, including scanners must be
put in place to keep vigilance over the movement of persons and goods along the LoC. The
Committee is of the view that broad intelligence sharing is required for information

32
gathering, analysis, decision/policy formulation for ensuring the security and sovereignty of
the country. (Para 4.5.9)
CROSS-BORDER CRIMES
The Committee, taking note of anti-national activities being carried out across the
border, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should come forward with a
sustainable mechanism in the LPAI Bill, 2009 to address the security imperatives and for
prevention of cross-border crimes. Unless that was done, LPAI would not serve the purpose
for which it was proposed to set up. (Para 4.6.5)
MECHANISM TO CHECK MOVEMENT OF FAKE INDIAN CURRENCY NOTES
The Committee is not convinced by the response of the Ministry. In spite of all these
steps having being taken, smuggling of FICN continues unabated and on a large scale. The
Government has not come forward with a roadmap to effectively deal with this menace. The
Committee is of the view that adequate mechanism must be put in place to check the inflow
of FICN in the country because such activities not only pose a serious threat to national
security but also possess tremendous potential to wreck the national economy from inside.
(Para 4.7.3)
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
On reconsideration, the Committee agreed that the word ‘regulate’ used in para 3,
line 4 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons should be substituted by the word
‘coordinate’. Consequentially, in line 5 of the said para, the word ‘also’ may be inserted
before the word ‘coordinate’. (Para 5.1.4)
The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may
circulate a revised Statement of Objects and Reasons before the Bill is taken up for
consideration in the Lok Sabha. (Para 5.1.5)
Long Title
The Committee is of the view that the spirit of the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Bill should be reflected in its Long Title. The Committee, therefore, suggests that in
the first line of the Long Title, before the words ‘for the development’, the words “to put in
place systems, which address security imperatives and” may be inserted. (Para 5.1.6)
The Committee feels that sub-clause 3(b) needed some drafting change. The
Committee recommends that the existing sub-clause 3{b) may be substituted by the
following:—
“Two Members, one Member (Planning and Development) and one Member (Finance)”
(Para 5.3.2)
Sub-clause 3(d)
The Committee feels that the nominee of the Chief Secretary of the concerned State

33
Government should not be below the rank of Secretary to the Government of the State. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that in sub--clause (3)(d), after the word ‘nominee’
the following words may be inserted:
“not below the rank of Secretary to the Government”
(Para 5.3.3)
Sub-clause 3(e)
The Committee recommends that the existing sub-clause 3(e) may be substituted by
the following:
“the representatives, one each of traders and workers, to be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst the representative bodies of trade and workers;”
(Para 5.3.4)
Sub-clause 3(5)
The Committee feels that knowledge and experience in security--related matters
should also be prescribed for a person to be eligible for being considered for appointment
as Chairperson of the Authority. The Committee accordingly recommends that the word
“security” may be inserted before the word “transport”. (Para 5.3.5)
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should address the concern of the
Committee in the matter and come out with suitable formulation at the time of piloting the
Bill in Parliament. (Para 5.4.3)
Clause 8 Sub-clause (1)
Some Members were of the view that sub-clause (1) was vaguely worded as it was not
clear as to where (places) the Authority could meet. The Committee feels that the word
‘places’ should be clarified to mean that the Authority can meet at such places where ICPs
are located or where the registered office of the Authority is located. The Committee
recommends that this aspect may be taken care of while framing regulations.
(Para 5.6.1)
Clause 9
The clause lays down the circumstances, which shall not invalidate the proceedings
of the Authority. The Committee observes that there should be a time limit within which
the vacancies in the Authority should be filled up. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that a provision may be inserted in the clause to provide that no vacancy in the Authority
shall remain unfilled for more than six months. (Para 5.7.1)
Clause 11
As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the proposed Authority has
to put in place systems at the Integrated Check Posts which address security imperatives

34
while also facilitating trade and commerce. The Committee notes that this aspect is missing
in the clause which delineated the functions of the Authority. The Committee accordingly
recommends the following amendments in sub-clauses (1) and (2). (Para 5.9.1)
Sub-clause (1)
The Committee recommends that the word “sanitise” may be inserted before the
word “develop”. (Para 5.9.2)
Sub-clause (2 )
The Committee recommends that the following may be added as the first item:—
“(a) put in place systems which address security imperatives at Integrated Check Posts”
(Para 5.9.3)
Items (h) and (j)
With a view to making security arrangements better and comprehensive at
Integrated Check Posts, the Committee recommends that the words “watch and ward at
various sensitive installations” appearing in item (h) may be substituted by the words “the
security of Integrated Check Posts”. (Para 5.9.4)
The Committee also recommends that the word “plying” occurring in item (h) may
be substituted by the word “movement”. (Para 5.9.5)
Likewise, the Committee recommended that the word “plying” also appearing in item
(j) be substituted by the word “movement”. (Para 5.9.6)
The Committee is of the view that as the Authority could set-up joint ventures, there
was no necessity for empowering it to form companies also, for the efficient discharge of
any of its functions. The Committee, accordingly, recommends omission of item (m).
(Para 5.9.8)
As already stated earlier, security is the prime concern at the designated points along
International Borders of India where Integrated Check Posts are proposed to be set up.
Keeping that in view, the Committee recommends that a suitable proviso be inserted in
item (n) to ensure that sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any
private entity. Accordingly the Committee recommends that the following proviso be
inserted in item (n):—
“Provided that the sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any
private entity”. (Para 5.9.9)
Likewise, the Committee is of the view that the Authority should set up ‘joint
ventures’ only in public sector as involvement of private sector enterprises in the border
areas for discharge of functions of the Authority, will not be desirable. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in item (0), the words “in the public sector” be inserted after
the words” joint ventures”. (Para 5.9.10)

35
The Committee also recommends that consequent upon its recommendations for
addition and omission of certain items in sub-clause (2), the existing items (a) to (p) be
renumbered accordingly. (Para 5.9.11)
Clause 12
Sub-clause (2) of the clause empowers the Authority to seek the assistance of Armed
Forces, Central Para-Military Forces or State Police, whenever considered necessary to do so for
ensuring peace and security at an Integrated Check Post. The Committee is of the view that the
said sub-clause is deficient inasmuch as the Authority by itself cannot seek such assistance
and has to follow the procedure established by law. (Para 5.10.1)
The Committee, therefore, with a view to making the sub-clause self-contained,
recommends that the words “as per the provisions of the law”, be added at the end.
(Para 5.10.2)
Clause 16
The Committee accordingly recommends that the issue raised by it should be
considered by the Government and if necessary, suitable provision may be inserted in the
clause. (Para 5.12.3)
Clause 19
The Committee is of the view that since the Authority is a statutory body consisting
of, amongst others, nine members, ex-officio, to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst the officers, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of
India, representing concerned Ministries, the requirement of obtaining previous approval of
the Central Government, for determining and charging fees or rent etc., may be done away
with. The Committee is of the view that the Authority should be fully empowered in that
regard. (Para 5.14.2)
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the word “with the previous approval
of the Central Government” be omitted. (Para 5.14.3)
Clause 32
The Committee feels that the word “defaulted” appearing in sub-clause (l)(b) need
not be qualified by the word “persistently”. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
word “persistently” appearing in sub-clause (l)(b) may be omitted as being unnecessary.
(Para 5.16.2)
Sub-clause (4) provides for laying of a full report of any action taken under this
clause and the circumstances leading to such action, to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament ‘at the earliest opportunity’. The Committee is of the view that the said
expression is open-ended, vague and needed to be made specific. (Para 5.16.3)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause (4) may be amended so that
it is in tune with clause 36 which is based on the standard formulation for laying of papers

36
on the Table of the Houses and specified the period within which rules, regulations and
notifications to be issued under the proposed Act are to be laid before each House of
Parliament. (Para 5.16.4)
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely the figures and the word, ‘2009’ and
“sixtieth” to be substituted by “2010” and “Sixty first”, wherever these occurred.
(Para 5.18.1)
The Committee adopts the Bill subject to the changes proposed and suggestions made
in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee recommends that the Government may bring
forward the amendments suggested while piloting the Bill for consideration in Parliament.
Other suggestions relating to rules/regulations may be kept in view while framing those.
(Para 5.18.2)
The Committee recommends that the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 be
passed as amended. (Para 5.18.3)

37
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, 3 November, 2009 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
9. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
14. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
15. Shri A. Sampath
16. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
17. Shri Harsh Vardhan
18. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
19. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
39

40
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shri Vinay Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri A.E. Ahmed, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director
6. Shri L. Vishwanathan, Director
7. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director
8. Shri Anuj Sharma, Director
Representative of Bureau of Immigration
Shri Arun Choudhary, Joint Director
Representative of Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications)
Shri Subodh Kumar, Additional Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
1. Shri Suresh Kumar Reddy, Director (BSM)
2. Shri K.S. Reddy, US (Pak)
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture
1. Dr. A.P. Negi, Joint Commissioner, Livestock Health, Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries
2. Dr. P.S. Chandrurkar, Advisor
Representative of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representative of RITES
Shri Arun Chaturvedi, General Manager
Representative of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
Shri P.S. Pruthi, Commissioner, Central Board of Excise and Customs
Representative of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Shri V .L. Patankar, Chief Engineer
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Col. Rupinder Singh, Director (MO)
2. Brig. Rajeshwar Singh, DDG, MO (E)

41
Representative of Ministry of Railway Board
Shri Rajeev Chaudhary, Executive Director
2. The Chairman informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to hear the
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2008.
He also informed the Members that senior officers of the Ministries of Commerce and Industries,
External Affairs, Agriculture, Communications and IT, Finance, Defence, Railways and agencies
such as RITES had also been invited to the sitting so that they could respond to the queries of
the Members.
(At this stage the witnesses were called in)
3. The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials of other Ministries/
Departments/Organisations. He then asked the Home Secretary to commence the presentation on
the Bill.
4. The Home Secretary gave a brief background to the Bill. Thereafter, the Secretary (BM) made
a presentation on the salient features of the Bill. The highlights of the presentation were as follows:
* There are several designated entry and exit points on the international land borders of
our country through which cross border movement of persons, goods and traffic take
place and it is important to put in place a system to address security imperatives while
facilitating trade and commerce in an organized manner and hence the said Bill.
* The Bill proposes to establish a statutory body to undertake planning, construction,
management and maintenance of the Integrated Check Posts (ICPs).
* The Land Ports Authority of India will coordinate the management of the ICPs and will
be vested with powers similar to bodies like the Airports Authority of India.
* The Authority will be a statutory body responsible for development of infrastructure,
coordination and cooperation with various Ministries/Departments of Government of
India and other agencies at each ICP.
* The Authority would plan, develop, construct and maintain terminal and ancillary
buildings, services and all other facilities that may be required for facilitating trade and
traffic.
* The Authority would own land and infrastructure and exercise developmental and
regulatory functions.
* Various Government Departments/Agencies operating from the ICPs would look after
their own sphere of activities, including sovereign functions, under the respective laws.
5. The Chairman informed the Members that the erstwhile Committee had sought written
comments of seventeen State Governments on the earlier Bill namely, the Land Ports Authority of
India Bill, 2008 and that only three States had sent their views.
6. The Chairman and the Members of the Committee, thereafter, raised several issues and
queries regarding the Bill which were as follows:

42
* Whether State Governments and other agencies have been consulted by Ministry of
Home Af fairs before drafting the Bill?
* What is the primary concern of the Bill — Security or facilitation of trade and
commerce?
* What is the justification for allocating the Bill to Ministry of Home Affairs when the
primary objective thereof is trade and commerce?
* Whether private sector participation in non-Sovereign functions at the proposed Land
Ports would not threaten the security of our country?
* The one each representative of traders and workers, to be appointed by the Central
Government on the Authority, is to be co-opted on case-to-case basis, wherever
necessary. What mechanism is likely to be adopted for these appointments by the
Government?
* How the Home Ministry is contemplating to check illegal trade of narcotics and
sophisticated arms and ammunition and the illegal trafficking of women through the
landlocked borders of India?
* If the main objective of this Bill is to ensure security as claimed by Home Ministry,
then why it is not setting up Land Ports at Nathu La in Sikkim and LoC in J&K?
* What steps have been taken by Government to plug the porous landlocked borders
with neighbouring countries namely, Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar, etc.?
* Besides the proposed 13 ICPs, the Government should set up more ICPs where those
are needed the most.
7. The Home Secretary and other officials replied to the queries and issues raised by the
Members. The Committee was not satisfied with most of the responses. Some Members made
further observations on those issues.
8. The Chairman then asked the officials to send written replies to the queries not replied
orally. The Comm ittee also taking note of the fact that since several Ministries/Departments/
Agencies were involved in the setting up of the Land Ports Authority of India and also  security
issues were involved therein, it should seek clarifications from the Secretaries of the concerned
Ministries/Departments. The Committee, accordingly decided to seek further clarifications from the
Secretaries of the concerned Ministries/Departments in the next meeting and also take up clause-
by-clause consideration of the Bill.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 
P.M.

43
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, 13 November, 2009 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
11. Shri A. Sampath
12. Shri Harsh Vardhan
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shri Vinay Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri A.E. Ahmed, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Sadakant, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director
6. Dr. V . Candavelou, Deputy Secretary
43

44
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
l. Shri Jose K. Cyriac, Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Goel, Member (Customs), Central Board of Excise and Customs
3. Shri P.S. Pruthi, Commissioner, Central Board of Excise and Customs
Representative of Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce)
Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
l. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary
3. Shri M. Khandelwal, Assistant Law Officer
Legislative Department
1. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri K.Y . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
3. Shriamti Akali V . Konghey, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Central Police Organisations
1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
2. Shri R.K. Medhekar, Special DG, BSF
3. Shri Alexander Daniel, ADG (Ops), BSF
4. Shri M.V . Krishna Rao, DG, SSB
Representative of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
Shri Rajeev Chaudhary, Executive Director
Representative of RITES
Shri Arun Chaturvedi, General Manager
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
1. Shri Suresh K. Reddy, Director (BSM)
2. Shri Gopal Baglay, Director (PAK)
3. Shri Sanjiv Ranjan, Director (North)
2. The Chairman welcomed the newly appointed Member of the Committee, Shri Neeraj
Shekhar, Member, Lok Sabha.
3. The Chairman then made reference to the passing away of Shri Mahendra Sahni, a sitting
Member of Rajya Sabha, representing the State of Bihar. The Committee observed a minute’s
silence, all Members standing, as a mark of respect to the memory of the departed soul. The
Chairman then directed the Secretariat to forward a copy of the obituary reference to the next of
kin of the departed.

45
4. The Chairman then informed the Members that the day’s meeting had been convened to take
up clause-by-clause consideration of the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009. He reminded
Members that the Committee was called upon to submit its report on the said Bill on or before
13th December, 2009.
5. The Chairman thereafter mentioned that a communication had been received from Shri S.S.
Ahluwalia, MP, Rajya Sabha and a Member of the Committee raising certain issues and concerns
about the provisions of the Bill. He also mentioned that Shri Ahluwalia had expressed reservations
on certain issues concerning the role of MHA in the proposed Land Ports Authority. The Chairman
also drew attention of the Members to the suggestion made by Shri S.S. Ahluwalia that the
Committee should hear representatives of the nine States viz., Bihar, Punjab, West Bengal, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Tripura, Assam, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh, wherein the thirteen ICPs were proposed
to be set up, before proceeding further with the Bill. In this regard, the Chairman informed that
during the course of consideration of the 2008 Bill, by the previous Committee, the Committee
sought written comments from seventeen State Governments, including the States suggested by
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, on the Bill. However only three State Governments viz. Uttarakhand, Sikkim
and Nagaland responded and none of the nine State Governments where the thirteen ICPs were
proposed to be set up, had furnished their views in spite of being reminded to do so. The
Chairman, therefore, stated that it would not be necessary to call Chief Secretaries of the nine
States suggested by Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, for oral evidence before the Committee. He also stated
that Shri Ahluwalia had called for certain documents which had been made available to him and
copies of the minutes of the Inter-Ministerial Meeting held in the Planning Commission on
05.06.2006 had been circulated to all Members.
6. The Chairman further informed that Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, a Member of the Committee
had suggested some amendments in the Bill which had been forwarded to MHA and also circulated
amongst Members. Besides, the comments of MHA on the various issues raised in the previous
sitting held on 3rd November, 2009 had also been received and circulated to the Members.
7. The Chairman then informed the Members that since several Ministries and agencies were
involved in the setting up of Land Ports Authority and the Integrated Check Posts, besides the
Home Secretary, the Law Secretary and the Secretary, Legislative Department, the Commerce
Secretary, the Revenue Secretary and the Foreign Secretary were also invited to attend the meeting.
He further informed that Shri P.V. Bhide, Revenue Secretary sought exemption from personal
appearance as he had some official engagements outside Delhi, which was granted by him and Shri
Bhide had deputed Additional Secretary, Department of Revenue and Member (Customs), Central
Board of Excise and Customs, to represent the Department of Revenue. The Chairman further
stated that Dr. Rahul Khullar, Commerce Secretary also sought exemption from personal appearance
on medial grounds which was granted and Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary was deputed to
represent the Department of Commerce. In that context, the Chairman stated that he had come to
know that Dr. Khullar attended his office the previous day. About Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary,
Legislative Department, the Chairman mentioned that as he was unable to appear before the
Committee because of heavy legislative agenda for the ensuing Winter Session, his request for
exemption from personal appearance had been conceded and that Department was represented in
the meeting by concerned senior officers.

46
8. The Chairman apprised Members that as the ICPs were proposed to be set up along India’s
borders with Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Myanmar, the Foreign Secretary was also asked to
appear before the Committee and a communication in the matter was sent by the Secretariat to the
Foreign Secretary on 6th November, 2009 but the Committee’s Secretariat had not received any
confirmation from the Foreign Secretary’s Office whether she would be appearing before the
Committee or not. He mentioned that the Secretariat advised the MEA about the need to send
written confirmation regarding the appearance of the Foreign Secretary before the Committee and
also the procedure to be followed, in case she was unable to come in person. Despite that advice,
the Ministry of External Affairs failed to communicate anything to the Secretariat. The Chairman
stated that non-appearance of the Foreign Secretary before the Committee and lack of any
communication from MEA to the Secretariat of the Committee, was a serious matter and a breach
of established parliamentary practice and procedure and the Committee should take a view on this.
9. The Members of the Committee took serious note of the non-appearance of the concerned
Secretaries before the Committee and felt that explanation should be sought from the Secretaries.
(At this stage the witnesses were called in)
10. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and other
Ministries/Departments/Agencies.
11. The Chairman then referred to the absence of some Secretaries in the meeting. He stated
that though the Commerce Secretary took permission from him for being absent on medical
grounds, he was attending the office and in that case he should have come to the Committee
meeting and expressed his difficulty. He took serious exception to the Foreign Secretary’s absence
in the meeting, without seeking permission from him and also to the presence of only Director level
officers from the Ministry of External Affairs. The Chairman observed that the Committees were
mini Parliaments and the Secretaries to the Government should respond positively and adequately
well before time, to the Secretariat, through a letter or a telephone call and seek permission for
being absent and depute other senior officers. He also referred to the Direction No. 59 of the
Direction issued by the Speaker, Lok Sabha which prescribed the procedure relating to oral
evidence of officials of Government of India and Undertakings. The Chairman further observed that
all the Ministries/Departments were duty bound to abide by that Direction. The Chairman then told
the Members that he would take up the matter appropriately with Hon’ble Chairman.
12. In view of the absence of key officials of the concerned Ministries, the Committee decided
not to proceed with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The Committee also directed that
the Legislative Secretary, the Law Secretary, the Home Secretary, the Commerce Secretary, the
Foreign Secretary, the Revenue Secretary and the Director, IB should be present in the next
meeting, when it would take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
13. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
14. The Committee adjourned at 12.25 
P.M.

47
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 1 December, 2009 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
9. Shri L. Rajagopal
10. Shri Nilesh Narayan Rane
11. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
12. Shri A. Sampath
13. Shri Ravneet Singh
14. Shri Harsh Vardhan
15. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
47

48
2. Shri Vinay Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri Sada Kant, Joint Secretary (BM)
4. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director
5. Shri L. Vishwanathan, Director
Representative of Intelliegence Bureau
Shri Rajiv Mathur, Director
Representatives of CPFs
1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
2. Shri R.K. Medhekar, Special DG, BSF
3. Shri Hemant Desai, IG (Ops.), BSF
4. Shri M.V . Krishna Rao, DG, SSB
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
1. Shrimati Nirupama Rao, Foreign Secretary
2. Shri Y .K. Sinha, Joint Secretary, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran (PAl)
3. Shri Satish C. Mehta, Joint Secretary (North)
4. Shri T.S. Tirumurthy, Joint Secretary, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar (BSM)
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri P.V . Bhide, Revenue Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Goel, Member, Central Board of Excise and Customs
3. Shri K. Jose Cyriac, Additional Secretary
4. Shri P.S. Pruthi, Commissioner, Central Board of Excise and Customs
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary
Legislative Department
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Legislative Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture
1. Dr. P.S. Chandurkar, Advisor, Plant Protection, Department of Agriculture
2. Dr. A.B. Negi, Joint Commissioner, Livestock Health, Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries

49
Representative of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
Shri Rajiv Choudhary, Executive Director
Representative of RITES
Shri Arun Chaturvedi, G.M.
2.0 The Chairman announced that the day’s meeting had been convened to take up clause-by-
clause consideration of the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009. He reminded Members that
the Committee was called upon to submit its Report on the Bill on or before 13th December, 2009.
2.1 The Chairman recalled that due to the absence of Secretaries of some of the Ministries,
particularly the Foreign Secretary and the Commerce Secretary in the previous meeting held on
13th November, the Committee could not go ahead with the clause-by-clause consideration of the
Bill. Therefore, it decided that all the Secretaries concerned should remain present in the next
meeting to assist it in the clause-by-clause consideration. He further stated that the Legislative
Secretary, the Law Secretary, the Home Secretary, the Commerce Secretary, the Foreign Secretary,
the Revenue Secretary and the Director, IB had accordingly been invited.
2.2 The Chairman also mentioned that out of the above mentioned officers, Dr. Rahul Khullar,
Commerce Secretary had again sought exemption from personal appearance on account of some
multilateral engagements outside the country where he was to assist the Commerce Minister. The
Chairman of the Committee informed Members that he had granted the request. He also informed
that Commerce Secretary had deputed Shri R. Gopalan, the senior-most Additional Secretary in the
Department of Commerce to represent that Department before the Committee.
2.3 The Chairman informed Members that one more State Government i.e. Government of J&K
had sent their comments on the said Bill stating that they had no objection to the proposed Bill
being enacted. He also informed Members that Ministry of Home Affairs had sent its comments
on the amendments suggested by Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, M.P. and Member of the Committee, on
the Bill.
2.4 In regard to the requirement of completion of consideration of the Bill, within the given
period i.e. by 13th December, 2009, one Member felt that the Committee should not hastily
consider the Bill clause-by-clause as it was not convinced with the explanations given by the nodal
Ministry and other agencies on the fundamental issues concerning the Bill. The Committee also felt
that it would be appropriate if it could devote more time to the Bill and present its Report in the
first part of the Budget Session.
(At this stage the witnesses were called in)
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and other
Ministries/Departments and stated that the Committee had already discussed this Bill in its previous
sittings and that the Members would like to seek clarifications from the officers on certain basic
issues.
4. The Chairman and Members then sought the following clarifications, some of which were
directly connected with the Bill and others having an indirect bearing thereon:—

50
(i) When it is self-evident that the setting up of the Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) along
the Indo-Pak, Indo-Bangladesh, Indo-Nepal and Indo-Myanmar borders and the
proposed statutory Land Ports Authority of India, were to promote trade and
commerce with our neighbouring countries, what is the rationale for assigning the Bill
to the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) How will the Government address the security implications of movement of goods
and persons across the LoC in PoK and Jammu and Kashmir;
(iii) What are the modalities for regulating the entry and exit of persons and goods across
the LoC;
(iv) What is the mechanism at the LoC to distinguish between a genuine person from a
insurgent;
(v) How is the Government addressing the issue of increased inflow of Chinese products
from PoK to Jammu and Kashmir which reportedly constitutes more than seventy five
per cent of the cross-border trade across LoC;
(vi) What is the position of the Government with regard to illegal arms trade and
smuggling of fake Indian currency Notes through the porous borders with Nepal,
Bangladesh and Myanmar;
(vii) How is the Government going to address the apprehensions expressed by Members
of the Committees on the possibility of the ICPs being turned into havens of illegal
trade in arms and ammunition;
(viii) How is the Government going to curb illegal activities along the riverine borders with
Bangladesh, in the context of the proposed setting up of ICPs along Indo-Bangladesh
border;
(ix) What is the stand of the Government on the increased assertiveness and activism of
China in the locations across the LAC in the border areas between India and China;
(x) What stand the Government of India has taken on the reported stoppage of
construction of a road at Demchok in Southern Ladakh due to objections taken by
the Chinese border patrols?
5. The Foreign Secretary, the Home Secretary, the Director, IB and the Revenue Secretary
responded to the aforementioned queries. On the justification of entrusting the work of the Land
Ports Authority of India Bill 2009 and the setting up of the Integrated Check Posts, the Home
Secretary inter alia stated that the main reason for assigning the subject to the Home Ministry was
that under the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, the Department of Border
Management had been allotted to his Ministry. The Committee was still not convinced with the
justification put forth by the Home Secretary.
6. The Members briefly discussed the matter. The Committee was of the unanimous view that
it would need more time to examine the critical aspects of the Bill and the remainder of the period
available at its disposal, would be inadequate to complete the remaining stages of consideration
of the Bill. As the stipulated time for presentation of its Report would shortly expire on

51
13th December 2009, the Committee unanimously decided that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha may
be requested to grant it an extension of time upto the last day of the first week of Part I of Budget
Session of 2010, for presentation of its Report on the Bill. The Committee, accordingly, authorized
its Chairman to request Hon’ble Chairman for grant of extension of time.
7. The Chairman then announced that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on
10th December, 2009 to take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and requested Members
to remain present therein. The Chairman also directed the Home Secretary to make himself and his
team available for the next sitting and he also told the Home Secretary to convey to the Commerce
Secretary and others to remain present in its said sitting.
8. The Chairman asked the officials to send written responses to those queries of the Members
which could not be answered orally.
9. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.

52
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 16 December, 2009 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri A. Sampath
12. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shri Vinay Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary (BM)
4. Shri Sada Kant, Joint Secretary (BM)
52

53
5. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary (F)
6. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director
7. Dr. V . Candavelou, Director
Representative of Intelligence Bureau
Shri Rajiv Mathur, Director
Representative of Bureau of Immigration
Shri Arun Chaudhary, Additional Director
Representatives of CPFs
1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
2. Shri R.K. Medhekar, Special DG, BSF
3. Shri Alexender Daniel, Addl. DG (Ops.), BSF
4. Shri M.V. Krishna Rao, DG , SSB
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri P.V . Bhide, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Goel, Member, Central Board of Excise and Customs
3. Shri P.S. Pruthi, Commissioner, Central Board of Excise and Customs
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
Legislative Department
Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
1. Dr. Rahul Khullar, Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Bamba, Director
Representative of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
Shri Rajiv Choudhary, Executive Director
Representative of RITES
Shri Arun Chaturvedi, G.M.
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members in the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then
informed the Members that BPST had organized a talk on “Unique Identification Project, Issues
and Challenges” by Shri Nandan Nilkani, in Parliament Library Building in the evening and
suggested to them to attend the said talk as the subject was likely to be considered by the
Committee shortly.

54
3. The Chairman then informed the Members that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has granted
extension of time to the Committee for presentation of report on the Land Ports Authority of India
Bill, 2009 up to first day of the Budget Session 2010. He sought cooperation of all Members of
the Committee for presenting its report on the Bill by the extended date.
(At this stage the witnesses were called in)
4. The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Home
Affairs and senior officers of other Ministries/Departments/Organizations. He, in the first instance,
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce to make his submissions before the Committee on the
Bill. The Secretary, Ministry of Commerce made the following submissions:-
(i) The Department of Commerce is extremely supportive of the Bill and they have been,
in the past, spending money from the Department in building some of the
infrastructure of the land customs stations.
(ii) The Department of Commerce has been consulted all along in various stages of
drafting of the Bill and has provided inputs to Ministry of Home Affairs.
(iii) It is high time that the Land Ports Authority (LPAI) is set up early because on the
land borders, besides border trade/commerce a lot of other aspects need to be looked
into.
(iv) The trade across the border is only a very small portion of the bilateral trade between
India and the neighboring countries. The main concerns on the borders are about
either smuggling or other security related matters as the borders are very porous.
(v) Movement of persons and goods across the borders are merely a concern of the
Department of Commerce; it also concerns many Departments of the Government. It
is, therefore, appropriate that the Department of Border Management have been
entrusted with the work of LPAI. That have much greater control over the security-
related maters. That is the considered view of the Department of Commerce.
5. The Chairman and Members of the Committee then sought clarifications from the
Commerce Secretary which were replied to by him.
6. The Chairman told the Home Secretary that the information provided to Shri Bishnu Pada
Ray, Dr. Kakaoli Ghosh Dastidar and Shri Raman Deka, Members of the Committee, on the queries
raised by them, regarding the airfield reportedly being built by Chinese Authorities in Coco Island;
cattle and arms smuggling on Indo-Bangladesh Border, was routing and unsatisfactory. He asked
the Home Secretary to send detailed information to those Members.
7. The Chairman and the Members of the Committee, thereafter, sought clarifications on the
following issues from the Home Secretary on the provisions of the Bill;
(i) Setting up and running hotels are not the job of the Home Ministry. By establishing
hotels, how would the Government manage the security issues as there would be
movement of several persons in the integrated complex.

55
(ii) How does the Bill addresses the security concerns. If seaports are allocated to the
Ministry of Shipping and airports to the Civil Aviation Ministry, why LPAI should not
go to the Ministry of Commerce or the Finance Minister? Is it because Integrated
Check Posts on the borders?
(iii) The Chapter in the Bill dealing with the functions of the Authority only mentions
security as a secondary aspect.
(iv) There is a shortcoming in the qualification for being appointed as Chairperson of the
Authority as much as, a person who has got experience in trade, commerce, law,
finance and public administration can be appointed as Chairperson of the Authority
and there is no mention of the security concerns.
(v) The Chief Secretary or his nominee has been proposed as a Member of the Authority.
It should not be left to the whims and fancies of Chief Secretary to appoint a
nominee. The specific rank of officer, who could be appointed as nominee of Chief
Secretary should be mentioned in the Bill which may be of the rank of Secretary to
the Government. There should be some criteria to appoint representatives of trade and
workers on the Authority. Trader representative could be from one of the Chambers
of Commerce or some such organization. The workers’ representative could be
chosen amongst from the members of recognized trade unions.
8. The Home Secretary replied to the issues raised. The Committee was not convinced with
the response of the Home Secretary to the issues at (i) to (iii). The Committee noted the Home
Secretary responses on other issues.
9. The Chairman then decided to meet again on 30th December, 2009 to take up clause-by-
clause consideration of the Bill.
10. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

56
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Wednesday, 30 December, 2009 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
8. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
9. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat)
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Shri A. Sampath
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Harsh Vardhan
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
15. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shri Vinay Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary (BM)
4. Shri Sada Kant, Joint Secretary (BM)
56

57
Representative of Bureau of Immigration
Shri Arvind Deep, Joint Director
Representatives of CPFs
1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
2. Shri R.K. Medhekar, Special DG, BSF
3. Shri Alexender Daniel, Addl DG (Ops.), BSF
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri S.K. Goel, Member, Central Board of Excise and Customs
2. Shri P.S. Pruthi, Commissioner, Central Board of Excise and Customs
Representative of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary
Legislative Department
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
3. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri M. Khandelwal, Assistant Legislative Officer
5. Shri K.V. Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
1. Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bamba, Director
Representative of Ministry of External Affairs
Shri T.S. Tirumurti, Joint Secretary
2.0 The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the Agenda
for the day. He stated that during the forthcoming Budget Session of Parliament, the Committee
should present separate reports on Naxalism, Cross-Border Terrorism and Infiltration, besides the
report on the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009.
(At this stage the witnesses were called in)
3.0 Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs,
Finance (Department of Revenue), Law and Justice, Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce), External Affairs, Bureau of Immigration and Central Police Forces. The Committee
took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009.
The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
Statement of Objects and Reasons
3.1 The Committee, in the first instance, mulled over a proposal to substitute the word
“regulate” by the word “coordinate” in para 3, line 4 of the Statement of Objects and Reason of

58
the Bill. Some Members were of the view that the since the Land Ports Authority of India had to
regulate activities of various agencies, from time to time, the word “regulate” was the appropriate
word and it should remain in the SOR. It was argued in favour of the former proposal that in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 11 (2) (k) of the Bill, the Authority will co-ordinate and
facilitate the working of agencies who have been engaged to undertake various activities at the
integrated Check Posts, in accordance with the respective laws, for the time being in force. As
per Clause 12 (3), the customs, immigration, quarantine and other officials shall coordinate with
the Authority for the effective discharge of its functions. It was thus argued that the role envisaged
for the Authority was not that of a ‘regulator’ but of a ‘facilitator’ and’ co-ordinator’. The word
‘regulate’ used in the ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’ sought to create an erroneous impression
as though the Authority would act as a super regulator of the authorities who perform their
functions in accordance with the respective laws.
3.1.1 On reconsideration, the Committee agreed that the word ‘regulate’ used in, para 3, line 4
of the Statement of Objects and Reasons, should be substituted by the word ‘regulate’.
Consequentially, in line 5 of the said para, the word ‘also’ may be inserted before the word ‘co-
ordinate’.
3.1.2 The Committee accordingly recommended that the Ministry of Home Affairs may circulate
a revised Statement of Objects and Reasons before the Bill was taken up in the Lok Sabha for
second reading.
Long title
3.2 The Committee was of the view that the spirit of the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Bill should be reflected in its Long Title. The Chairman, therefore, suggested that in the first
line of the Long Title, before the words ‘for the development’, the words “to put in place systems,
which address security imperatives and” may be inserted. The Committee endorsed the suggestion.
3.2.1 The Long Title was adopted, as amended.
Clause 2
3.3 The clause provided for definitions of certain terms used in the Bill.
3.3.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 3
3.4 The clause dealt with the constitution of the Land Ports Authority of India and provided for
its composition.
Sub-clause 3(b)
3.4.1 The Committee felt that sub-clause 3(b) needed some drafting change. The Committee
recommended that the existing sub-clause 3(b) may be substituted by the following:—
“Two Members, one Member (Planning and Development) and one Member (Finance)”

59
Sub-clause 3(d)
3.4.2 The Committee felt that the nominee of the Chief Secretary of the concerned State
Government should not be below the rank of Secretary to the Government of the State. The
Committee, accordingly, recommended that in sub-clause 3(d) after the word ‘nominee’ for
following words may be inserted:
“not below the rank of Secretary to the Government”
Sub-clause 3(e)
3.4.3 The Committee decided that the existing sub-clause 3(e) may be substituted by the
following:
“the representatives, one each of traders and workers, to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the representative bodies of trade and workers,”
Sub-clause 3(5)
3.4.4 The Committee felt that knowledge and experience in security-related matters should also
be prescribed for a person to be eligible for being considered for appointment as Chairperson of
the Authority. The Committee accordingly recommended that the word “security” may be inserted
before the word “transport”.
Clause 4
3.5 This clause laid down the grounds of disqualification for being appointed as a Member of
the Authority. If the Central Government was of the opinion that a conviction and sentencing to
imprisonment for an offence of a person involved moral turpitude, or he had such financial or other
interest in the Authority as was likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions
as a member, such a person shall be disqualified for being appointed as such.
3.5.1 Some M embers of the Committee were of the view that the determination of the said
grounds of disqualification was dependent upon the opinion of the Central Government which at
times could be subjective and defeat the purpose of the clause. Those Members felt that adequate
safeguards should be provided in this clause to rule out the element of subjectivity in forming an
opinion by the Central Government. One of the suggestions which came up during discussion was
that the words “in the opinion of the Central Government” could be tempered by adding the words
“to be recorded in writing”.
3.5.2 The Committee was of the view that the Ministry should address the concern of the
Committee in the matter and come out with suitable formulation at the time piloting the Bill in
Parliament.
3.5.3 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clauses 5 to 7
3.6 These clauses were adopted without any change.

60
Clause 8 Sub-Clause (1)
3.7 Some Members were of the view that sub-clause (1) was vaguely worded as it was not
clear as to where (places) the Authority could meet. They felt that the word ‘places’ should be
clarified to mean that the Authority could meet at such places where ICPs were located or where
the registered office of the Authority was located. The Committee recommended that this aspect
may be taken care of while framing regulations.
3.7.1 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 9
3.8 The clause laid down the circumstances, which shall not invalidate the proceedings of the
Authority. Some Members of the Committee observed that there should be a time limit within which
the vacancies in the Authority should be filled up. The Committee, accordingly, recommended that
a provision may be inserted in the clause to provide that no vacancy in the Authority shall remain
unfilled for more than six months.
3.8.1 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 10
3.9 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 11
3.10 As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the proposed Authority had to put
in place systems at the Integrated Check Posts which addressed security imperatives while also
facilitating trade and commerce. The Committee noted that this aspect was missing in the clause
which delineated the functions of the Authority. The Committee accordingly recommended the
following amendments in sub-clauses (1) and (2).
Sub-clause (1)
3.10.1 The Committee recommended that the word “sanitise” may be inserted before the word
“develop”.
Sub-clause (2)
3.10.2 The Committee recommended that the following may be added as the first item:—
“(a) Put in place systems which address security imperatives at Integrated Check Posts”
Items (h) & (j)
3.10.3 The Committee discussed the import of the words “watch and ward at various sensitive
installations” appearing in item (h) and recommended that with a view to making security
arrangements better and comprehensive at Integrated Check Posts, the said words may be
substituted by the words “the security of Integrated Check Posts”.

61
3.10.4 The Committee also recommended that word “plying” occurring in item (h) may be
substituted by the word “movement” which was a better expression.
3.10.5 Likewise, the Committee recommended that the word “plying” also appearing in item (j) be
substituted by the word “movement”.
Items (m), (n) and (o)
3.10.6 The Committee discussed item (m) which enabled the Authority to form one or more
companies under the Companies Act, 1956 or under any other law relating to companies for
efficient discharge of functions assigned to it. In this context the Committee noted that item (o)
also empowered the Authority to set up ‘Joint ventures’ for the discharge of any of the functions
entrusted to it.
3.10.7 The Committee was of the view that as the Authority could set-up joint ventures, there was
no necessity for empowering it to form companies also for the efficient discharge of any of its
functions. The Committee accordingly recommended omission of item (m).
3.10.8 As already stated earlier, security was the prime concern at the designated points along
International Borders of India where Integrated Check Posts were proposed to be set up. Keeping
that in view, the Committee recommended that a suitable proviso be inserted in item (n) to ensure
that sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any private entity. Accordingly
the Committee recommended that the following proviso be inserted in item (n):—
“Provided that the sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any private
entity”.
3.10.9 Likewise, the Committee was of the view that the Authority should set up ‘joint ventures’
only in the public sector as involvement of private sector enterprises in the border areas for
discharge of functions of the Authority, would not be desirable. The Committee therefore,
recommended that in item (o), ‘the words “in the public sector” be inserted after the words “joint
ventures”.
3.10.10 The Committee also recommended that consequent upon its recommendations for addition
and omission of certain items in sub-clause (2), the existing items (a) to (p) be renumbered
accordingly.
3.10.11 The clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 12
3.11 Sub-clause (2) of the clause empowered the Authority to seek the assistance of Armed
Forces, Central Para-Military Forces or State Police, whenever considered necessary to do so for
ensuring the peace and security at an Integrated Check Post. The Committee was of the view that
the said sub-clause was deficient inasmuch as the Authority by itself could not seek such assistance
and had to follow the procedure established by law.
3.11.1 The Committee, therefore, with a view to making the sub-clause self-contained,
recommended that the words “as per the provisions of the law”, be added at the end.

62
3.11.2 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clauses 13 to 15
These clauses, dealing with property and contract, are adopted without any change.
Clause 16
This clause provides that any land acquired by the authority for discharge of its functions
shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and the same may be acquired for the Authority
under the provisions of the National Highways Act 1956 or any other law for the time being in force.
A point was raised that the process of acquisition of land for the Authority should involve
the concerned State Government and the notification for acquiring of land may be issued after
obtaining the consent of the concerned district Authorities of the State.
The Committee accordingly recommended that the issue raised by it should be considered
by the Government and if necessary, suitable provision may be inserted in the clause.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clauses 17 to 18
These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 19
3.13 This clause empowered the Authority to determine and charge fees or rent, not being a
statutory levy under any other Act, as may be provided by regulations, separately for each
Integrated Check Post with the previous approval of the Central Government.
3.13.1 The Committee was of the view that the Authority being a statutory body consisting of,
amongst others, nine members, ex-officio, to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the officers, not below the rank of Joint Secretaries to the Government of India,
representing concerned Ministries, the requirement of obtaining previous approval of the Central
Government, for determining and charging fees or rent etc., may be done away with. The
Committee was of the view that the Authority should be fully empowered in that regard.
3.13.2 The Comm ittee, accordingly, recommended that the word “with the previous approval of the
Central Government” be omitted.
3.13.3 The clause was adopted as amended.
Clauses 20 to 31
3.14 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 32
3.15 This clause empowered the Central Government to supersede the Authority.

63
3.15.1 The Committee felt that the word “defaulted” appearing in sub-clause (l)(b) need not be
qualified by the word “persistently”. The Committee, therefore, recommended that word
“persistently” appearing in sub-clause (1) (b) may be omitted as being unnecessary.
3.15.2 Sub-clause (4) provided for laying of a full report of any action taken under this clause and
the circumstances leading to such action, to be laid before both Houses of Parliament ‘at the
earliest opportunity’. The Committee was of the view that the said expression was open-ended,
vague and needed to be made specific.
3.15.3 The Committee, therefore, recommended that sub-clause (4) may be amended so that it was
in tune with clause 36 which was based on the standard formulation for laying of papers on the
Table of the Houses and specified the period within which rules, regulations and notifications to
be issued under the proposed Act were to be laid before each House of Parliament.
3.15.4 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clauses 33 to 37
3.16 These clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
3.17 Clause 1, the Ena cting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were
of consequential or drafting nature, namely the figures and the word, ‘2009’ “sixtieth” to be
substituted by “2010” and “Sixty first”, wherever these occurred.
4. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.25 
P.M.

64
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 9 February, 2010 in Room No. 139, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
6. Shri Ramen Deka
7. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
10. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
2.0 The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and apprised them
of the agenda for the day.
3.0 * * *
4.0 * * *
64
*** Relates to other matters.

65
Draft Report on Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
5.0 The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the draft One Hundred and Forty-Third
Report on the Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009. After a brief discussion, the report was
adopted with some minor changes.
5.1 The Committee decided to present the Report to Rajya Sabha and lay it on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 22nd February, 2010. The Committee also decided to lay on the Table of both Houses,
a copy of the oral evidence tendered before it on the Bill.
5.2 The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri D. Raja and Shri Prasanta
Chatterjee, Members, Rajya Sabha to present the Report and lay the oral evidence in the Rajya
Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Naveen Jindal, and in his absence, Shri Neeraj Shekhar,
Members, Lok Sabha to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
6.0 * * *
6.1 * * *
6.2 * * *
6.3 * * *
6.4 * * *
6.5 * * *
6.6 * * *
7.0 * * *
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
7 August, 2009
Bill No. 70 of 2009
THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2009
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER-II
T
HE L AND P ORTS A UTHORITY  OF I NDIA
3. Constitution of Authority.
4. Disqualification for office of member.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of members.
6. Vacation of office of members.
7. Eligibility of member for re-appointment.
8. Meetings.
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
10. Officers and other employees of Authority.
CHAPTER-III
F
UNCTIONS  OF A UTHORITY
11. Functions of Authority.
12. Responsibilities and powers of other agencies.
CHAPTER-IV
PROPERTY  AND CONTRACT
13. Assets and liabilities to vest in Authority.
14. General effect of vesting of undertakings in Authority.
69
ANNEXURE-I

70
15. Guarantee to be operative.
16. Compulsory acquisition of land for Authority.
17. Contracts by Authority.
18. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Authority.
CHAPTER-V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
CLAUSES
19. Power of Authority to charge fees, rent, etc.
20. Additional capital and grant to Authority by Central Government.
21. Fund of Authority and its investment.
22. Allocation of surplus funds.
23. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.
24. Borrowing powers of Authority.
25. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER-VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
26. Submission of annual report.
27. Delegation.
28. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Authority.
29. Officers and employees of Authority to be public servants.
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.
31. Custody and disposal of lost property.
32. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
33. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
34. Power to make rules.
35. Power to make regulations.
36. Rules, regulations and notification to be laid before Parliament.
37. Power to remove difficulties.

71
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 70 of 2009
THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY  OF INDIA BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the Land Ports Authority of India
for the development and management of facilities for cross border
movement of passengers and goods at designated points along the
international borders of India and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Land Ports Authority of India
Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and
different dates may be appointed for  different provisions of this Act,
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this
Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
71
Short title and
commencement.

72
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Land Ports Authority of
India constituted under section 3;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the
Authority appointed under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 3;
(c) “immigration check post” means any port or
place of departure on the land as notified under the
Foreigners’ Act, 1946;
(d) “integrated check post” means any land port, as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify;
(e) “land customs station” means any place notified
as such by the Central Government, under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 7 of the Customs Act, 1962 for the
clearance of goods imported or to be exported by land or
inland water;
(f) “land port” means an area on the international
borders of India including portions of national highways, State
highways and other roads, notified as land customs station or
immigration check post under the Customs Act, 1962 or the
Foreigners’ Act, 1946, and includes railways, with facilities
for clearance and transport of passengers 31 and goods
across the borders of India;
(g) “notification” means a notification published in
the Official Gazette;
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made
under this Act; and
(i) “regulations” means regulations made by the
Authority under this Act.
CHAPTER-II
T
HE L AND P ORTS A UTHORITY OF I NDIA
3. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be
constituted an Authority to be known as the Land Ports Authority
of India.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with
Definitions.
31 of 1946.
52 of 1962.
52 of 1962.
31 of 1946.
Constitution
of
Authority.

73
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property both movable and immovable, and to contract
and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Member (planning and Development) and a
Member (Finance);
(c) not more than nine members, ex officio, to be
appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
officers, not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the
Government of India, representing the ministries or
departments of the Government of India dealing with
Home Affairs, External Affairs, Revenue, Commerce,
Road Transport and Highways, Railways, Defence,
Agriculture and Cooperation, Law and Justice;
(d) the Chief Secretary or his nominee of the
respective State where the integrated check posts are
located;
(e) the representatives, one each of traders and
workers to be appointed by the Central Government, may
be co-opted on case-to-case basis, wherever necessary;
and
(f) such other representatives as the Central
Government may co-opt for functional purposes.
(4) The Chairperson and the members referred to in
clause (b) shall be appointed by the Central Government and shall
be whole-time members.
(5) The Chairperson shall be chosen from among persons
who have special knowledge and experience in the field of transport,
industry, commerce, law, finance or public administration.
4. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a
member if, he—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence, which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
Disqualification
for office of
member.

74
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of
the Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by
the Government; or
(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such
financial or other interest in the Authority as is likely to affect
prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a
member.
5. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of section 6, every whole-
time member shall hold office for a period of five years from the
date on which he assumes office or till he attains the age of sixty
years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that the Central Government may—
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole-time
member, after giving him notice of a period of not less than
three months or, in lieu thereof, on payment of an amount
equal to his salary and allowances, if any, for a period of
three months;
(b) terminate at any time the appointment of any
member who is a servant of the Government.
(2) The other conditions of service of the members shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in
writing for such period as may be prescribed, to the Central
Government and, on such resignation being notified in the Official
Gazette by that Government, such member shall be deemed to have
vacated his office.
6. The Central Government shall remove a member if, he—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications
mentioned in section 4:
Provided that no member shall be removed on the
ground that he has become subject to the disqualification
mentioned in clause ( e) of that section, unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter;
or
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or
(c) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the
Authority, absent from three consecutive meetings of the
Authority; or
Term of
office and
conditions
of service
of
members.
Vacation
of office
of
members.

75
(d) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so
abused his position as to render his continuance in office
detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that no member shall be removed under this
clause unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter.
7. Any person ceasing to be a member shall, unless
disqualified under section 4, be eligible for re-appointment.
8. ( 1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) as
may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is unable to
attend any meeting of the Authority, any other member chosen by
the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Authority shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the
members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of
votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence the person presiding, shall
have and exercise a second or casting vote.
9. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as
a member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
10. (1) For the purpose of enabling it to efficiently discharge
its functions under this Act, the Authority shall appoint such number
of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary:
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers,
as may be specified, shall be subject to the approval of the Central
Government.
(2) Every officer or other employee appointed by the
Authority shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall
be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by
regulations.
Eligibility of
member for re-
appointment.
Meetings.
V acancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Authority.
Officers and
other employees
of Authority.

76
CHAPTER-III
FUNCTIONS  OF A UTHORITY
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority
shall have powers to develop and manage the facilities for cross
border movement of passengers and goods at designated points
along the international borders of India.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions
contained in sub-section (1), the Authority may—
(a) plan, construct and maintain roads, terminals and
ancillary buildings other than national highways, State
highways and railways, at an integrated check post;
(b) plan, procure, install and maintain communication,
security, goods handling  and scanning equipment at an
integrated check post;
(c) provide appropriate space and facilities for
immigration, customs, security, taxation authorities, animal
and plant quarantine, warehouses, cargo and baggage
examination yards, parking zones, banks, post offices,
communication facilities, tourist information centres, waiting
halls, canteen, refreshment stalls, public conveniences, health
services and such other services, as may be deemed
necessary;
(d) construct residential buildings for its employees as
well as residential accommodation for staff deployed at
integrated check posts;
(e) establish and maintain hotels, restaurants and
restrooms;
(f) establish and maintain warehouses, container depots
and cargo complexes for the storage or processing of goods;
(g) arrange for postal, money exchange, insurance and
telephone facilities for the use of passengers and other
persons at integrated check posts;
(h) make appropriate arrangements for watch and ward
at various sensitive installations and provide for regulation and
control of plying of vehicles, entry and exit of passengers and
goods with due regard to the Custom laws and the security;
(i) ensure prevention and control of fire and other
hazards and other facilities as deemed necessary;
Functions
of
Authority.

77
(j) regulate and control the plying of vehicles, and the
entry and exit of passengers, transportation workers, handling
agents, clearing and forwarding agents and goods at the
integrated check post with due regard to the law, security and
protocol of the Government of India;
(k) co-ordinate and facilitate the working of agencies
who have been engaged to undertake various activities at the
integrated check posts, in accordance with the respective law,
for the time being in force;
(l) develop and provide consultancy, construction or
management services, and undertake operations in India and
abroad in relation to an integrated check post;
(m) form one or more companies under the Companies
Act, 1956 or under any other law relating to companies for
efficient discharge of the functions imposed on it by this Act;
(n) take all such steps as may be necessary or
expedient for, or may be incidental to, the exercise of any
power or the discharge of any function conferred or imposed
on it by this Act;
(o) set up joint ventures for the discharge of any of the
functions assigned to the Authority; and
(p) undertake any other activity at the integrated check
post in the best commercial interests of the Authority.
(3) In the discharge of its functions under this section, the
Authority may consult such ministry or department of the
Government of India or of the State Government as it deems
necessary, and shall have due regard to the development of land port
services and to the efficiency, economy and safety of such service.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as—
(a) authorising the disregard by the Authority of any
law for the time being in force; or
(b) authorising any person to institute any proceeding in
respect of duty or liability to which the Authority or its
officers or other employees would not otherwise be subject
to.
12. (1) The respective border guarding forces deployed at the
borders of India shall be responsible for security around an
integrated check post.
1 of 1956.
Responsibilities
and powers of
other agencies.

78
(2) The Authority may, whenever considered necessary so to
do for ensuring the peace and security at an integrated check post,
seek the assistance of armed force, Central para military force or
State police.
(3) The Customs, immigration, quarantine and other officials
shall co-ordinate with the Authority for the effective discharge of its
functions.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any provisions of
this Act, the Customs, immigration, quarantine officials, the border
guarding forces and the police shall discharge their function in
accordance with the law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER-IV
P
ROPERTY AND CONTRACT
13. (1) On the date of notification issued under clause (d) of
section 2, all such assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges
and such property movable and immovable, real or personal,
corporeal or incorporeal, present or contingent, of whatever nature,
including lands, buildings, machinery, equipments, works,
workshops, cash balances, capital, reserves, reserve funds,
investments, tenancies, losses and book debts and all other rights
and interests  arising out of such property, as immediately before the
issue of that notification, were in the ownership or possession of
the Government of India in any of the land port, as the Central
Government may, in such notification, specify, shall vest in the
Authority and such vesting shall also be deemed to include all
borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then
subsisting.
(2) The notification under sub-section ( 1) shall be issued only
after the concurrence of the concerned ministries or departments of
the Government of India, in case where such properties are owned
or controlled by such ministries or departments.
14. All contracts, agreements and working arrangements
subsisting immediately before the date of notification issued under
clause ( d) of section 2, and affecting the land ports shall be of full
force and effect as regards the Authority.
15. Any guarantee given for or in favour of land customs
stations or immigration check posts with respect to a loan, lease or
finance shall continue to be operative in relation to such stations or
Assets and
liabilities
to vest in
Authority.
General
effect of
vesting of
undertakings
in
Authority.
Guarantee
to be
operative.

79
check posts which have been vested in the Authority by virtue of
this Act.
16. Any land required by the Authority for the discharge of its
functions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public
purpose and such land may be acquired for the Authority under the
provisions of the National Highways Act, 1956 or any other law for
the time being in force.
17. Subject to the provisions of section 18, the Authority shall
be competent to enter  into and perform any contract necessary for
the discharge of its functions under this Act.
18. ( 1) Every contract on behalf of the Authority, shall be
made by the Chairperson or such officer of the Authority as may
be generally or specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority
and such contracts as may be specified, in the regulations, shall be
sealed with the common seal of the Authority:
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as
the Central Government may, by order fix in this behalf, shall be
made unless it has been previously approved by the Central
Government:
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of
immovable property or for the lease of any such property for a term
exceeding thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value
or amount as the Central Government may, by order fix in this
behalf, shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the
Central Government.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the form and
manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be
such as may be provided by regulations.
(3) Any contract which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder
shall not be binding on the Authority.
CHAPTER-V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
19. The Authority may with the previous approval of the
Central Government, determine and charge such fees or rent, not
being a statutory levy under any other Act, as may be provided by
regulations, separately for each integrated check post,—
Compulsory
acquisition of
land for
Authority.
Contracts by
Authority.
Mode of
executing
contracts on
behalf of
Authority.
48 of 1956.
Power of
Authority to
charge fees,
rent, etc.

80
(a) for the cargo handling, warehousing, parking of trucks or
for any other service or facility offered in connection with transport
operations;
(b) for the parking of passenger vehicles and other amenities
given to the passengers and visitors; and
(c) for the availing of facilities and other services provided by
the Authority.
20. The Central Government may, after the appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf,—
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the
Authority for the discharge of its functions under this
Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such
terms and conditions as that Government may determine;
(b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and
conditions as the Central Government may determine, by
way of loans or grants such sums of money as that
Government may consider necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act.
21. (1) The Authority shall establish its own fund and all
receipts of the Authority shall be credited thereto and all payments
by the Authority shall be made therefrom.
(2) The Authority shall have the power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to spend such sums as it thinks fit to cover
all administrative expenses of the Authority or for purposes
authorised by this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure
out of the fund of the Authority.
(3) All moneys standing at the credit of the Authority which
cannot immediately be applied as provided in sub-section (2), shall
be—
(a) deposited in the State Bank of India or any such
Scheduled bank or banks or other public financial institutions
subject to such conditions as may, from time to time, be
specified by the Central Government;
(b) invested in the securities of the Central Government
or in such manner as may be prescribed.
Additional
capital
and grant
to
Authority
by Central
Government.
Fund of
Authority
and its
investment.

81
Explanation.—In this sub-section “Scheduled bank” has the
same meaning as in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934.
22. (1) The Authority may, from time to time, set apart such
amounts as it thinks fit, as All a reserve fund or funds for the
purpose of expanding existing facilities or services or creating
new facilities or services at any integrated check post or increase
of expenditure from transient causes or for purposes of replacement
or meeting expenditure arising from loss or damage due to any
natural calamity or accident or meeting any liability arising out of
any act of omission or commission in the discharge of its functions
under this Act:
Provided that the Authority shall also have the power to
establish specific reserves for specific purposes:
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of
each or any of the specific and general reserves and the aggregate
at any time of such sums shall not exceed such limits as may, from
time to time, be fixed in that behalf by the Central Government.
(2) After making provision for such reserve fund or funds
and for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets and all other
matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and
incorporated under the Companies Act,  1956, the Authority shall pay
the balance of its annual net profits to the Central Government.
23. The Authority shall, before the commencement of each
financial year prepare a statement of the programme of its activities
during the forthcoming financial year as well as financial estimate in
respect thereof and submit it for the approval of the Central Government.
24. (1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or
special authority given to it by the Central Government, borrow
money from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or such
other instruments as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of
its functions under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such
manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the principal and the
payment of interest thereon with respect to the loans taken by
the Authority under sub-section (1).
(3) Subject to such limits as the Central Government may,
from time to time, lay down, the Authority may borrow temporarily
Allocation
of surplus
funds.
2 of 1934.
1 of 1956.
Submission of
programme of
activities and
financial
estimates.
Borrowing
powers of
Authority.

82
by way of overdraft or otherwise, such amount as it may require
for discharging its functions under this Act.
25. ( 1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
including the profit and loss account and the  balance-sheet in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure
incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be reimbursed
to him by the Authority.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General has in connection with the audit of Government
accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers, documents and
papers and inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and
that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses
of Parliament.
CHAPTER-VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
26. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after the end
of each financial year, prepare and submit to the Central
Government in such form as may be prescribed, a report giving an
account of its activities during that financial year and the report
shall also give an account of the activities which are likely to be
undertaken by the Authority during the next financial year.
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is
submitted.
27. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing,
delegate to the Chairperson  or any other member or to any officer
Submission
of annual
report.
Delegation.
Accounts and
audit.

83
of the Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any,
as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions
under this Act, (except the powers under section 35) as it may
deem necessary.
28. All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson or any other
member authorised by the Authority in this behalf and all other
instruments executed by the Authority shall be authenticated by the
signature of an officer of the Authority authorised by it in this behalf.
29. All officers and employees of Authority shall, while acting
or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule or regulation made thereunder, be  deemed to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Authority or any member or any officer or other
employee of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or
regulation made in thereunder.
31. Subject to such regulations as the Authority may make in
this behalf, the Authority shall provide for securing the safe custody
and restoration of any property which, while not in proper custody,
is found on any premises belonging to the Authority or under its
overall control.
32. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of
opinion—
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority
is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it
by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in
complying with any direction issued by the Central
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act and as a result of default the financial position of
the Authority or the administration of an integrated check
post has deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary
in the public interest so to do,
45 of 1860.
Officers and
employees of
Authority to be
public servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Custody and
disposal of lost
property.
Power of
Central
Government to
supersede
Authority.
Authentication
of orders and
other
instruments of
Authority.

84
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding six months,
as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-
section for the reasons mentioned in clause ( b), the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to
show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the
explanations and objections, if any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-
section ( 1) superseding the Authority,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised
and discharged by such person or persons as the Central
Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority
shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-
section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified
in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may,—
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further
term not exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary,
or
(b) reconstitute the Authority by fresh appointment and
in such case the members who vacated their offices under
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified
for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before
the expiration of the period of supersession, whether as originally
specified under sub-section ( 1) or as extended under this sub-
section, take action under clause ( b) of this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under

85
this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before both Houses of  Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
33. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of  this
Act, the Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy
as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to
time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be
given opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a
question is one  of policy or not shall be final.
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue
directions to the Authority regarding the discharge of any functions
by it under the clauses of sub-section ( 2) of section 11 and the
Authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.
34. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette; make rules for carrying out the provisions of  this
Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for —
(a) the other conditions of service of members of the
Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 5;
(b) the period of notice as may be given by any
member to resign his office under  sub-section (3) of
section 5;
(c) the manner in which the Authority may invest the
funds under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section 21;
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts
shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of
section 25;
(e) the form in which a report giving an account of its
activities shall be prepared and submitted by the Authority to
the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) of section 26;
and
(f) any other matter which is to be, or  may be,
prescribed.
Power to make
rules.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue directions.

86
35. (1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government,  make regulations not inconsistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder for the purpose of giving effect to
the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for—
(a) the time and places of meetings of  the Authority and
the procedure to be followed for transaction of business
including the quorum at such meetings under sub-section ( 1)
of section 8;
(b) the conditions of service and the remuneration of
officers and other employees to be appointed by the Authority
under sub-section ( 1) of  section 10;
(c) the contracts which are to be sealed with the
common seal of the Authority under sub-section ( 1), and the
form and manner in which a contract may be made by the
Authority under sub-section (2) of section 18;
(d) the fees and rent to be charged by the Authority
under sub-section ( 1) of section 19;
(e) the custody and restoration of lost property and the
terms and conditions under which lost property may be
restored to the persons entitled thereto under section 31.
36. Every rule and every regulation made or notification
issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the  session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule, regulation or notification, as the case may be, or both
Houses agree that the rule, regulation or notification, as the case
may be, should not be made or issued, the rule, regulation or
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule, regulation or
notification:
Rules,
regulations
and
notifications
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Power to make
regulations.

87
37.  ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by general or
special order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of two years from the date of the commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are several designated entry and exit points on the international
borders of the country through which cross-border movement of  persons, goods
and traffic takes place. Good border management is mandated by India’s security
concerns and, to this end. it is important to put in place systems, which address
security imperatives while also facilitating trade and commerce. Existing
infrastructure available with Customs, Immigration, other regulatory agencies and
auxiliary services at these designated entry and exit points are generally not
sufficient. The regulatory and support functions are also not available either
under one roof or in any integrated manner. There is no single agency
responsible for coordinated functioning of various Government authorities and
service providers.
2. It is, therefore, proposed to establish Integrated Check Posts at entry
and exit points on the international and borders of the country through a Plan
scheme. The Integrated Check Posts shall be a sanitised zone with dedicated
passenger and cargo terminals comprising adequate customs and immigration
facilities, security and scanning equipments, health and quarantine facilities,
passenger amenities like waiting areas, restaurants, rest rooms, duty-free shops,
parking, warehousing, container yards, offices of transport and logistics
companies, banks and financial services, dormitories for drivers, and all related
facilities like service stations and fuel stations, in a single complex equipped with
state-of-the-art modern amenities.
3. The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 aims to establish the
Land Ports Authority of India to undertake the construction, management and
maintenance of Integrated Check Posts. The Authority would, inter alia, plan,
develop, construct, manage and maintain Integrated Check Posts, regulate the
functions of various agencies working at such Cheek Posts, coordinate with
various Ministries and Departments concerned of the Government of India and
other agencies for regulating the entry and exit of passengers and goods and
establish necessary service facilities.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 3rd August, 2009.
88

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 110l2/19/2006-BM.V/ICP dated 3.8.2009 from
Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Land
Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009 to provide for the establishment of the Land
Ports Authority of India for the development and management of facilities for
cross border movement of passengers and goods at designated points along the
international borders of India and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto, recommends the introduction of the Bill under article 117(1) and its
consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution, in Lok Sabha.
89

90
Notes on clauses
Clause 1  provides for short title of the Bill, its commencement and
application. It provides that the Bill shall apply to all integrated check posts
where facilities for cross border movement of passengers and goods at
designated points along the international borders of India are operated or intended
to be operated.
Clause 2  defines the various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3  seeks to constitute the Land Ports Authority of India and
provides for its composition.
Clause 4  provides for disqualification for being appointed as a member
to the Authority;
Clause 5  provides for the term of office and conditions of service of
members of the Authority.
Clause 6  deals with the removal of members of the Authority on the
grounds mentioned in sub-clauses (a) to (d) of that clause.
Clause 7  deals with the eligibility condition for a member for his re-
appointment to the Authority.
Clause 8  seeks to make provisions for the meetings of the Authority for
transaction of its business and the quorum at such meetings.
Clause 9  lays down the circumstances, which shall not invalidate the
proceedings of the Authority.
Clause 10 seeks to provide for appointment of officers and other
employees of the Authority.
Clause 11  provides for the functions of the Authority. The Authority
shall, inter alia, plan, develop and manage the facilities for cross border
movement of passengers and goods at designated points along the international
borders of India. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates in detail the various
functions to be performed by the Authority.
Clause 12  provides for the responsibilities and powers of other agencies
such as the respective border guarding forces, Customs, immigration, quarantine
and other officials, etc., who Shall coordinate with the Authority for the
effective discharge of its functions at the integrated check post.
Clause 13  seeks to make provisions for vesting in the Authority such
undertakings as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official
90

91
Gazette. Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the concurrence of
concerned ministries and departments of the Government of India shall be
obtained before issuing the notification under sub-clause ( 1) in case where such
properties are owned or controlled by such ministries or departments.
Clause 14  provides for the general effect of vesting of the undertakings
as regards the Authority, before the date of notification issued under sub-
clause ( d) of clause 2.
Clause 15  lays down that any guarantee given for or in favour of land
customs stations or immigration check posts with respect to a loan, lease or
finance shall continue to be operative in relation to such stations or check posts
which have been vested in the Authority.
Clause 16  provides that any land acquired by the Authority for discharge
of its functions under the Bill shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose
and the same may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the
National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) or any other law for the time being
in force.
Clause 17  empowers the Authority to enter into and perform any
contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under the Bill.
Clause 18  seeks to provide for the mode of executing contracts on
behalf of the Authority.
Clause 19  seeks to empower the Authority with the previous approval of
the Central Government, to charge such fees or rent other than a statutory levy
being charged under any other Act by providing in the regulations separately for
each integrated check post.
Clause 20 empowers the Central Government to provide additional capital
to the Authority for the discharge of its functions on such terms and conditions
as the Central Government may determine and also to pay to the Authority by
way of loans or grants such sums of money as the Central Government may
consider necessary.
Clause 21  provides that the Authority shall have its own fund, and all its
receipts shall be credited thereto and all the payments shall be made therefrom.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause also provides that all moneys standing at the credit
of the Authority which cannot immediately be applied shall be deposited in the
State Bank of India or any such scheduled bank or other public financial
institution as may be specified by the Central Government.
Clause 22  seeks to provide for reserve fund or funds for purposes of
expanding existing facilities or services or creating new facilities or services at
any integrated check post or increase of expenditure from transient causes or for
purposes of replacement or for meeting expenditure arising from loss or damage

92
due to any natural calamity or accident or meeting any liability arising out of any
act of omission or commission in the discharge of functions of the Authority
under the Bill. It also empowers the Authority to establish specific reserves for
specific purposes.
Clause 23  seeks to provide that the Authority shall prepare and submit to
the Central Government before the commencement of each financial year, a
statement of the programme of its activities during the forthcoming financial
year as well as financial estimates in respect thereof for approval.
Clause 24  seeks to empower the Authority to borrow with the consent
of the Central Government, money from any source by the issue of bonds,
debentures or such other instruments as it may deem fit for discharging all or
any of its functions under this Bill. The clause also lays down that the loans
borrowed by the Authority may be guaranteed by the Central Government for the
repayment of principal and payment of interest thereon.
Clause 25  provides for the audit of the accounts of the Authority
annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 26  seeks to provide that the Authority shall prepare and submit to
the Central Government after the end of each financial year, a report giving an
account of its activities during that financial year and the report shall also give
an account of the activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority
during the next financial year. The report so submitted by the Authority to the
Central Government shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
 Clause 27  seeks to empower the Authority to delegate to the
Chairperson or to any other member or to any officer of the Authority such of
its powers and functions under the Bill, except the power to make regulations,
as may deem necessary.
Clause 28  seeks to provide for authentication of the orders and other
instruments of the Authority.
Clause 29  provides that the officers and employees of the Authority while
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of the Bill or of any
rule or regulation made thereunder, shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Clause 30 seeks to protect the Authority or any member or any officer
or other employee of the Authority for anything done in good faith or intended
to be done in pursuance of the Bill.
Clause 31 seeks to provide for securing the safe custody and restoration
of any property which while not in proper custody, is found on any premises
belonging to the Authority or under its overall control, subject to such
regulations as the Authority may make in this behalf.

93
Clause 32  lays down the circumstances in which the Authority may be
superseded by the Central Government. The clause further empowers the Central
Government to extend the period of supersession for such further term not
exceeding six months as it may consider necessary.
Clause 33  seeks to empower the Central Government to issue directions
to the Authority on questions of policy and the Authority shall be bound to
comply with such directions.
Clause 34 seeks to provide for making of rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by
the Central Government are enumerated in detail in sub-clause (2) of this clause.
Clause 35  seeks to confer powers on the Authority to make regulations
not inconsistent with this Bill and the rules made thereunder for giving effect to
the provisions of this Bill with the previous approval of the Central Government.
The particular matters with respect to which regulations may be made are
enumerated in sub-clause (2) of this clause.
Clause 36  provides for laying of every rule, regulation and notification
under the Bill, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 37  seeks to empower the Central Government to make orders, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Bill, for removal of any difficulty in
implementation of the provisions of the Bill, within two years from the date of
commencement of the Bill. It further provides that every such order made by
the Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

94
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Land Ports
Authority of India for the development and management of facilities for cross
border movement of passengers and goods at designated points along the
international borders of India and to perform the functions specified in clause 11.
2. Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the payment of additional capital and
loans or grants to the Authority by the Central Government. Payment of
additional capital and loans or grants to the Authority will depend on the future
requirements of the Authority in the context of its development plans. The
expenditure that may have to be incurred by the Central Government from the
Consolidated Fund of India on this account cannot be estimated, at present.
However, on the basis of proposals made in the Eleventh Five Year Plan, an
expenditure of Rs.635 crores is likely to be incurred during the said period on
capital projects to be executed by the Authority.
3. Clause 24 (2) provides that the Central Government may guarantee in
such manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the principal and the payment of
interest thereon with respect to loans taken by the Authority under sub-
section ( 1). While the quantum of liability likely to arise out of such guarantees
cannot be estimated at this stage, the consideration of such guarantees shall be
governed by the provisions of Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act
and Rules and other Government Rules relevant to the subject as applicable from
time to time.
4. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will not involve any
other recurring or non-recurring expenditure.
94

95
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters, with respect to which
rules may be made, have been detailed in sub-clause (2). The matters, inter alia,
relate to the other conditions of service of members of the Authority, period of
notice required to be given by any member to resign his office, the manner in
which the Authority may invest its funds, the form in which the Authority shall
prepare the annual statement of accounts and also the form in which a report
giving an account of its activities shall be prepared and submitted to the Central
Government.
2. Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations not
inconsistent with the Bill and the rules made thereunder, for the purpose of
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill, with the prior approval of the Central
Government. The matters with respect to which the Authority may make
regulations have been detailed in sub-clause (2). The matters, inter alia, relate
to providing for the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the
procedure to be followed for the transaction of business including quorum at
such meetings, the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers and
other employees appointed by the Authority, the contracts which are to be sealed
with the common seal of the Authority and the form and manner in which a
contract may be made by the Authority, the fees and rent to be charged by the
Authority for the services and facilities offered by it, the custody and restoration
of lost property and the terms and conditions under which lost property may be
restored to the persons entitled thereto. Clause 36 provides that every rule and
regulation made or notification issued under the Bill shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made
are essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.
95

96
96
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the Land Ports Authority of India for the development
and management of facilities for cross border movement of passengers and goods at
designated points along the international borders of India and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

97
ANNEXURE-II
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DRSC ON HOME AFFAIRS ON
3RD AND 13TH NOVEMBER 2009; 1ST, 16TH AND 30TH DECEMBER 2009 IN
CONNECTION WITH THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2009
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary
2. Shri Vinay Kumar, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Additional Secretary (BM)
4. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Sadakant, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director
7. Shri L. Vishwanathan, Director
8. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director
9. Shri Anuj Sharma, Director
10. Dr. V . Candavelou, Director
Representative of Intelligence Bureau
Shri Rajiv Mathur, Director
Representatives of Bureau of Immigration (MHA)
1. Shri Arvind Deep, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun Choudhary, Additional Director
Representatives of CPFs
1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF
2. Shri R.K. Medhekar, Special DG, BSF
3. Shri Alexander Daniel, ADG (Ops), BSF
4. Shri Hemant Desai, IG (Ops.), BSF
5. Shri M.V . Krishna Rao, DG, SSB
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Legislative Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
97

98
4. Shri M. Khandelwal, Assistant Legal Officer
5. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
6. Shrimati Akali V . Konghey, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
l. Shri D .R. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary
3. Shri M. Khandelwal, Assistant Legal Officer
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
l. Shrimati Nirupama Rao, Foreign Secretary
2. Shri Y .K. Sinha, Joint Secretary, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran (PAI)
3. Shri Satish C. Mehta, Joint Secretary (North)
4. Shri T.S. Tirumurti, Joint Secretary, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar (BSM)
5. Shri Suresh Kumar Reddy, Director, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar (BSM)
6. Shri Gopal Baglay, Director (PAK)
7. Shri Sanjiv Ranjan, Director (North)
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
l. Shri P. V . Bhide, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Goel, Member, Central Board of Excise and Customs
3. Shri K. Jose Cyriac, Additional Secretary
4. Shri P.S. Pruthi, Commissioner of Customs, Central Board of Excise and Customs
5. Ms. Kameshwari Subramanian, Joint Secretary, Central Board of Excise and Customs
Representatives of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
l. Dr. Rahul Khullar, Commerce Secretary
2. Shri R. Gopalan, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Arvind Mehta, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Bamba, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture
l. Shri Pankaj Kumar, Joint Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
2. Dr. P.S. Chandrurkar, Advisor, Plant Protection, Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation
3. Dr. A.P. Negi, Joint Commissioner, Livestock Health, Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries
Representative of Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Telecommunications)
Shri Subodh Kumar, Additional Secretary

99
Representative of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORTH)
Shri V .L. Patankar, Chief Engineer, Project Implement Cell
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Col. Rupinder Singh, Director (MO)
2. Brig. Rajeshwar Singh, DDG, MO (E)
Representative of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
Shri Rajeev Chaudhary, Executive Director
Representative of RITES
Shri Arun Chaturvedi, General Manager

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.