Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 19th April, 1999) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 22nd April, 1999) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 1999/Chaitra 1921 (Saka)
C O N T E N T S
1. Composition of the Committee (i)-(ii) 
2. Introduction (iii) 
3. Report 1-58
4. *Relevant Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee
 *to be appended at the printing stage
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1998-99)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee Chairman
RAJYA SABHA 
  
 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri
4. Shri H.Hanumanthappa
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh
7. Shri Prafull Goradia
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra
12. Shri Drupad Borgohajan
13. Dr.(Ms.) P. Selvie Das

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
14. * * Dr. Jagannath Mishra
15. · Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
22. Shri Anant Kuma Hegde
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
26. Smt. Meira Kumar
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy
31. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
32. Shri Motilal Vora
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subha
34. Shri Sudhir Giri
35. Shri Samar Choudhury
36. Shri Mohan Singh
37. Shri C, Sreenivaasan
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi
39. Shri Lalu Prasad
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor
41. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi
42. Shri Ramsheth Thakur
43. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
44. # Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-Fourth Report on

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
the Demands for Grants (1999-2000) relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The Committee held in all six sittings to complete the examination of the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry. In its meetings held on the 23rd and 24th March, 1999, the Committee considered the relevant
documents and papers received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and heard the Secretary of the Ministry. In
its meeting held on the 31
st March, 1999 the Committee heard the Commissioner of Police, Delhi on
Demands relating to Delhi Police. In its meeting held on the 7th April, 1999, the Committee heard Directors-
General of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), Border Security Force (BSF) and Central Reserve Police
Force (CRPF) on the Demands relating to their respective forces. The committee again heard the Secretary
in its meeting held on the 8th April, 1999.
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the following:-
(i) Presentations made and clarifications given by the Secretary and other senior
representatives of the Ministry; Commissioner of Police, Delhi and Directors-General
of CISF, BSF and CRPF;
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 1999-2000;
(iii) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 1998-99;
(iv) Performance Budget of the Ministry for the year 1999-2000;
(v) Detailed Explanatory Note on the Demands for Grants for the year 1999-2000;
(vi) Statement showing approved outlays for and the expenditure incurred on Plan
Schemes of the Ministry during the Ninth Plan period (1997-2002);
(vii) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires sent to it by the
Secretariat;
(viii) Written clarifications furnished by the Ministry on points/issues raised by the
Members in the meetings of the Committee; and
(ix) Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in its Forty-third Report on
the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry.
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Report in its sitting held on the 15th April, 1999. 
  
  
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
New Delhi; Chairman
April 15, 1999 Committee on Home Affairs 
  
  
  
 

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
REPORT
 The Ministry of Home Affairs has been entrusted broadly with the following functions;
(a) To deal with all matters relating to internal security;
(b) To deal with all matters relating to Centre-State relations and Inter-State relations;
(c ) Implementation of the provisions of the Constitution relating to Official Language
and the provisions of the Official Language Act, 1963;
(d) To discharge certain basic functions like notification of assumption of office by the
President and the Vice-President; notification of appointment of the Prime Minister and
other Ministers; notification of appointment, resignation and removal of governors and
Lt. Governors, appointment of Lt. Governors, Chief Commissioners and Administrative
Officers in Union Territories;
(e) To deal with matters like citizenship and naturalisation, census of population,
National Anthem, National Flag, etc.; and
(f) To deal with all constitutional provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir and all other matters relating to the State of Jammu and Kashmir excluding
those with which the Ministry of External Affairs is concerned.
2. To discharge the above functions, the Ministry has been divided into five Departments:-
(i) Department of Internal Security – to deal with Police, Law and Order and
rehabilitation;
(ii) Department of States – to deal with Centre-State relations, inter-State relations,
Union Territories and Freedom Fighters’ Pension;
(iii) Department of Official Language – to deal with the implementation of the
provisions of Constitution relating to Official Language and provisions of the Official
Language Act, 1963;
(iv) Department of Home – to deal with notification of assumption of office by the
President and Vice-President, notification of appointment of the Prime Minister and
other Ministers, etc.; and
(v) Department of Jammu and Kashmir Affairs – to deal with all constitutional
provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and all other matters
relating to the State of Jammu and Kashmir excluding those with which the Ministry of
External Affairs is concerned.
3. On behalf of the Ministry, ten Demands have been presented to Parliament.
4. In Vol. I of the Demands for Grants, there are five Demands namely, (I) Demand No. 42 – Ministry of
Home Affairs; (ii) Demand No 43 – Cabinet; (iii) Demand No. 44 – Police; (iv) Demand No. 45 – Other
Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and (v) Demand No. 46 – Transfers to Union Territory
Government.

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
5. Vol. II of the Demands for Grants relates to Union Territories (without Lagislature), namely, Demand No.
99 – Andaman and Nicobar Islands; Demand No. 100 – Chandigarh; Demand No. 101 – Dadra and Nagar
Haveli; Demand No. 102 – Daman and Diu and Demand No. 103 – Lakshadweep. The entire Budget of the
Union Territories (without Legislature) on the Plan as well as Non-Plan side is reflected in the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
6. A Table indicating the Actuals for 1997-98, B.E. 1998-99, R.E. 1998-99 and B.E. 1999-2000 in respect of
various Demands of the Ministry is given below:-
BUDGET
 (Rs. in crores) 
 
     
Demand No. Actuals 1997-98 BE 1998-
99
RE 1998-99 BE 1999-
2000
42 Ministry of
Home Affairs
384.83 453.11 469.09 543.00
43.Cabinet 118.89 140.89 138.74 139.17
44.Police 5636.82 5974.90 6528.15 6970.34
45.Other
Expenditure
of
MHA
656.82 949.70 784.25 728.00
46.Transfer to
UT
Governments
656.58 728.96 761.84 728.96
99.A&N
Island
581.89 677.62 730.00 712.66
100.
Chandigarh
606.03 616.32 721.32 732.64
101 D&N
Haveli
139.38 170.66 188.95 229.03
102.Daman &
Diu
121.63 143.32 156.86 209.06

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
103.
Lakshadweep
143.92 158.85 174.54 185.77
 
Demand No. 42 – Ministry of Home Affairs
7. This Demand mainly includes expenditure relating to the Secretariat, Registrar General of India (Census),
Official Language, Intelligence Bureau, Civil Defence, Home Guards and Payment to State Governments for
administration of Central Acts and Regulations, etc.
Budget ( Rs. In crores)
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E.
1997-98 1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
384.83 453.11 469.09 543.00
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1998.99.
(a) Additional expenditure due to grant of Dearness Allowance;
(b) More expenditure under travel expenses due to revision of TA/DA rates and
increase in fares;
(c ) Additional expenditure on reimbursement claims of the State Government due to
holding of general election to the Lok Sabha and some State Assemblies on account
of deployment of Home Guards and clearance of some pending claims of State
Governments on that account; and
(d) Administration of Central Acts and Regulations
DEMAND NO. 43 – CABINET
8. This Demand includes budget provision for –
(i) Salaries of Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers;
(ii) Expenditure on travel by Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy
Ministers;
(iii) Sumptuary and other allowances of Ministers;
(iv) Expenditure on salaries, travel, office expenses of Cabinet Secretariat;
(v) Expenditure on salaries, travel, office expenses etc. of Prime Minister’s Office;
(vi) Expenditure on Special Protection Group; and
(vii) Expenditure on Government hospitality and entertainment of foreign State guests;
official entertainment arranged at Rashtrapati Bhawan on behalf of the Vice-President
and Prime Minister; reception of National Days, investiture and presentation of

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
credential ceremonies etc.
Budget (Rs. In crores)
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E.
1997-98 1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
118.89 140.89 138.74 139.17
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1998-99
Less Expenditure under capital works of Special Protection Group
DEMAND NO. 44– POLICE
9. This Demand relates to expenditure on CRPF; NSG; BSF; ITBP; CISF; Assam Rifles, Education, Training
and Research; Criminal Investigation and Vigilance; Inter-State Police Wireless Scheme; Special Police;
Modernisation of Police Force; Crime, Criminal Information System; Delhi Police; Construction of Residential
Accommodation and Office Buildings for Police, Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pak border works, etc.
Budget (Rs. In crores)
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E.
1997-98 1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
5636.82 5974.90 6528.15 6970.34
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1998-99.
(a) Additional expenditure due to grant of additional Dearness Allowance;
(b) Payment of Detachment Allowance, TA/DA at revised rates and increase in rail/air
fares;
(c) Sanction of ration money to the non-gazetted police personnel of Delhi Police w.e.f.
1.4.98 and revision in the rates of ration money;
(d) Purchase of more arms and ammunitions by the Central Para Military Forces for
making additional grant assistance to J&K and North Eastern States for meeting their
security related expenditure;
(e) More reimbursement to the Ministry of Defence in respect of J&K Light Infantry due
to grant of dearness allowance, purchase of more ordance stores, etc; and
(f) More expenditure under Welfare Grant for CPMFs due to increase in the rates of
the ex-gratia payments to the force personnel who died in the performance of their
duties.
DEMAND NO. 45 – OTHER EXPENDITURE OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
10. This Demand includes expenditure relating to various relief and rehabitlitation schemes/programmes,
pension and other benefits to freedom fighters, schemes of North-Eastern region, modernisation of prison

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
administration, and Debt Relief Scheme for borrowers in J&K etc.
Budget (Rs. In crores)
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E.
1997-98 1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
656.82 949.70 784.25 943.00
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1998-99.
a. Less expenditures under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Schemes;
b. Revision to the lower side of the Plan Outlay of the North Eastern Council;
(c ) Lesser provision for Debt Relief Schemes for Borrowers in J&K.
DEMAND NO. 46 – TRANSFERS TO UNION TERRITORY GOVERNMENTS
11. This Demand covers assistance provided to Union Territories (with Legislature in the form of Grants and
Loans. There are two such Union Territories, namely, Pondicherry and NCT of Delhi.
Budget (Rs. In crores)
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E.
1997-98 1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
625.58 728.96 761.84 728.96 
  
 
DEMAND NUMBERS 99, 100, 101, 102 AND 103 – UNION TERRITORIES (WITHOUT LEGISLATURE)
Budget (Rs. In crores)
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E.
1997-98 1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
1592.85 1766.77 1971.67 2069.16
12. Demand Nos. 99, 100, 101, 102 and 103 which are given in Volume-II of the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Home Affairs, relate to Union Territories (without Legislature), namely Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep respectively. The entire budget
of the Union Territories (without Legislature) on the Plan as well as Non-Plan side is reflected in the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry. Though the budget of these Union Territories forms part of the Ministry
of Home Affairs, being the nodal Ministry, it, however, does not dilute the responsibilities of the Ministries of
the Central Government for scrutinising and sanctioning the schemes under their purview. The factual
position regarding budgetary procedure in this regard is that the entire budget requirement for Plan and Non-
Plan, revised estimates for current year and Non-Plan budget estimates for the ensuing year is discussed by
the Ministry of Finance in the pre-budget meetings with the representatives of the concerned Union

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
Territories and Ministry of Home Affairs. An overall ceiling is fixed in respect of each Union Territory. Annual
Plan allocations for the ensuing year are decided by the Planning Commission. The Union Territory
Administrations, prepare budgetary break-up showing budget provisions according to their respective
budgetary heads and also showing the allocation against Ministries/Departments of the Central Government
administratively concerned. This budgetary break-up is included in the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Home Affairs.
Presentation on Demands for Grants (1999-2000
)
13. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Ministry in its meeting held on the 23rd
March, 1999. At the outset, the Financial Advisor attached to the Ministry made a presentation on the
Budget of the Ministry. The presentation included major additionalities in the BE-1999-2000 over RE-
1998-99 in each of the Demands of the Ministry; Grant-wise expenditure incurred by the Ministry under
each of the Demand upto February, 1999; important decisions taken by the Ministry during the year
1998-99 and Action Taken by the Ministry on observations/recommendations of the Committee as
contained in its 43
rd Report on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry.
14. With regard to the important decisions taken in respect of Jammu & Kashmir; the Financial Advisor
stated that the provision for reimbursement of Security Related Expenditure incurred by the State in
fighting militancy which was enhanced to Rs.273 crs. in 1998-99 has further been raised to Rs.295
crores in B.E. 1999-2000; monthly allowances to the families which migrated from the State in the wake
of militancy there has been raised to Rs.2500 from Rs.1500 w.e.f. April, 1999 and a three year Action
Plan to tackle militancy in the State has been formulated. In respect of Action Plan for the State he
enumerated the various features of the Plan which included –
(i) Curbing infiltration
(ii) Countering militancy in hinterland
(iii) Protection of minorities
(iv) Greater interaction with border population
(v) Enhancing intelligence capabilities
(vi) Countering overground secessionist forces
(vii) Greater functional integration between Security Forces, Police & Intelligence
agencies.
(viii) Technology upgradation for security forces & J&K Police; and
(ix) Constitution of Operations & Intelligence Groups.
15. In respect of important decisions taken during 1998-99 for North-Eastern region the Financial Advisor
apprised the Committee that a proposal was moved for creation of a separate Department for the region,
namely, Department of North-East. It was also decided to reimburse Security Related Expenditures incurred
by Assam, Nagaland, Manipur and Tripura w.e.f. April 1, 1995 and a provision of Rs.100 crores for the year
1999-2000 has been kept for the purpose. Further, under Special Scheme for modernisation of Police
Forces, in kind, Rs.11.00 crores were spent during the year 1998-99, which has been enhanced to the level
of Rs. 65 crores this year. Other important decisions taken during the year included - introduction of
helicopter services in the States of Sikkim and Meghalaya w.e.f. 31.10.1998 and 15.2.1999 respectively,
making provision for rehabilitation & maintenance of migrants in Assam, Manipur and Tripura and relaxion of

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
Restricted Area Permit (RAP) and Prohibited Area Permit (PAP) for the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim
and Manipur to boost tourism there.
16. Apart from J& K and North-East, important decisions which were taken in other areas, included ---
(i) Enhanced financial powers delegated to DGs of CPMFs for procurement of
ration/other items, grant of cash rewards and condemnation of vehicles on maturity
and their replacement;
(ii) Introduction of light weight and high performance 5.56 mm weapons in the CPMFs
for enhancing their combat capability;
(iii) Token provision of Rs.5.00 crores kept in B.E. 1999-2000 for the proposed
National Identity Card Scheme;
(iv) Reimbursement of SRE to States affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE),
proposed to be introduced from the year 1999-2000; and
(v) Providing assistance to the Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal &
Sikkim to raise Special Task Forces of their respective State Police to patrol the Indo-
Nepal Border to curb anti-national activities.
17. The important decisions which were taken during the year 1998-99 in respect of Delhi Police included –
(i) Sanction of 17 new Police Stations;
(II) Sanction of UHF Trunked Radio Digital System for Police Control Room /PCR
Vans;
(iii) Sanction of ration money for non-Gazetted Police personnel at par with the
personnel of equal status of CPMFs;
(iv) Modernisation of Police Training College;
(v) Purchase of 300 Motor Cycles for introduction of Motorised Beat Patrolling.
18. The Financial Advisor also apprised the Committee about the status of Indo-Pak and Indo-Bangladesh
Border Projects. On the Indo-Pak Border, he submitted that the fencing and flood lighting on the Punjab
Border had been completed. On the Rajasthan Border, the entire fencing and flood lighting had been
completed except that in the ‘Shahgarh Bulge’ in Jailsalmer district which was scheduled for completion by
December, 1999. On the Gujarat front fencing/flood lighting has recently been taken up from Rajasthan side
which is expected to be completed in five years. On the Jammu & Kashmir border "CAT Wing"
fencing/lighting has been proposed for installation in the Jammu sector. Regarding Indo-Bangladesh Border
Project, the Financial Advisor stated that while most of the work of construction of roads and fencing under
Phase I has been completed, the work under Phase II has been approved by HLEC and would be completed
by year 2007 subject to approval of Cabinet Committee on Security.
19. The Committee, thereafter, heard the Home Secretary on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry, who
devoted a major portion of his presentation on the internal security situation, left wing extremism, insurgency,
ethnic conflicts in the North-East, communal violence, caste clashes and other extremist/terrorist activities in
the country. He stated that during last year Ministry had taken initiatives in anticipating these problems and
preventing/containing them. These initiatives have payed positive results. The overall internal security
situation in the country has shown some improvement in the last year over the previous year, he claimed.

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
20. Regarding the State of Jammu & Kashmir, the Secretary apprised the Committee that there was a
sense of optimism in the State. The number of incidents in the year 1998 has declined as compared to
those in the year 1997. There had also been a decline in the number of persons killed in 1998 as
compared to those killed in 1997. The number of militants killed in the year 1998 was higher as against
those killed in the previous year. The situation in Srinagar has vastly improved. In 1998, nearly one lakh
tourists visited the State as against 7,000 the previous year. Nearly 1.5 lakh pilgrims participated in the
Amarnath Yatra in 1998. The Republic Day functions were held throughout the State with great pomp
and grandeur and these were free from violence. The local recruitment of militant outfits for exfiltration
or for sabotaging the market places or other installations within the State has sharply declined. The
local people are coming forward to support and cooperate with the security forces he added. However,
the situation is still difficult in certain other ways. The militants are attacking Hindu minorities in isolated
places and are trying to extend the garb of militancy to other areas of the State. There is nothing to
indicate that Pakistan Army or the Pak ISI have decided to follow the spirit of the Lahore Declaration or
the spirit that has been unanimously sponsored and supported by Members of Parliament in India and
Members of various sections within Pakistan itself. The Secretary further apprised the Committee that
the Government of India was extending all assistance to modernise the State Police Force. There was
better coordination between the Security Forces and the State Police. Everything was being done to
keep the morale of the State Police very high. The Secretary went on to state that 12,855 Special
Police Officers had been appointed and Village Defence Committees had been set up in the State. He
further stated that the people of the State were tired and disillusioned with militancy. It was therefore,
necessary to accelerate the pace of development process so that they may benefit from the fruits of
democracy and development in the State. The Ministry has been impressing upon the State
Government to involve local people in development programmes he stated. There was also a need to
further strengthen the forces in the State. The proposed Panchayat Elections which were going to take
place this year after a gap of more than 20 years would be a landmark, he added. They would facilitate
accelerating the pace of rural employment generation and infrastructure development work in villages
like construction of roads, construction of schools, irrigation channels, health centres, handlooms and
so on.
21. Regarding insurgency situation in North East, the Secretary submitted that the overall situation in the
North East had shown signs of improvement in certain areas. There has been a decline in the total number of
killings as also the total number of incidents in the affected States. In some of these States, the insurgency
has deteriorated in terms of ideology but it persists in some kind of a cottage industry for kidnapping and
demanding money by way of extortions purely for private gains, he added. In Nagaland, the cease-fire has by
and large helped the process of peace. Some progress has been made with regard to talks between the
Government and the NSCN(IM) leadership. The other groups are also willing to have talks with the
Government of India. However, the level of extortion by these outlawed elements has increased and has
created hardships to officials, businessmen and general public, and this has also meant the continued
diversion of development funds to the insurgent outfits. The situation in Tripura has not improved. It is mainly
directed by outlawed militant groups in the form of attacks on non-tribals, lootings, extortions, kidnappings,
ransoms, highway robberies and attacks on trucks and vehicles. The Government of India is very keen for
initiating dialogue between the insurgent tribals and the Government, the Secretary stated. But, this is
possible when the security forces are in command of the situation and the insurgent elements come to
realise that there is no other way but to go for dialogue, he stated. In Manipur, the overall violence involving
the Naga and Kuki extremists as also ethnic groups has shown a slight decline. Peace has been attained in
the State as a result of signing of an MOU between Kukis and Zomis on 26
th March, 1998. In Assam, the
ULFA menace is on the decline, but the tensions on account of the role of National Democratic Front of
Bodoland (NDFB) and Bodo Liberation Tiger (BLT) continues. There have been frequent clashes last year
between the Bodos and the Santhals which resulted in the killing of 191 persons. In Mizoram clashes have
taken placed between the Mizos and Reangs, resulting in exodus of large number of Reangs from Mizoram

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
to Tripura and Assam. These Reangs need to be repatriated back to Mizoram, the Secretary stated.
22. With regard to the menace of Left Wing extremism in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Orissa, the Secretary stated that to tackle the problem effectively a `Coordination
Centre’ had been set up which comprises Union Home Secretary as its Chairman and the Chief Secretaries
and Directors General of the concerned States as members. Under this scheme, Action Plans have been
prepared by each State and now there is greater degree of intelligence co-ordination between them. The
setting up of this `Co-ordination Centre’ has yielded positive results, he stated.
23. On the communal front, the Secretary apprised the Committee that the situation was vitiated on account
of tension between Hindus and Christians. There were incidents directed against the Christian community in
Jhabua in M.P., and Dang, Surat and Valsad in Gujarat. He stated that the Government of India had taken
measures to deal with the situation appropriately and the State Governments had been impressed upon to
make the District Magistrates and the Superintendents of Police personally responsible for any incident of
such nature. A commission of inquiry, headed by a judge of the Supreme Court had been instituted after the
grusome murder of Dr. Graham Stewart Stains and his two minor children, he stated.
24. On the caste front, the Secretary stated that three States namely, Tamil Nadu, Bihar and U.P. are facing
difficulties.
25. The Secretary also informed the Committee that the Ministry had recently initiated action for raising of 26
Bns. of B.S.F., I.T.B.P. and CRPF. He expressed his concern over persistent dependance on Army in dealing
with militancy and insurgency in some parts of the country.
26. Regarding modernisation of the Police Forces in the North Eastern region, the Secretary stated that it
had been decided by the Chief Secretaries and DGPs of the North-Eastern States to approach their
respective State Government so that they could earmark 10% of the total budget or 20% of the non-plan
budget for police every year. 25 percent of that money would be earmarked for police stations, housing and
matter related thereto. There was a need to take similar steps in Jammu and Kashmir, he stated.
27. The Secretary also informed the Committee that this year seven India Reserve Bns., two each for Bihar,
J&K and Tamil Nadu and one for Nagaland had been sanctioned. He further stated that while the ex-gratia
payment in case of death of CPMF personnel in action against enemy had been raised from Rs.2 lakh to
Rs.7.5 lakh, it had been raised from Rs.2 lakh to Rs.5 lakh in case of death in act of violence by terrorists or
anti-social elements.
28. Regarding fencing/flood lighting/construction of roads on the Indo-Pak and Indo-Bangaldesh border, the
Secretary informed that while work on the former had made good progress, it was somewhat slow in case of
the latter. He stated that the Ministry was endeavouring to ensure that the first phase of this Project be
completed by year 2001 and the second be completed by the year 2007. He stated that completion of this
project will greatly help in checking illegal influx of Bangaldesh nationals into India.
29. The Secretary, thereafter, informed the Committee about proposal of the Ministry for introduction of a
`National Identity Card’ for every Indian citizen. A `Person of Indian Origin Card’ (PIO Card) is also being
introduced by the Ministry which will give the card holder freedom from taking visa for a period of six months
at a time. It would also give them certain educational, cultural and property rights, he submitted.
Activities of Pak ISI on Indo-Nepal Border
30. The Committee in its 43rd Report on the Demands for Grants 1998-99 of the Ministry had expressed its
concern over the increasing activities of Pak ISI on the Indo-Nepal Border in recent time. It had noted that not
only funds flow through this route but also unwanted elements were intruding through this route. The

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
Committee had urged the Government to take appropriate action so that the onging disruptive activities of ISI
could be curbed. The Committee had also recommended that patrolling on the borders also needed to be
intensified.
31. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note on the observation of the Committee has apprised that there is
excellent cooperation between various agencies in India and Nepal and the two countries have constituted a
Joint Working Group for monitoring the activities of terrorists and other undesirable elements across the Indo-
Nepal Border. Further, the Government of Uttar Pradesh has constituted a Special Task Force headed by an
Additional Director-General of Police to maintain special vigil on its border with Nepal. This Task Force has
been introduced with the objective of preventing smuggling of consumer goods, weapons, narcotic
substances, explosive substances and keeping an eye on controlling trans-border activities of anti-national
elements, illegal and anti-national organisations and institutions and also to collect operational intelligence
and launch various operations and drives in this regard. This Task Force has proved effective to some extent
in curtailing illegal and undesirable activities there. The Ministry has also submitted that our relationship with
His Majesty’s Government of Nepal was based on Treaty of Peace & Friendship which was signed on 31
st
July, 1950. The Treaty provides for free movement of citizens of both the countries through the Indo-Nepal
Border. The major portion of the border runs along the densely populated Terrai area, a region where the
trans-border population is linked with shared history, language, culture, religion and economic interest.
Keeping this in view, no Central Forces have been deployed on the Indo-Nepal border. Owing to the said
provisions in the Treaty and absence of any physical barriers, the control on Indo-Nepal border is, therefore,
exercised through the State Police.
32. In reply to a query whether the Treaty of Peace and Friendship with Nepal bars Government of India in
deploying Para Military Forces on its border with that country, the Ministry has replied that there was no bar
for such deployment under the Treaty. However, in view of India’s traditional friendly and special relationship
with Nepal, it was not considered advisable to deploy CPMFs on the borders with it. The Committee was also
apprised that the activities of certain agencies on the border, which were inimical to interests of the country
had been brought to the Notice of Government of Nepal and they had been requested to make efforts to
discourage such activities. Such diplomatic efforts would continue to be made. The Government of India has
also separately advised the State Governments of U.P., Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim to upgrade policing
along the Indo-Nepal Border. The Government of India has assured financial assistance to these States in
this task.
33. The Committee notes the diplomatic efforts being made by the Government of India with
Government of Nepal in sensitizing that country about the evil designs of Pak ISI directed towards
India and for taking necessary action in the matter. The Committee also notes the efforts being made
by Government of U.P. in constituting a Special Task Force to curb the illegal and anti India activities
on its border with Nepal. The Committee also appreciates the stand of Government of India in
extending financial support to the States bordering Nepal in upgrading policing along the borders.
The Committee, however, does not feel convinced with the reason put forth by the Ministry in not
deploying Central Forces along the Indo-Nepal Borders. The Committee acknowledges the
importance of India’s friendly and special relationship with Nepal and feels that they need to be
strengthened further. But, it does not feel convinced that only because of this friendship we should
hesitate in deploying our Central Forces to assist the Police Forces of States bordering Nepal in their
effort to check activities of elements which are inimical to the interests of our country. It strongly
feels that our friendship with Nepal should not become our weakness in not feeling confident for
deploying our forces on the borders and thereby to be exploited by others for anti-India activities .
The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to examine this issue from different angles
with an objective to make the border completely sealed for those who do not want to see India strong
and united.

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
Deputation Quota for IPS in BSF and CRPF
34. The Committee in its 43rd Report had expressed its concern over the persistence of vacancies to be
filledn up by IPS officers on deputation at various levels in BSF and CRPF. The Committee had noted that
these posts remain vacant due to reluctance shown by IPS officers in joining them. The Committee had
therefore urged the Government that in order to ensure that these forces do not suffer adversely due to non-
filling of these posts in large number, some remedy needed to be evolved on an urgent basis. The
Committee in this regard had suggested to increase quota of cadre officers at various levels of posts
especially at the DIG level.
35. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note on the recommendation of the Committee has submitted that all out
efforts have been made to make available services of IPS officers to BSF and CRPF. Though officers are
approved for appointment in these forces, but most of them did not join. The Ministry has further submitted
that on account of this experience, an amendment in the IPS (Cadre) Rules, 1954, has been suggested to
make posting of IPS officers mandatory on central deputation. The proposed amendment is under reference
to Department of Personnel and Training and Ministry of Law for their views. The situation would improve
once the proposed amendment is made to the Rules.
36. In reply to a point relating to current IPS deputation quota vacancy position at various levels of BSF and
CRPF, the Committee has been informed that out of twenty posts in BSF, earmarked for IPS officers of DIG
level, only one post is presently filled and cases of two IPS officers are under consideration. Twelve out of
these twenty posts have temporarily been diverted to promotion quota and BSF cadre officers are holding
them. The Committee was also informed that these twenty posts constitute 40% of the total sanctioned
strength of DIGs and this percentage was fixed by Government in the year 1989.
37. The position of vacant posts meant for IPS deputation quota in CRPF is more dismal. The Committee
was informed that ten posts at the DIG level were currently lying vacant of which three posts have been
temporarily diverted to cadre officers. At the level of Deputy Commandant and Commandant, fifty-eight and
sixty-nine posts, respectively, are presently lying vacant and all these posts have been filled by cadre
officers. The Committee was further informed that for the last many years, 100% of the posts of Deputy
Commandant and two I/C and all posts except one or two at the level of commandants are being filled by
promotions of cadre officers. The Committee also noted that the percentage of posts at the DIG level from
IPS officers was last revised in the year 1986, while there is no change in the percentage fixed for them at
the level of commandant and Deputy Commandant since 1970. It has been suggested by CRPF that posts
upto commandant level should be filled up by promotion. It has also been informed to the Committee that
after receipt of the 5
th Pay Commission’s report, a cadre restructuring exercise is being undertaken and
revision in percentage fixed for IPS deputation quota at various levels will be looked into.
38. The Committee is perturbed to note that inspite of making comprehensive recommendation on
the subject as contained in its 43
rd Report, there has been no improvement in the filling-up of
vacancies meant for officers of the IPS cadre at the level of Deputy Commandant, Commandant
and DIG in CRPF and at DIG level in BSF. IPS officers continue to show their reluctance in
joining these posts. The Committee fails to understand the wisdom in keeping posts at the
Deputy Commandant and Commandant level for IPS officers on deputation in CRPF when for
the last many years not a single IPS officer has joined at this level against the prescribed quota.
Filling up of only one post out of twenty posts earmarked for IPS officers at DIG level by such
officers in BSF also puts a question mark to the proportion of percentage so fixed. Similar is the
situation in case of CRPF. The Committee feels that there is merit in the suggestion put forth by
CRPF that all posts upto Commandant level should be filled up by promotion of the cadre
officers. The suggestion also gathers weight in view of the fact that for about last thirty years
the quota so fixed has not been revised. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
its Forty-third report for making an examination to increase the quota of cadre officers in these
forces at the DIG level. The Committee also urges upon the Government that in order to
enhance the promotional avenues of cadre officers and thereby boosting their morale, an
indepth examination may be made to suitably increase the quota of these officers at the I.G.
level from their present level of 33 1/3 %. The Committee also feels that even in case of I.G. level
posts, if vacancies earmarked for IPS deputation quota are not filled up within three months,
they should be dereserved and diverted to the promotee quota for promotion to eligible cadre
officers. The Committee at the same time supports the proposal of the Ministry to make
amendment in the IPS (Cadre) Rules, 1954, so as to make posting of IPS officers at the centre
mandatory. The Committee strongly feels that such an amendment will definitely help these
forces in getting services of IPS officers which happens to be so valuable for them.
Raising of Flying hours for ITBP
39. The Committee in its 43rd report had urged the Government to pursue the matter with the Ministry of
Defence for increasing the quantum of flying hours allotted to ITBP from the current level of 215 hours to 336
hours. The Committee had also recommended that the demand of ITBP for excluding the flying hours taken
for casualty evacuation from forward posts from the allotted hours should be agreed to with immediate effect.
40. The Committee had made these recommendations in view of the high altitudes ranging from 9000 to
18,000 feet above sea level at which the ITBP personnel have to perform duties. The area of operation of
ITBP are located in hazardous mountainous terrain having hostile weather conditions with temperature
dipping to minus 40 degree centigrade. During winter, these terrain becomes inaccessible. Further, out of the
81 forward posts on Indo-Tibetan Border, 25 posts are seasonal and withdrawn before the onset of snow fall.
41. On a query about response of the Defence Ministry to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has informed that the response of the Ministry of Defence has not been received so far. Regarding
exclusion of casualty evacuation hours from the total flying hours allotted, it has been informed to the
Committee that the demand had been made to the Defence Ministry several times earlier also but has not
been agreed to by it.
42. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. It however reiterates its recommendation for
raising the quantum of allotted flying hours to ITBP from the current level of 215 hours to 336
hours and excluding from it hours taken for casualty evacuation. The Committee impresses
upon the Government to approach the Ministry of Defence again for a sympathetic
consideration of the Demand of ITBP.
Kailash Mansarovar Yatra
43. It had been recommended by the Committee in its 43rd Report that suitable grant may be provided to
ITBP for shouldering the responsibility of selecting yatris for Kailash Mansarovar Yatra, conducting their
medical examination and taking care of them upto our border with China. The recommendation was made by
the Committee in the background that though ITBP has been asked to perform this duty in addition to its
charter of duties, no special grant for the purpose has been allocated to it and it has to meet expenses for
performing this duty out of its own welfare fund.
44. In reply to query about Government’s response to the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry
has submitted that the entire expenditure on the Kailash Mansarovar Yatra is borne by Ministry of External
Affairs and ITBP only provides logistic support for which the expenditure is met from the sanctioned budget
grant of the Force from time to time.
45. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. It, however, not feels convinced with it. It feels that

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
if an additional responsibility has been placed on ITBP, it should also be matched with adequate
financial support so that the Force is not placed under undue hardship. There seems to be no point
in meeting this additional expenditure out of the normal grant made available to ITBP. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation for making suitable financial provision in
the Budget of ITBP for performing the task of facilitating the Kailash Mansarovar Yatris in completing
their pilgrimage.
Increasing dependence of State Governments on CPMFs
46. It has been observed that of late the dependence of State Governments, all over, on the Central Para
Military Forces in dealing with difficult situations arising on the law and order front has increased significantly.
The Committee while considering Demands for Grants of the Ministry deliberated on this issue and noted that
though the subjects `Public Order’ and `Police’ falls under entry `1’ and `2’ respectively, of the `State List’ of
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, making thereby the State Governments primarily responsible for
maintenance of the law and order in their respective States, yet, it has been experienced in recent years that
their dependence on CPMFs for maintaining general law and order in their respective States has increased
significantly. Whenever any incident of serious proportion takes place, the concerned State Government take
the stand that the incident occurred because of inadequate presence of the Para Military Forces. The CPMFs
are called by the State Governments even for holding elections to the Panchayats or local bodies.
47. This changing trend over the years has given rise to a situation of dichotomy wherein while on the one
hand the State Governments tend to demand more and more power and autonomy, on the other hand they
appear to be prepared very inadequately to perform their one of the most primary duties of maintaining law
and order and peace and normalcy in their respective State. On every incident of minor or major proportion
they tend to seek help of the central police forces, which only throw poor light on the preparedness of their
police forces in dealing with adverse situations. Maintenance of law and order being the primary
responsibility of the State Governments, every effort should have to be made by them to strengthen and
modernise their respective police force. It becomes more necessary because of the hard truth that even if
union government provide adequate number of central forces to the State having problem on the law and
order front, they can be effective only to a certain extent and can not root out the problem. This limitation of
central forces is because of the fact that they do not have policing powers and they have to perform under
civil authorities. Therefore, under the present situation only the State police, for having policing powers can
be effective if it is adequately trained and modernised.
48. In this context, the Committee has also noted that the increasing dependence of State Governments on
CPMFs has also put these forces under lot of stress and strain. Due to persistent demands of State
Governments these forces are over deployed which leave no room for the training, rest and recuperation of
their personnel. The excessive commitment of forces over a prolonged period also adversely affect the
welfare activities needed to take care of their physical and psychological needs. This extensive deployment
also affect their efficiency and operational preparedness.
49. The Committee has noted from the papers/documents submitted to it that during the years 1995, 1996,
1997, 1998 and 1999 (upto 15.3.1999), the deployment of CRPF was to the extent of 94%, 94.3%, 98.2%,
97.66% and 98% respectively. The Rapid Action Force (RAF) which was originally raised out of CRPF to
deal with the problems of communal violence, has also been over deployed. This heavy dependence of State
Governments on the central forces have also resulted in aberration of their duties. The increasing
dependence has also compelled central forces to withdraw Bns. from their primary roles and deploy them to
perform duties which are of secondary nature in its charter of duties. In this regard the Committee has noted
with concern that the Border Security Force (BSF) whose primary role is to guard our borders with the
neighbouring countries, has withdrawn its 21 Bns. from borders and has put them on internal security duty to
fulfil the requirements of State Governments. Not only this, but 19 out of 22 Reserve Bns. of BSF have also
been deployed on internal security duty. This diversion of BSF Bns. from its primary role has got telling

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
effects on the training, standard of efficiency, time for rest/relief/recupertion and availability of reserves.
50. In this context the Committee has observed that the Government of India is providing assistance to the
State Governments from quite some time in the form of cash as well as kind. Under the scheme of
modernisation of Police Forces, the Central Government is providing financial assistance to State
Governments since 1969-70 in the form of 50% grant-in-aid and 50% loan to be utilised for expenditure of
non-recurring nature on purchase of vehicles, wireless equipments, computers and other sophisticated
equipment. The Committee is pleased to note that in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee,
the allocation under this scheme has been increased to Rs.100 crores from the level of Rs.50 crores. The
increased component of allocation i.e. Rs.50 crores is proposed to be kept for release as "Special
Allocations" to the States affected by militancy/insurgency/extremism etc. or for any special scheme of the
State Government. The amount under this scheme will also be released on 50:50 Grant:Loan basis. The
Committee has also noted that in addition to this scheme of modernisation of Police, a special scheme for
modernisation of Police Forces in kind has been formulated for the North-Eastern States. The total estimated
expenditure under this scheme is Rs.284.93 crores which includes Rs.35.63 crores already spent during the
year 1997-98. The items/equipments to be supplied under the scheme include arms and ammunitions,
vehicles communication equipments and other essential items. This scheme is a 100% centrally assisted
scheme. There is also a scheme for raising India Reserve (IR) Bns. under which the State Governments are
given entire cost of raising the IR Bns. which are patterned on the lines of CRPF. These Bns. have better
quality of manpower with higher level of training and are provided with more sophisticated arms and
equipment than the normal State Police Forces. Over and above these schemes, the Central Government is
also reimbursing Security Related Expenditure (SRE) to the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Assam, Manipur,
Nagaland and Tripura. The Scheme has also been extended recently on recommendation of the Committee
to the States effected by Left Wing extremism namely – Andhra Pradesh, Maharshtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa and Bihar, who will be reimbursed 50% of their Security Related Expenditure. Further, the Committee
has also noted that considering the need for modernisation of Police Telecommunication in the country and
to provide end-to-end connectivity from national capital to State Capitals, Range/District Head Quarters to the
Police Stations with Voice, Data and Fax facilities, "POLNET" Project based on the state-of-the-art satellite
technology has been taken up recently by the Ministry. The Project will involve hiring of a Satellite
Transponder from the Department of Telecommunications, installation of One Earth Station (HUB) in New
Delhi and 833 Very Small Aperture Terminals (V-SATs) at State Capitals/District Headquarters/Central Para
Military Forces’ (CPMFs) locations to provide for direct communication with each other on
VOICE/DATA/FAX. 40 V-SAT Terminals are proposed to be of higher capacity (3.8 M Antenna) to be located
at the Capitals of each State/UT and other important locations like MHA, NCRB, etc. The remaining 793 V-
SAT Terminals of lower capacity (1.8/2.4 M Antenna) are to be installed at each District Headquarters and
the selected locations of the Central Para-Military Forces, i.e.; the Border Security Force (BSF), Central
Reserve Police Force (CRPF), Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
and the Assam Rifles (AR). The connectivity from the District Headquarters to Police Stations/Police Posts
will be extended through local Radio network using Multi-Access Radio Telephone (MART) System.
51. The Committee in view of the facts mentioned above feels that the Central Government is trying
to extend on its part every possible help within the available resources to the State Governments in
modernising their police forces and also to enable them in meeting expenses incurred in fighting
with insurgency/militancy/Left Wing extremism etc. The taking up of the POLNET project will be a
boon for police forces all over the country in performing their assigned role effectively and
efficiently. However, the Committee at the same time also feels that there is an urgent necessity on
part of State Governments to pay more attention on their respective police forces so that they may
shoulder the responsibility assigned to them more efficiently.
52. The Committee during deliberation on the issue also mooted an idea that in view of the increasing
dependence of State Governments on CPMFs and also keeping the fact in mind that the CPMFs do

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
not possess policing powers and thereby feel handicap, whether it would not be appropriate to grant
them policing powers so that they become more effective in dealing with the situations for which
they have been called for. Considering the importance and sensitivity of the issue and also in view of
the statutory amendments required to give effect to the proposition, the Committee decided to form a
small Group out of its members to discuss the matter in detail and also to interact with the Chief
Secretaries and Directors-General of Police of different States besides obtaining opinion of the
Government of India, to arrive at a logical conclusion.
Representation of Local M.P. in the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh
53. The Committee in its 37th Report on the Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry had recommended
that the Member of Parliament from Chandigarh should have a representation in the Municipal Corporation of
Chandigarh. The Committee had reiterated this recommendation in its 43rd report on the Demands for Grants
(1998-99) of the Ministry.
54. The issue was again raised in the meeting of the Committee held on 23rd March, 1999, during
consideration of the Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry. The Ministry in its reply on the subject
has submitted that the establishment of Municipalities in the country is governed by provisions contained in
Part IXA of the Constitution of India. In accordance with Article 243R, all the seats in a Municipality shall be
filled by persons chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area, provided
that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the representation in a Municipality, inter-alia, of the
member of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area. However, Article 243 ZB empowers the
President to direct that the provisions of the said part shall apply to any Union Territory or part thereof subject
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify.
55. The Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh was set up under an Ordinance issued by the Central
Government in May, 1994 which was later replaced by "The Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to
Chandigarh) Act, 1994". It was under the said Act that "the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976" as
amended by the State Government in May, 1994 was extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh with
some modifications considered essential to cater to the special characteristics of Chandigarh. One of the
important modifications made related to the composition of the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation. It was
decided that the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation shall consists of:-
i. twenty members to be directly elected, representing wards; and
ii. nine members with voting rights to be nominated by the Administrator, from amongst the persons
who are eminent or distinguished in public affairs or those who have special knowledge or
practical experience in respect of municipal administration.
56. It is significant to note that the Punjab law also does not provide any representation for a local member of
Parliament in its Municipal Corporations. The Punjab law relating to establishment of a Municipality within the
State was therefore extended to Chandigarh in a manner so as not to strike a discordant note with the parent
Act applicable in rest of Punjab.
57. The Ministry has further stated that in pursuance of the recommendation made by the Committee in its
43
rd Report, the matter was examined and the Ministry of Law was requested to advise whether it was
mandatory on the Government in terms of provisions contained in Article 243R of the Constitution to
provide for representation of the Member of Lok Sabha elected from Chandigarh in the Chandigarh
Municipal Corporation. The advice tendered was that it was not mandatory in terms of the said
provision for the Central Government to provide for the said representation. Nevertheless, the matter
has been reconsidered and the following proposals have been submitted to the Government for its

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
consideration:-
The Administrator may be asked to nominate the M.P. of Lok Sabha from Chandigarh as one of
the members of the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation as provided in section 4(3)(ii) of the
Punjab Municipal Corporation Law, 1976 as extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh;
Or
_ to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 as extended to the Union
Territory of Chandigarh providing specifically for the representation of the M.P., Lok
Sabha in the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation through a Parliamentary Legislation
after obtaining the approval of the Cabinet.
58. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry and hopes that an early decision on the
proposals of the Ministry would be taken by the Government to ensure representation of the local
M.P. in the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh. The Committee also urges upon the Ministry that it
may be apprised of the progress of the case from time to time.
Reservation Benefits to Scheduled Castes Residing in Chandigarh
59. While discussing the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry, the Committee had deliberated on
the issue of non availability of reservation benefits to the members of the Scheduled Caste Community who
migrated to Chandigarh after 1.11.1996. The Committee in its 43
rd Report had expressed its dissatisfaction
with the views of the Ministry in the matter. The Ministry had, however, assured to take up the matter again
with the concerned Ministries so that the issue could be resolved. The Committee had hoped that necessary
steps would be taken by Government to ensure that the members of scheduled castes communities who
migrated to Chandigarh after 1.11.1996 be provided reservation benefits.
60. The issue again came up in the meeting of the Committee held on the 23
rd March, 1999. Explaining the
matter the Ministry has submitted that in accordance with provisions contained in Article 341 of the
Constitution of India, the President may with respect to any State or Union Territory specify the castes, races
or tribes which shall for the purpose of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that
State or Union Territory, as the case may be. The castes so specified under the Presidential Notification
relate to the State or Union Territory concerned and not to other States or Union Territories. This position has
been upheld by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Pradeep Jain Vs. Union
of India.
61. The Ministry of Home Affairs has accordingly laid down in its letter No.35/1/72-RU (SCTV) dated the 2
nd
May, 1975 that where a person migrates from one State to another, he can claim to belong to a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe only in relation to the State to which he originally belonged and not in respect of
State he had migrated. It has been further clarified in the Ministry of Home Affairs’ letter No. BC 12055/2/76-
SCT(1) dated 22
nd March, 1977 that the inter-state area restrictions have been deliberately imposed so that
the people belonging to the specific community residing in a specific area, which has been assessed to
qualify for the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe status, only benefit from the facilities provided for them.
62. The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Pradeep Jain Vs. Union of India has
clearly stated that merely because a given caste is specified in State A as a Scheduled Caste does not
necessarily mean that if there be any caste bearing the same nomenclature in another State, a person
belonging to the former would be entitled to the rights, privileges and benefits admissible to a member of the
Scheduled Caste of the latter State. The said ruling was given by the Supreme Court of India in the

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
background of Dr. Ambedkar having stated in answer to a question put to him in the course of debates in
Parliament that "a member of a Scheduled Tribe going outside the scheduled area or tribal area would
certainly not be entitled to carry with him the privileges that he is entitled to when he is residing in a
scheduled area or in a tribal area.
63. The Ministry further submitted that the issue whether a person who belongs to a Scheduled Caste in the
State of his origin on migration to Chandigarh after 1
st November, 1966 (the date on which Presidential
notification in respect of the Union Territory of Chandigarh was issued) is entitled to carry the benefit and
privilege of being a member of Scheduled Caste in case the same Caste is included in the list of notified
castes in respect of Chandigarh also was nonetheless specifically referred to Ministry of Law for advice. The
Ministry of Law has opined that where a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste in the State of his origin has
migrated to Chandigarh after 1.11.1966, he is not entitled to carry the benefit and privilege of being a
member of Scheduled Caste even if the same caste is included in the notification in respect of Chandigarh.
This legal advice is based on the judgements of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Action Committee Vs.
Union of India (1994 5 S.C.C. 244) and in Marri Chandra Shekhar Rao Vs. Dean Seth G.S. Medical College,
(1990 3 S.C.C. 130).
64. The Ministry pointed that it is therefore clear that in accordance with existing constitutional scheme, a
member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe who migrates from a State in which he was specified to be
a member of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be, can not carry with him the rights,
privileges and benefits if he migrates to another State or a Union Territory. The Ministry, however, submitted
that it cannot at the same time be over-looked that the said provision does act harshly against the interests of
those members of Scheduled Castes who migrated for permanent residence to Chandigarh after the
notification of the Presidential Order specifying the list of Scheduled Castes in respect of the Union Territory
of Chandigarh was issued. The Ministry informed the Committee that the Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment, which is the nodal Ministry for this purpose, has indicated that the issue of extending the
privileges and benefits of reservation to SC/ST migrants is under consideration of the Government along with
similar cases received from other States/Union Territories in the context of comprehensive revision of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes lists.
65. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. It hopes that Government would be able
to arrive at a judicious decision soon. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry that it may be
apprised of the progress of the consideration of the subject from time to time. 
  
  
Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969 As extended to Union Territory of Chandigarh
66. The Committee while considering the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry had deliberated on
the issue of repealing the `Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969’ as extended to the Union
Territory of Chandigarh in August, 1971 and replacing it with the `Punjab Privately Managed Recognised
Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979’. The Committee was informed on the issue by the
Ministry that while Section 87 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 empower the Union Government to
extend with such restrictions or modifications as it thinks fit to the Union Territory of Chandigarh, it does not
give power to it to repeal any enactment which is in force in the Union Territory of Chandigarh. Such a repeal
could be done only by a law of Parliament. The Ministry had also informed the Committee that the matter has
been referred for appropriate action to the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Education), being the Ministry concerned with the subject matter. The Committee in its 43
rd report had
expressed the hope that appropriate action would be taken in the matter.
67. The issue was again discussed by the Committee in its meeting held on the 23rd March, 1999. Some

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
members expressed unhappiness over tardy progress in the matter.
68. The Ministry in a detailed reply informed the Committee that section 87 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act,
1966 provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend with such
restrictions or modifications as it thinks fit, to the Union Territory of Chandigarh any enactment which is in
force in a State at the date of the notification".
69. In exercise of the powers conferred by section 87 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, the Central
Government extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh, the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service)
Act, 1969, as was in force in the State of Punjab. The State of Punjab enacted a new law on the subject
known as "The Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979".
This Act also repealed the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969 in the State of Punjab.
70. The Chandigarh Administration examined the matter in view of the new law enacted in Punjab and
recommended the repeal of the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969, as in force in the
Union Territory of Chandigarh and simultaneously to have the Punjab Private Managed Recognised Schools
(Security of Service) Act, 1979 extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh in terms of section 87 of the
Punjab Reogranisation Act, 1966.
71. The matter was examined in the Ministry and it was felt that whereas section 87 of the Punjab
Reorganisation Act, 1966 empowers the Central Government to extend, with such restrictions or
modifications as it thinks fit, to the Union Territory of Chandigarh, any enactment which is in force in a State
at the date of the notification, it does not confer on the Central Government any power to repeal such an
extended law by an executive order and that it would therefore be necessary to have the Punjab Aided
Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969, repealed through a Parliamentary legislation before extending to the
Union Territory of Chandigarh the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools (Security of Service) Act,
1979. The Committee was informed that since the subject-matter of secondary education is alloted to the
Department of Education, that Department was requested to process the matter further for repealing the
1969 Act and its substitution by the 1979 Act through a Parliamentary legislation.
72. In order to have the matter expedited in pursuance of the reocmmendation made on the subject by the
Committee in its 43
rd Report, a meeting with the Officers of the Department of Education was convened on
the 17th August, 1998 in which the representatives of that Department agreed to process the matter further
after the Chandigarh Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs furnished certain clarification as regards the
scope of the 1979 Act proposed to be extended to the Union Territory along with a draft Bill. The Chandigarh
Administration was accordingly advised to furnish the requisite clarifications along with a draft "Bill" and the
same were received in November, 1998. A self-contained proposal containing the comments of Ministry of
Home Affairs was forwarded to the Department of Education on the 11
th December, 1998 alongwith a draft
Bill on the subject.
73. The Department of Education informed the Ministry in March, 1999 that the matter had been examined in
consultation with the Ministry of Law and that the Legislative Department in that Ministry had opined that the
purpose could be achieved by superseding the earlier notification (under which 1969 Act had been extended)
by issue of a fresh notification for extension of 1979 Act. A draft notification for extending the 1979 Act was
accordingly prepared and forwarded to the Ministry of Law on 18
th March, 1999 for vetting from legal angle.
The proposal was, however, returned by the Ministry of Law on 30th March, 1999 with the observation that
the 1979 Act could not be extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh unless the existing Act of 1969 was
repealed through a Parliamentary Legislation.
74. The above advice of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, however, does not appear to be
correct in view of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, which reads as under:-

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
"21. Power to issue, to include power to add to, amend, vary or rescind notifications, orders, rules
or bye-laws, - where, by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to issue notifications, orders,
rules or bye-laws is conferred, then that power includes a power, exercisable in the like manner
and subject to the like sanction and conditions, if any, to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued."
75. The Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, therefore, are being requested to reconsider the
matter and clear and vet the draft notification for repeal of the existing Punjab Aided Schools (Security of
Service) Act, 1969 and extension of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security
of Service) Act, 1979 to the Union Territory of Chandigarh by a notification.
76. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. It hopes that the Ministry of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs will arrive at a decision soon regarding appropriate legal way for repealing the
Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969 and extending in its place the Punjab Privately
Managed Recognised Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1979 to the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
The Committee also hopes that the concerned Ministry would take necessary action for repealing and
extending the two Acts soon after getting informed by the Ministry of Law about the correct legal
procedure to be followed in the matter. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry that it may be
apprised of the progress of the case from time to time.
SCHEME FOR RESETTLEMENT OF KASHMIRI MIGRANTS IN KASHMIR
77. In the meeting of the Committee held on 23
rd March, 1999, the issue of Kashmiris who migrated from the
valley to different parts of the country in the wake of militancy in the State was raised. Members regretted
that lakhs of such migrants are living in inhuman conditions in different parts of the country. While
Government is making claims that the situation in the State has improved, no effort is seems to be made for
early return of these migrants, some of whom want to go back to their native places. There should be some
concrete plan for the purpose and funds should be made available in the budget for implementing such plan.
78. The Ministry in this regard has apprised the Committee that Government is conscious of the fact that
return of Kashmiri migrants to their homes would signify restoration of complete normalcy. Accordingly, no
permanent rehabilitation of migrants at any other place has been envisaged. The Ministry has been
constantly urging the State Government to work out a detailed Action Plan.
79. In response to this , the Government of J&K has informed that the matter of safe and honourable return
of migrants to their native places in the valley is of top-most priority for the State Government and that the
Government is drawing a detailed plan in this regard. As the matter has to be dealt on politico-economic
basis, finalisation of this plan is likely to take some time. It has also been intimated by the State Government
that a Social Interaction Programme was started under which groups of migrants visited their native Districts
in the valley. This programme was launched with a view to enable the migrants to meet the members of the
majority community and their old neighbours and interact with them.
80. The Ministry further submitted that it has been in constant touch with the State Government regarding
finalisation of the Action Plan. The State Government in a letter dated 8.6.1998 has intimated that they have
constituted a Sub-Committee of Ministers comprising Ministers for Revenue, Law, Finance and Tourism
under orders of the State Cabinet to examine the whole issue and make recommendations thereon. The
Ministry has requested the State Government to ensure that the exercise is completed at the earliest. As and
when the Action Plan is finalised, necessary financial assistance would be provided either by re-appropriation
or placing the requirement in RE.
81. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. It strongly feels that the issue of
Kashmiri migrants is of significant importance and deserve utmost attention. It feels sorry for the

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
plight of these migrants who are facing all kinds of problems and living in miserable conditions due
to the proxy war unleashed by Pakistan in Kashmir. Of their no fault they were forced to leave their
homes and properties in their native places. The Committee feels that it is of urgent necessity that
these migrants return to their home land, but at the same, it should be ensured that conditions are
conducive enough there to make them lead peaceful and honourable life. The Committee in this
regard appreciates the Social Interaction Programme started by the Government of J&K under which
groups of migrants visit their native districts in the valley to meet with the people living in the vicinity
of their residence and interact with them. The Committee feels that this programme will definitely
help these migrants in judging the present situation in their native places and in deciding whether
conditions have improved enough for having a safe return. The Committee hopes that the State
Government will be able to expedite preparation of a comprehensive Action Plan for rehabilitation of
these migrants in Kashmir. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to extend every possible help to
the State Government as soon as the Action Plan as prepared by it is received in the Ministry.
DELHI POLICE
82. The Committee in its meeting held on the 31st March, 1999, considered the Demands for Grants of Delhi
Police and heard Commissioner of Police on the funds allocated to it, performance of Delhi Police during the
year and the support, if any, Delhi Police require from the Committee.
83. The Commissioner of Police in his presentation informed the Committee that as per census figures the
population of Delhi now stood at 1.3 crores. However, according to voters’ figure, it is more than 1.6 crores.
Everyday more than ten lakh people come or go by trains in Delhi, and more than 20,000 passengers come
to Delhi by air. Every ten years, the city of Delhi multiplies itself by one-and-a-half times. Though this city has
the highest per capita income, the number of people living below the poverty line is about 17 lakhs. This
underlines the difference in the economic status of people living in Delhi the Commissioner explained. He
further stated that the persons in the age-group of 15-25, which is supposed to be more vulnerable to crime,
and who committ most of the crimes are more than 20 per cent in Delhi, which is highest in the country. The
Commissioner submitted that the performance of Delhi Police should be judged against this background.
84. The Commissioner of Police further informed the Committee that if the number of crimes committed
during the first three months of year 1999 were compared with those of the last three months of year
1998, then it can be observed that almost under every head the crime had come down. This is not a
common feature to occur. The Commissioner stated that it is, however, true that certain sensational
cases have taken place and Delhi Police has not been able to work them out. In this connection he
narrated certain impediments which the police was experiencing. He, however, assured that every
effort is being made to solve them and nab the culprit. He stated that Delhi Police has significantly
higher detection of crime percentage with comparison to the All India average. After the Committee’s
recommendation made in its 43
rd Report 17 Police Stations have been sanctioned. The recruitment has
also been done and the candidates selected are under training. At present, we have been able to post
there only about 40% to 50% of the sanctioned strength. As office building for these Police Stations are
not currently available, they are functioning from make-shift shelters. It will take some time to provide
regular buildings. The Commissioner recalled that in the last presentation also he had suggested about
a study may be done on Delhi Police to find out whether its functioning is all right, what is expected of it,
whether its sanctioned strength is adequate to fulfil its obligations or not. Delhi Police has been able to
get two reliable agencies to conduct this study. One is the Tata Consultancy Services and the other is
Arthur and Aderson, who are supposed to be experts in man-power studies. They have submitted their
project reports and these would be submitted to the Government of India for consideration. The
Committee requests that early action should be taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the suggestion
made by the Delhi Police for this study.
85. The Commissioner opined that the sanction of police stations should be on the basis of future

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
requirements, after taking into consideration growth rate of the city, setting up of new colonies and
industrial estates etc. If planned so, it would help Delhi Police in utilising the sanction as soon as it is
received by it, because activities like acquisition of land, recruitment of personnel etc. take time. He
stated that Delhi Police has been working under very heavy pressure to give excellent performance. On
the level of satisfaction in providing dwelling units to its personnel, the Commissioner stated that the
situation was very unsatisfactory and currently only about 19 per cent of the total police personnel have
been provided houses.
86. The Commissioner further stated that about 1,20,000 cases concerning Delhi Police are currently
pending in courts and almost 20,000 cases are added every year, he stated. The prosecution of cases
in the courts takes place at very slow pace because in many cases witnesses do not come forward to
depose before the courts. The dehumanizing level in Delhi is very high and is one of the reasons for
many heinous crimes. Delhi Police is trying to convince the residents for forming resident associations.
Some resources are available with them. It is dovetailing the resources available with public with police
resources to provide them better security. A beginning has been made but it is not as satisfactory as it
should be. ‘Thana Committees’ are also functioning and he hoped that with their help and efforts, Delhi
Police would be able to force some kind of community feeling into them.
87. The Additional Commissioner of Police (Traffic) then made a presentation before the Committee on
situation of traffic on Delhi roads. She said that the number of vehicles in Delhi has increased significantly
and presently there are 32 lakh vehicles. But, the road space has not grown correspondingly. There is
congestion in many areas of the city. In the walled city, it has been estimated that during peak hours the
average speed of a vehicle is 6.1 kilometers per hour. Added to this is the problem that drivers are normally
not trained prior to coming on the roads. The training as well as testing of drivers before licensing is almost
non-existent. About 1500 driving licences are being issued on a daily basis, but we don’t have the facilities in
the city for their training or their proper testing, she stated. There is, therefore, the necessity of having some
sort of Government controlled training institutions, under the Traffic Police or any other institution where
training and testing of drivers before their coming on the roads become possible. In the absence of
education, prior to licensing, traffic police have to rely on prosecution to educate. The challanning amount
needed to be raised suitably because the current level of challan of Rs.100 hardly makes a difference in a
city like Delhi. Traffic Police has also made a proposal for raising the quantum of fine to the level existed in
other cities of the country. In fact, a special punitive fine in a city like, Delhi is needed, she submitted. To
ensure optimum utilisation of the road space modern technology is required to be brought in she added. A
pilot project in this respect has been approved for the Central business District of Delhi which includes
Cannaught Place.
88. The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by Commissioner of Police for having
prospective planning for sanction of new police stations. It feels that with the increase in population
and other criminogenic factors, there has to be regular review of the strength of Delhi Police as per
norms accepted by Government. When new colonies come up, there should be a system of automatic
increase in the police strength. It feels that such planning may be made at least two years in advance
for sanction of the manpower as well as setting up of Police Stations/Police Posts, because finding
location of a site for Police Station and construction of buildings takes considerable time. The
Committee notes that this point is evident from the recent sanctioning of 17 Police Stations. The
whole process has begun much after the growing of colonies where these stations have been set up.
These police stations are currently functioning with 50% of their sanctioned strength which is made
available to them from the existing strength of Delhi Police, which thereby must also have affected
the functioning of Police Stations from where they have been withdrawn. The full new batch will likely
to be made available to it for performing duties only by the end of year 1999-2000.
89. The Committee also notes from the presentation of Commissioner of Police that Government of
India is contemplating to engage and expert body to study about the functioning and component of

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
additionality to the existing strength of Delhi Police. The Committee is in full agreement with such a
study to be conducted by an expert body. In this connection it notes that on an earlier occasion also,
a Committee was set up by Government of India under the Chairmanship of S.D. Srivastava. This
Committee had recommended along with other recommendations criteria for setting up of police
stations in Delhi. As per recommendation of this Committee to be effective, a police station has to be
a compact unit and the population in the jurisdiction of it should not exceed 75,000 and the incidence
of crime it is expected to deal with in a year should not be more than 500. The Committee had further
recommended that when population under jurisdiction of any Police Station exceeds one lakh and/or
when the number of crime in a year exceeds 750, bifurcation of the police station should be
considered. Further to ensure proper organisation and supervision of beats, the Committee
recommended that jurisdiction of the police station even in a semi urban or rural area in Delhi should
not be more than 20 kms. In densely populated area, the area would be much less.
90. The Committee has noted from the papers submitted to it that there should have been 165 police
station in Delhi as per Srivastava Committee. However, the total number of police stations which
Delhi currently has is only 122. The Committee in this background feels that when a Committee or an
expert body is set up for examining a particular issue, the recommendations made by it should be
given due consideration and action taken accordingly. The Committee is not aware whether these
recommendations of the Committee were accepted by Government or not and if accepted why there
is such a large gap between the required and existing number of police stations in Delhi.
91. The Committee also notes from the evidence of the Commissioner that housing for Delhi Police
personnel is another sector where the situation is quite unsatisfactory . From the information
submitted to it, the Committee notes that the satisfaction level in Type-II, III, IV and V quarters are
only 19.80%, 10.50%, 12.02% and 85.29% respectively. This makes the overall satisfaction level at
18.29%. In this context, the Committee notes with concern that one of the reasons for this low
satisfaction level is the underutilisation of funds allocated for construction of residential houses. Out
of total amount allocated at the BE stage for the years 1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97 and 1997-98 there
was a saving to the tune of Rs.9.91 crores. The Committee feels that if that amount could have been
utilised, the position would have definitely been much better. Further, it notes that in R.E. 1999-2000,
due to increase in allocation for construction of office buildings, the allocation for residential
buildings has been reduced to Rs.23.70 crores. The Committee feels that making available dwelling
units for its personnel is very crucial for any force to keep their morale high. The Committee,
therefore, urges upon the Government to suitably raise the allocation under this head at the RE
stage. The various reasons for non utilisation of fund allocated for construction of residential
quarters, which have been put forth by Delhi Police include multiplicity of authority and slow
progress of work by PWD. The Committee in this context has noted that in the year 1998-99, Delhi
Police has purchased 250 ready built flats from DDA. The Committee feels that it is a good option to
purchase ready built flats than to surrender funds. The Committee also feels that the situation could
be improved if a Police Housing Corporation on the lines of similar Police Housing Corporation in
other States be constituted for Delhi. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to examine the
feasibility of setting up of such Housing Corporation for Delhi Police.
92. The Committee notes the various measures taken by the Police Commissioner for maintaining
law and order in the capital city and fully supports the endeavour of Delhi Police in seeking
cooperation of general public in maintaining peace and prevention of crime in the capital as
highlighted by the Commissioner in his presentation. The Committee feels that Commissioner of Police
is doing a good job despite heavy odds. The Committee wanted to know the various steps taken by Delhi
Police in soliciting cooperation of general public for the purpose. The Committee has been informed that
following steps have been taken to solicit cooperation of general public:-

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
i. District Level Committees/Thana Level Committees have been constituted in every District/Police
Station to promote interaction between police and public of its respective areas.
ii. "Neighbourhood Watch Scheme" is functioning in some of the localities wherein vigilant members
of the public have been organising themselves to ensure area security under the police guidance.
iii. "Crime Watch Scheme" has been revived. Under this scheme anyone can pass on information to
police regarding crime/criminals without disclosing his/her identity.
iv. "Helpline Scheme" for women in distress is functioning since June 3
rd 1997 and a separate
telephone line has been earmarked in Police Control Room to receive the calls.
v. "Senior Citizen Scheme" has also been launched under which the area beat constable has been
issued directions to contact the aged persons living alone in his beat and to take all steps for their
protection besides give them assistance in their small errands.
vi. To help the victims of vehicular accidents and to seek public cooperation, the police has been
directed not to put any question to the person who brings the victim to hospital, against his will.
vii. PCR Vans are providing assistance to the passengers of brake-down vehicles at odd hours and
help the stranded passengers to reach their destination.
viii. Regular interaction takes place between the Police and Resident Welfare Associations/Market
Associations.
ix. Special Police Officers are nominated from the public to help/interact with the Local Police.
x. It is emphasised upon every police officer/man to maintain human dignity and to protect "human
rights" of every citizen while dealing with them.
xi. From time to time service oriented activities such as de-addiction camps, blood donation camps
and juvenile aid camps etc. are organised by Delhi Police.
93. The Committee acknowledges the importance of these schemes and feels that if sincere efforts
are made by Delhi Police for involving larger section of society in cooperating with it, the situation on
the law and order front and curbing the incidents of crimes can be improved significantly. For this,
the Committee feels that the public need to be informed/educated about these schemes and the
electronic and print media can play a big role in achieving this. While the task of ensuring peace and
law and order primarily is the task of police, but the active cooperation of citizens is very vital and
Committee hopes that the citizens of Delhi will extend all cooperation.
94. The Committee also acknowledges the importance of having training institutions for imparting
driving skills to persons who want to have driving licences. The Committee strongly feels that if such
institutions are established, the number of accidents on roads can be reduced to a large extent.
Keeping in view the fact that almost 1500 driving licences are issued every day, it will definitely
require large infrastructure for imparting training to the licence seekers. The Committee urges upon
the Ministry to take appropriate action in the matter.
95. The Committee in its 43
rd Report on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry had noted that the
casualty rate in road accidents in Delhi was very high and thousands of persons die every year in such
accidents. In many cases accident victims die due to non-availibility of immediate medical first-aid. The
Committee had felt that if a rudimentary knowledge of medical first aid was made mandatory for acquiring
driving licence then in the event of road accidents the driver/owner of the vehicle can render valuable aid, to
the victim and many lives could be saved. The Committee, therefore, urged upon the Ministry to take
necessary action in the matter and make knowledge of medical first aid compulsory for all persons holding
driving licenses.
96. In its comments on the recommendation of the Committee, Delhi Police has stated that it endorses the
views of the Committee to make working knowledge of medical first aid compulsory for acquiring driving
licenses. The Ministry, in its comments on the recommendation has stated that the powers to issue driving
licenses are vested with the Transport Department of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. The

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
recommendation of the Committee has accordingly been forwarded to the Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi, which has stated in its reaction that making knowledge of medical first aid prerequisite for
grant of driving licenses would require to be examined from the point whether required infrastructure for
imparting training in the first aid is available, as on an average over 20,000 licenses are issued or renewed
every month.
97. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. It however, impresses upon the Ministry
to pursue the matter with Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi as the knowledge of
medical first aid to drivers can prove to be a boon for the victim of a road accident.
98. In reply to a point whether activities of Pak ISI have been felt in Delhi, the Committee has been informed
by Delhi Police that it is a fact that militants from Punjab and J&K aided by Pak ISI are active in Delhi. These
militants belong to Hizbul Muzahideen, Jammu & Kashmir Islamic Front, Tehrik-Ul-Muzahideen, Al-Umar-
Muzahideen, Lashkar-e-Toiba, Harkat Ul Ansar, Ikhwan Ul Musalmeen, Al Jehad, Al Umar, Jammu &
Kashmir Liberation Front, Khalistan Zindabad Force, Khalistan Commando Force and Babbar Khalasa
International of Punjab.
99. The Committee was also informed about the number of Punjab and J&K militants arrested in Delhi from
1996 till date, the details of which are given below:-
Year Arrests
1996 64
1997 17
1998 15
1999 01
Total 97
100. Delhi Police further informed the Committee that to frustrate the evil designs of these militant outfits
following steps have been taken by it:-
(i) Guards are provided to the VVIPs/PPs;
(ii) Routes of the VVIPs are covered adequately by deploying plain clothes/armed
police personnel;
(iii) Spotters are deployed at the place of functions to be attended by the VVIPs/PPs;
(iv) Anti-sabotage checks are got conducted;
i. Field intelligence Officers have been briefed to keep a watch on suspected persons and checking
of Gurdwaras and Mosques;
ii. Checking at bus stop and the running buses either starting from ISBT/Old Delhi Railway Station
or going towards these points has been under-taken to detect any suspected persons;
 
 
iii. Close co-ordination is being maintained with the Central and State Intelligence agencies;

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
iv. Checking of suspected guest houses/hide outs is being done;
 
 
v. The verification of new tenants has been undertaken by the District Police in their respective
areas; and
vi. Checking is done of the suspicious vehicles.
101. The Committee, in view of the fact that Delhi is the city where there is Parliament House, State
Legislature, President, Chief Minister, Supreme Court, High Court, diplomatic zones and continuous
movement of VVIPs, expresses its concern over the presence of hard core militants from Punjab and
J&K who are getting support from the Pak I.S.I. The Committee also notes the various steps taken by
Government. It also notes, as evident from the figures given above that the number of militants
surrendered during the previous years show a declining trend, yet it strongly feels that the measures
taken to avoid any untoward incident need to be continued. Delhi being the capital city of the
country, any incident, minor or major, attract attention of the media world over. It is therefore very
essential that we keep our security agencies and intelligence network alert and geared up to the
maximum extent. In this context, the Committee notes that to give a fillip to the city’s communication
network, the Government of India has recently accorded sanction for purchase and installation of a
modern UHF Digital Trunked Radio System for improving the patrol van operations in the NCT Delhi
as the existing conventional wireless network has various drawbacks such as (I) no multiple call is
possible (ii) data communication but only voice communication alone, is possible (iii) it is prone to
noise and jamming (iv) selective calling, privacy, automatic number identification (ANI) and
conferencing are not available (v) suppression of ongoing communication for transmission is not
possible, and (vi) unscrupulous use cannot be tracked down.
102. The Committee hopes that Delhi Police will be able to derive desired benefits from this
sophisticated system.
HOUSING FOR CPMFs
103. The issue of Housing for CPMF personnel has been drawing attention of the Committee from quite
some time. The Committee, in view of the fact that CPMF personnel have to perform duties in remote and
inhospitable areas and housing facility is having very critical importance for the morale of these forces, has
made several recommendations in its earlier reports (No. 15
th, 32nd, 37th and 43rd) on the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry. These recommendations include raising the level of allocation for this activity, raising
the level of authorised satisfaction in the case of constabulary from the existing 14% to 25% and need to
involve agencies other than CPWD to construct houses for these forces. The third recommendation was
made by the Committee in light of the fact that the allocations for constructing dwelling units for CPMFs were
not getting fully utilised due to infrastructure constraints and thin presence of CPWD, which is the only
agency authorised by rules to construct these quarters. The disturbed law and order situation along with
climatic conditions have also affected construction activities in places like J&K and North-East.
104 With regard to engaging agencies other than CPWD for constructing residential houses for CPMF
personnel, the Ministry has stated that implementation of this recommendation of the Committee would
require relaxation/amendment to GFR 136. To get this relaxation the Ministry has been approaching the
Department of Finance since November, 1996, which has informed it vide
 its letter dated 8.9.97 that the
proposal has been opposed by the Department of Urban Affairs and employment. The Finance Ministry then
took up the matter with the Committee of Secretaries, who suggested it to examine the matter in consultation
with Department of Urban Affairs and Employment. The matter is currently being considered. The Ministry

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
has, however, informed the Committee that in isolated cases it has been allowed relaxion from the Ministry of
Finance. The Ministry has further submitted that with a view to speeding up of construction and ensuring full
utilisation of the funds, periodical reviews are conducted by it with CPWD and CPMF authorities. CPMFs
have also been specifically instructed to continuously monitor the construction programmes. The CPWD is
also giving priority to the construction activities of the Central Para Military Forces. It is expected that the 9
th
Plan allocation for housing for Central Para Military Forces will be met fully.
105 The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. It is of the considered view that while it
is desirable to enhance the allocation made for construction of dwelling units for CPMFs, it is also
required to ensure at the same time that whatever allocation has been made are fully utilised. The
Committee in this regard noted that during the last Five Year Plan, out of the total allocation of Rs.
130.00 crores under this head only Rs. 91.91 crores could be spent. The Committee, therefore,
impresses upon the Ministry to pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance for obtaining a general
relaxation under GFR 136 for being able to engage agencies other than CPWD for construction of
residential quarters for CPMFs. The Committee hopes that with periodical reviews of the construction
work by the Ministry with CPWD and CPMFs it will be able to ensure better utilisation of the allocated
amount.
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (CISF)
106 The Director General, CISF in his presentation before the Committee on 7th April, 1999 informed that
CISF was made an armed force of the Union of India on 15th June, 1983. The role of CISF is to protect and
safeguard Industrial Undertakings owned by the Central Government together with such other installations as
specitied to be vital by the Government which includes state Government Undertakings and its employees.
The CISF has also been performing the all important role of Internal Security duties and Election duties as
and when called upon by the Government, although the same is beyond the purview of the CISF Act. The
CISF is a force of over 94,000 sanctioned strength.
PERSONNEL POLICES FOLLOWED IN CISF
107. Several Members raised the issue of discriminatory personnel policies being followed in CISF. The force
has been following the Personnel Polices in line with those of Para Military forces officers of the gazetted
ranks starting from the rank of Assistant Commandant, filled through promotion from the rank of Inspector,
absorption of security officers from PSUs, reemployment of Ex-army officers and direct recruitment through
Civil Services Examination. The post of AC was a group ‘B’ post and was elevated to the status of a group ‘A’
post in 1987-88. The direct recruitment at the level of group ‘A’ started from Civil Services Examination 1987.
The rank structure of the force at Group ‘A’ level is as under:-
AC
Deputy Commandant
Commandant
DIG
IG
DG
108. In addition to promotion a provision for deputation exists at all these levels. Besides, Ex-army officers
are also given lateral entry into the force at the levels above the Assistant Commandants. Provision for

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
deputation widen as we move from AC to DG with the latter being filled exclusively by deputation.
  
 
SERVICE CONDITIONS VIS-À-VIS GROUP ‘A’ CIVIL SERVICES
109 As per the V Central Pay Commission Report – chapter 48, the following attributes characterise a group
‘A’ Civil Services, recruited through the Civil Services Examination:-
(i) Highest Cadre Post is not below the level of 5900-6700;
(ii) It has all the standard grades namely 2200-4000; 3000-4500; 3700-5000; 4500-
5700; and 5900-6700;
i. Total 50% of the vacancies in Junior Time scale (2200-4000) are required to be filled by direct
recruitment;
(iv) All vacancies above Junior Time scale and upto Senior Administrative Grade
(5900-6700) are filled by promotion from the next lower grade.
110. As per the report officers joining a Central Group ‘A’ Civil Service have certain expectations from these
services in terms of going up the ladder through different stages of the heararchy within a reasonable period
of time.
111. Career planning in all group ‘A’ Civil Services follow these broad parameters. Broady, the new entrants
in all group ‘A’ services are assured of promotions to Senior Time scale around 4
th to 5th year of service and
J.A.G. by 9th year of service. They assure selection grade in 14th year and SAG after 17th year, with some
minor directions depending upon the steepness of the cadre pyramid of the services.
112. All these services also undergo periodical cadre reviews (roughly once every 3-5 years) aimed at
providing reasonable promotional avenues to the cadre officers.
Scales indicated in para 109 are pre-revised scales.
113. With the upgradation of post of AC of group ‘A’, the service rules of CISF were amended in 1988,
however, the Committee observed that the new rules framed for CISF were no way near the guidelines
mentioned above. In the new rules no provisions for Time scale were made. Further the direct recruits at
entry level remained at 30% and the eligibility period for promotions were considerably enhanced.
Deputations also continued at all levels.
114. Contrary to DOPT norms the seniority of direct recruits were placed below those of all other officers
every year. These irregular practices continued ever since, with there being no cadre review since 1988.
115. In reply to a query, the CISF has claimed that deployment for internal secutiry, election duty and VIP
duties is as per order of Ministry of Home Affairs under provisions of the Article 355 of the Constitution read
with Section 7 and 10 of CISF Act. The force having been constituted only for the better protection and
security of industrial undertakings and employees therein as envisaged in the preamble of the CiSF Act,
1968 (Act No. 50 of 1968) does not include performance of internal security duties, VIP and election duties
by the force. Section 7 of the Act only mentions that the superintendence of the force rests with the Central
Government and subject to such superintendence and the provisions of the Act the command, supervision
and administration of the force rests with the DG.

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
116. Thirdly administration of the force within local limits has also been vested in the other supervisory
officers.
117. Section 10 mentions the duties of member of force which, includes obeying and executing promptly all
orders lawfully issued by superior authorities, to protect and safeguard the industrial undertakings, the
employees therein and to do any other act conducive to the better protection of industrial undertakings and
employees therein.
118. These sections do not confer adequate powers on Central Government to use the force for the
purposes other than security and protection of the industry and its employees. It also fails to show how a
force trained specifically for protection of industrial undertakings and employees therein can be suitably
trained for these duties which, are outside its structure of duties, except in a generalised way.
119. The Committee has found the reply of CISF with regard to deployment of forces on IS duties
evasive. A perusal of CISF Act and Rules clearly proves that the deployment for internal security
duties are outside its charter of duties. The fact cannot be denied that CISF as a Para Military Force
meant for secutity of industrial undertaking is being pulled out of some PSUs to carry out duties like
Internal Security etc. thereby naturally affecting the security of these undertakings.
120. The Committee takes very strong exception of the evasive, incorrect and misleading replies
furnished by the CISF with regard to the cadre policies like ROTA QUOTA etc. While the CISF has
admitted to the existence of ROTA QUOTA System in CISF, it has evaded answers of other aspects
raised in the question. The contention that seniority of direct officers is not affected by the ROTA
QUOTA System, and that they are placed on top of the seniority list appear to be misleading and
factually incorrect. A perusal of the seniority list with reference to the year of vacancy in case of
promotees and year of examiniation in case of direct recruits clearly shows the placement of five
promotees, one optee (opned from PSU security service) and one ex-army (reemployed) above a
group of 3 direct officers, in a group of 10 officers. The factual position is thus a total contradiction of
the stand taken by CISF.
121. Contrary to the experience of various Group ‘A’ Services, it is observed that in CISF which is
also a Group ‘A’ Service, a Group ‘C’ level has been the feeder category to Group ‘A’, as Group ‘C’
officials get promotions directly to Group ‘A’. Further, existing Group ‘B’ officers of CISF were also
upgraded to Group ‘A’ retrospectively enmasse when the CISF itself was upgraded to Group ‘A’.
ROTA QUOTA System also envisages first – 5 positions in the seniority list for promotee officers. The
Committee thus fails to understand as to how the career prospects of direct officers is not seriously
disadvantaged, when promotee officers have been given priority over direct recruits, over the years.
122. The Committee also notes that the faulty policies and no cadre review since 1988, the direct
Group ‘A’ officers of CISF get a raw deal vis-à-vis the other Group ‘A’ services like IPS, RPF etc.
selected through the same exam. A mere comparision with scales as submitted by the CISF clearly
indicates the casual approach to the significance of rank in the legitimate career aspirations of these
young officers.
123. The CISF has also enlisted a list of proposals for amendment with an aim at improving the career
prospects of cadre officers. The Committee observes that the proposed promotions and their time period are
at variance with other Group ‘A’ Civil Services. The CISF also proposes to introduce the concept of
Residency Period in each rank which is not in existence in a majority of the Group ‘A’ Civil Services. Further,
the Committee having been apprised of the stagnation of the direct officers (having rendered 8-9 years of
service and yet to get even one promotion) it fails to see how these prospects can be effected in a need
based force. With the CISF facing mounting dues from 21 major PSUs and withdrawal from them being

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
imminent, the possibility of having vacancies in the existing set up appear to be limited. Already the direct
officers as seen in the paragraphs above have been placed unfairly in their seniority. These
recommendations/proposals by CISF thus appear to be faultering on the point of actual implementation and
as to whether they will really make a difference to the plight of the young Group ‘A’ entrant of the force.
124. The new proposals thus appear to be an eyewash as along with the delayed promotions (vis-à-vis
Group ‘A’ Services) and the residency periods envisaged – the service conditions are bound to deteriorate.
The CISF has in its reply indicated that there have been no shrinkage of vacancies in any rank. However,
with list of 21 major PSUs having dues greater than 322 crores and withdrawals from them imminent, the
Committee fails to see how the posts will remain unaffected.
125. The Committee takes note of the fact that on the ground of parity of all Group ‘A’ Services, officers
allotted CISF were subjected to negative restrictions in the subsequent attempts in Civil Services as per Civil
Services Examination Rules. However, the fact that there are glaring discrepancies between the other Group
‘A’ Civil Services and the CISF is also not hidden from the Committee. Haphazard cadre governing policies
like distorted from of ROTA QUOTA being operational in CISF, Group ‘C’ as a feeder to Group ‘A’ Service,
new clauses in the proposals proposed for remedy of career prospects like residency period etc. lead the
Committee to the view that Ministry of Home Affairs seems to have overlooked the basic aspects of career
planning in CISF. While the anomalous position vis-à-vis Group ‘A’ Services is evident, there has been no
word to the same by the affected Department i.e. the CISF. It appears that it considers Group ‘A’ as a mere
categorisation of its officers in names like only, and that consideration of proper promotional avenues as a
constant process rather than ascribing to them the basic prerequisites of a Group ‘A’ Services as envisaged
by DOPT.
126. An examination of the records with the Committee clearly establishes that recruitment to CISF started
through C.S.E. in 1983 as a Group ‘B’ Service. The upgradation to a Group ‘A’ service started w.e.f. C.S.E. in
1987. It is surprising that the CISF indicates in its reply that service conditions did not require to be changed
to accommodate Group ‘A’ officers. This itself lends credence to the fact that this service i.e. the CISF treats
Group ‘A’ categorisation in namesake only. While the Act by Parliament did not require amendment, all
changes in recruitment rules appear to have worsened the conditions in the service till the present state –
affecting the very morale of these bright officers.
127. The reply has been found to be extremely evasive and there seems to be an attempt to divert the
members. Instead of accepting its failure to give Group ‘A’ service conditions to a group of officers recruited
through the Civil Services Examination, even after having prevented them from improving to other services,
the Committee finds all norms governing Group ‘A’ Civil Service to be simply overlooked in the CISF. 
  
  
  
 
128. The Committee strongly felt that MHA should ensure that these officers do not lose their morale
and that service conditions due to them are provided in order to enable them to give their best to the
organisation. The Committee also noted that the decision to delink the recruitment of CISF officers
through Civil Services Examination has been withdrawn by Ministry of Home Affairs. 
  
 
129. The Committee feels that due to faulty and skewed personnel policies followed in CISF (e.g. Rota
Quota System etc.) taking it’s toll, and due to lack of initiative on the part of CISF/MHA in the last 10-
12 years to rectify these faults, an irreparable damage has already been done to these officers which
cannot be reversed by Cadre Review as stated by the special Secretary before the Committee. Their

Fifty Fourth Report-Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/54_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:25]
promotions will continue to remain vacancy based due to the need based deployment pattern of
CISF. Further, the non direct officers of CISF cannot be circumstanced adversely at such a late stage.
This would invite prolonged litigation, ultimately leading to these direct officers continuing to
stagnate. 
  
  
  
 
130. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the issue and strongly recommends
reallocatipon of these direct Group ‘A’ officers of CISF who were recruited through Civil Services
Examination into Indian Police Service (IPS) or in other Group ‘A’ services in order to settle their
grievances. In the past officers of Indian Frontier Administrative Service (a Group ‘B’ Service) were
merged/reallocated to the Indian Administrative Service (IAS). Even the latest National Police
Commission has recommended for allocating 16 2/3% of the posts of IPS for the officers of Central
Police Organisations (CPOs) subject to their clearing an exam conducted by the U.P.S.C. These
direct CISF officers have already cleared the combined Civil Services Examination which is also the
source of recruitment for direct IPS officers. Further, the MHA should end this ambivalence of
recruitment of officers for Central Paramilitary Forces under MHA through the Civil Service
Examination.
General Observation
131. The Committee at its sitting held on the 15th April, 1999, noted with concern that some of the
recommendations made by it from time to time have not been taken by Government with seriousness they
deserve. There has been inordinate delay in their implementation and when recommendations have not been
accepted, no detailed and cogent reasons were given for not accepting them. The Committee, therefore,
strongly feels that Government may take earnest action in respect of such recommendations pending before
it for decision/implementation.