Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDINGRAJYA SABHACOMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.216
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on th February, )7 2019(Laid on the T able of Lok Sabha on )7 2019th February,TWO HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)
Action T aken by Government on the Recommendations/ObservationsContained in the Two Hundred Eleventh Report on the CycloneOckhi-its Impact on Fishermen and Damage Caused by it

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Two Hundred Eleventh Report on the Cyclone
Ockhi-its Impact on Fishermen and Damage Caused by it
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 424


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-21
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted .................. 2-11
by the Government
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does ............ 12-13
not desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of ............. 14-17
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply ............ 18-21
of the Government have not been received
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ......................................................... 22-23
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 5-28

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Shri  Pratap Keshari Deb
4. Dr. V. Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
8. Shri R.K. Sinha
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
@10. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
12. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
19. Shri Ashwini Kumar
$20. Vacant
21. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
23. Shri Nagarajan P.
24. Shri Jagdambika Pal
25. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
26. Shri Dilip M. Patel
27. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
29. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
30. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
31. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
(i)
@Shri Rakesh Sinha, Member, Rajya  Sabha nominated w.e.f. 14th December, 2018
$Vacant consequent upon resignation of Shri Harish Chandra Meena from Lok Sabha Seat ( i.e., Dausa Parliamentary Constituency
of Rajasthan) w.e.f. 24th December, 2018.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the
Two Hundred Eleventh Report on ‘The Cyclone Ockhi - Its Impact on Fishermen and damage caused by it’.
2. The Two Hundred Eleventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 4th April,
2018.  After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs
requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the
Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee on 18th July,
2018.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the said Report of the Committee has been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
12th and 18th December, 2018 respectively in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated
24th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Sixteenth Report and adopted the same at its
meeting held on 5th February, 2019.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
P. CHIDAMBARAM
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
5th February, 2019 Department-related Parliamentary
Magha 16, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

          ACRONYMS
ACWCs : Area Cyclone Warning Centres
CWCs : Cyclone Warning Centres
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CIFNET : Central Fisheries Nautical Engineering Technology
DSS : Decision Support System
DES : Delhi Earth Station
EPS : Ensemble Prediction System
GFS : Global Forecasting System
GEFS : Global Ensemble Forecasting System
IMD : Indian Meteorological Department
IMCT : Inter -Ministerial Central Team
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organization
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Service
IMAC : Information Management and Analysis Centre
IITM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
MoES : Ministry of Earth Science
MME : Multi Model Ensemble
MSS : Mobile Satellite Service
M H A : Ministry of Home Affairs
NA VIC : Navigation with Indian Constellation
NWP : Numerical Weather Prediction
NOAA : National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NCEP : National Centre for Environment prediction
NERC : Natural Environment Research Council
NFDB : National Fisheries Development Board
NADP : National Agriculture Development Programme
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
(iv)

(v)
NCMRWF : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCSMCS : National Committee for strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security
OHC : Ocean Heat Content
PMNRF : Prime Minister s National Relief Fund
PMA Y : Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana
POC : Proof of Concept
RI : Rapid intensification
RW : Rapid Weakening
SOP : Standing Operating Procedure
SDRF : State Disaster Response Force
SST : Sea Surface temperature
SC-NEC : Sub Committee of National Executive Committee
TAFCOFED : T amil Nadu State Apex Fisheries Cooperative Federation
TWO : Tropical Weather Outlook
UM : Unified Model
UMEPS : Unified Model Ensem ble Positioning System
UKMO : United Kingdom Meteorological Office
WRF : Weather Research Forecast
WCSSP : W eather & Climate Science for Service Partnership Programme

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eleventh Report of the Committee on ‘The
Cyclone Ockhi - Its Impact on Fishermen and Damage Caused by it’. The Two Hundred Eleventh Report
was presented to Rajya Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on 4th April, 2018.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eleventh Report have been categorized as follows:
CHAPTER I: The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1.3.8, 1.3.9, 1.3.13, 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.2.11, 3.1.10, 3.2.17 and 3.3.8 (of Two
Hundred Eleventh Report)
Total recommendations- 9
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
CHAPTER II: The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
the matter in view of the Government s replies: Para Nos. 3.1.18 and 3.3.9 ( ibid)
Total recommendations - 2
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
CHAPTER III: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government  have
not been accepted by the Committee: Para Nos.  2.2.12, 3.1.6, 3.2.12 and 3.2.18 ( ibid)
Total recommendations - 4
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action taken steps in
respect of those recommendations.
CHAPTER IV: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 2.3.5, 2.4.10, 3.1.14 and 3.2.5 ( ibid)
Total Recommendations - 4
In respect of 4 recommendations in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished interim reply
or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should
furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized in
Chapters III and IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendation.
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding chapters.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 CYCLONE WARNING AND FORECASTING
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee takes note of the submission by the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) that
cyclone Ockhi was an unusual phenomenon, which was evident in its rapid intensification. The committee
understands that forecasting rapid intensification of cyclones remains an area of concern. However, the
committee wishes to stress upon the fact that rapid intensification of cyclones is no longer a rare phenomenon
and globally, several countries have evolved credible prediction models for this phenomenon. The committee
is of the opinion that the prediction of rapid intensification of cyclones is imperative, to bolster our existing
capacity for advance cyclone warning. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the IMD should
focus on intensive research to develop forecasting models for the prediction of the “Rapid Intensification”
phenomenon. The Committee also recommends that the IMD must acquire inputs on sea surface temperatures
from thermal satellites and integrate them into the cyclone forecasting models to make the prediction of
cyclones like Ockhi more accurate. (Para 1.3.8 of 211th Report)
Action taken
1.1.2 The following crucial steps have been taken by the Ministry of Earth Science (MoES) & Indian
Meteorological Department (IMD) to enhance the Early warning capabilities:-
(a) The Sea Surface temperature (SST) and Ocean Heat Content (OHC) anomaly products to be
prepared and are made available to forecasters in IMD on daily basis by Indian National Centre
for Ocean Information Service (INCOIS).
(b) Examination and evaluation of various models is carried out in MoES for cyclone forecasting
including Global Forecasting System (GFS), Global Ensemble Forecasting System (GEFS),
Unified Model (UM) and Unified Model Ensemble Positioning System (UMEPS), for prediction
of rapid intensification. The impact of resolution, data assimilation, physics, and ensemble
approach along with V ortex generation / relocation in these models is also examined.
(c) NWP Division of IMD and various R&D institutes are taking up the studies to develop intensity
prediction model/Rapid intensification (RI) and Rapid Weakening (RW) models based on various
environmental parameters including Ocean Heat Content.
(d) Ocean atmosphere coupled Hurricane Weather Research & Forecast Model has the potential to
predict intensity more accurately. Hence it is being made operational in collaboration with
INCOIS.
1.1.3 The INCOIS, National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF), Indian Institute
of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), IMD (Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) Division) have been informed
to take necessary action as mentioned above.
Further Recommendation
1.1.4 The Committee notes the Reply.
2

3
Recommendation
1.1.5 The Committee understands that cyclones like Ockhi are likely to happen more frequently in the
future due to the effects of global warming. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the IMD must
learn from the best practices being followed globally to improve prediction of such phenomenon. If
necessary, research should be undertaken to predict such cyclones in collaboration with international
organisations. ( Para 1.3.9  ibid)
Action Taken
1.1.6 There has been continuous up-gradation and enhancement of early warning capability of India
Meteorological Department (IMD) by multi prong approach. One of the most important initiatives has been
collaboration with Academic and R&D Institutes to improve early warning services. A few notable initiatives
taken up in recent years are as follows:
(a) Bilateral agreement with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), USA and
UK Met. Office for improvement in Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) modelling with
respect to global forecast system and Unified Model respectively. This collaboration also aims
to improve and operationalize the Ensemble Prediction System (EPS) for probabilistic forecast
based on Global Ensemble Forecasting System (GEFS). MoES has adapted global models
from USA and UK under the bilateral cooperation for forecasting of cyclones. Global Forecasting
System (GFS) with a resolution of 12 km. and GEFS with a resolution of 23 km. have been
adapted from National Centre for Environment prediction (NCEP), NOAA, USA and being
used to provide forecast upto 7 days. Similarly, the Unified Model (UM) and unified Model
Ensemble Prediction System (UMEPS) have been adapted from United Kingdom Meteorological
Office (UKMO), UK to provide forecast upto 7 days.
(b) The regional models like Weather Research Forecast (WRF) and Unified Model (Regional
Model) have been implemented in IMD with this collaboration.
(c) A bilateral collaboration between India and United States involving National Centre for
Environment Prediction (NCEP), USA, IMD, Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
Services (INCOIS), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bhubaneswar has resulted in
experimental implementation of high resolution of Ocean Atmosphere Coupled Model viz.
Hurricane Weather Research & Forecast Model for north Indian Ocean with a resolution of
2,6,18 km.
(d) The collaborative research & development has been taken up between IMD, IIT Delhi and
INCOIS for development of storm surge and coastal inundation model for operational forecasting
by IMD.
(e) UK’s Newton-Bhabha Fund along with Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) and
UK Met Office are collaborating with MoES for launching Weather & Climate Science for
Service Partnership Programme (WCSSP)-India program to work upon seamless ensemble
coupled system development across scales, Model & Observations evaluation of monsoon
processes & hazards and risk based forecasting & high impact weather/seasonal events including
cyclones.

4
(f) A Decision Support System (DSS) for forecasting and early warning has been established by
Meteo France International and operational since 2009.
(g) Further review will be made on the best practices being followed globally to improve prediction
of such phenomenon. In order to further understand the best practices being followed globally,
visit of scientists from IMD and other international centres will be facilitated for exchange of
views and improvement of warning mechanism.
Further Recommendation
1.1.7 The Committee notes the Reply.
Recommendation
1.1.8 The Committee takes note of the submissions by the IMD that the prediction of cyclone Ockhi, due to
its rapid intensification, was quite difficult. The Committee observes that the usual Standard Operating
Procedure of issuing cyclone watch and an alert could not be followed by the Area Cyclone Warning Centres
(ACWC) and the Cyclone Warning Centres when the depression developed on 28th November and intensified
rapidly into a cyclonic storm on 29th November, 2017. However, the Committee feels that with the increase
in sea temperatures due to global warming, the prediction, of both the path and the intensity of cyclones,
will become more difficult in the future. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Central Government
should develop a Standard Operating Procedure for such unpredictable cyclones in collaboration with other
developed countries and international organisations, so that the prediction of such unusual and rare
phenomenon becomes more reliable in the coming times. ( Para 1.3.13  ibid)
Action Taken
1.1.9 Already IMD has initiated review of its Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on cyclones. As regards
other global centres, SOPs of developed centres are taken into consideration while considering the same
over Indian region.
1.1.10  It may be mentioned here that globally genesis forecast is issued in terms of Tropical Weather
Outlook (TWO). National Hurricane Centre, USA issues TWO valid for next five days. NHC gives track and
intensity forecast from cyclone stage upto 120 hrs. (five days). Japan Meteorological Agency issues 3 days
genesis forecast for formation of tropical storm. The track and intensity forecast is issued for next 72
hours. IMD issued genesis forecast in TWO valid for next 72 hours. The IMD issues track and intensity
forecast valid for next 5 days.
1.1.11  However, as per recommendation, the Standing Operating Procedure (SOPs) of developed countries
will be reviewed to update the SOP of IMD with respect to cyclone warning services. Based on the lessons
learnt from Ockhi, following modifications have already been suggested in the SOP on cyclone:
(a) IMD has extended validity period of genesis forecast in its daily ‘Two’ from three days to five
days.
(b) Considering the fact that north Indian Ocean is a small basin, the life period of the cyclonic
disturbances (between the time of genesis and time of landfall) is relatively less and there is
possible rapid intensification near the coast, the objective track and intensity forecasts will be
issued from depression stage against the current practice of deep depression stage onwards in
case the depression is expected to intensify into a cyclonic storm and cross the coast.

5
(c) Modification of SOP for genesis over landlocked sea areas and coastal water will be made by
IMD. The existing SOP regarding issue of Pre Cyclone Watch (72 hours in advance), Cyclone
Alert (48 hours in advance), Cyclone Warning (24 hours in advance) and Post Landfall Outlook
(12 hours prior to landfall) is applicable for the TCs developing over open sea like central Bay
of Bengal or Arabian Sea. It is not applicable to the systems developing in land locked areas or
near the coast and under most rapidly intensifying scenario. In such situation, a Cyclone Alert
can be issued directly without issuing the Pre-Cyclone Watch and Cyclone Warning can be
issued directly without issuing Cyclone Alert/Pre-Cyclone Watch. The genesis, location, it s
distance from expected coast and expected number of days for landfall will decide the possibilities
of providing all cycles of cyclone warning SOP.
(d) Special Bulletins will be issued by Cyclone Warning Centres (CWCs) and Area Cyclone Warning
Centres (ACWCs) to concerned disaster management agencies from low pressure stage, if it
is expected to intensify further. IMD has already started this practice. During recent depression
over Arabian Sea during 13th-15th March, Special Bulletins commenced from 11th March
itself at the stage of low pressure area.
1.1.12  To carry out the above, following modeling efforts will be made:
z Dynamical statistical model for genesis prediction will be run twice a day from the stage of
well-marked low pressure area to provide forecast for cyclogenesis (formation of depression
and higher intensity) during next five days.
z Multi Model Ensemble (MME) Model will be run twice a day from stage of depression against
existing practice of deep depression stage to provide track forecast for next five days.
z Dynamical statistical model for intensity prediction will be run twice a day to provide intensity
forecast from depression stage for next five days.
1.1.13  All concerned in IMD and sister organisations in MoES have been advised accordingly.
Further Recommendation
1.1.14  The Committee notes the Reply.
1.2  Missing Fishermen
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee observes that the advisory issued on 29th November did not clearly predict a cyclonic
storm and, therefore, it was not taken with the seriousness it deserved. Moreover, rapid intensification did
not leave enough time for the IMD to issue a cyclone watch or alert and, therefore both the affected State
Governments and the people were not sufficiently alert. Officially, a cyclone specific advisory was issued
only on 30th November, the very date of the arrival of cyclone Ockhi but by then many fishermen would
have already ventured out to sea. This was a clear departure from the Standard Operating Procedure wherein
the first cyclone specific advisory, the Pre-cyclone Watch, is issued three days prior to the landfall of the
cyclone. While rapid intensification of a cyclone is a reasonable justification for this omission, the fact
remains that the State Government machinery and the people may not adequately understand the technicalities
and therefore should be proactively informed in each case. The Committee is of the opinion that the advisory
issued on 29th November, 2017 would have been taken more seriously had it clearly forewarned of an

6
impending cyclone. The Committee recommends that the IMD should be more proactive and take every
instance of weather disturbance with utmost seriousness in the future. ( Para 2.2.2  ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 Though cyclone warning could not be issued on 29th November, 2017, the heavy rainfall warning for
south Kerala, south Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep was first issued at around noon of 28th November for
occurrence during next 72 hours and was repeated on 28th and 29th November. First information regarding
formation of depression during next 48-72 hours ( i.e. 29th onwards) was issued on 28th November at 1200
hours IST in the Tropical Weather Outlook (available in IMD website).
1.2.3 In the first bulletin issued on 1150 IST of 29th Nov, IMD indicated the west-north westward movement
of system and its emergence into Comorin area by 30th. It was also mentioned that the system would
intensify further. The system emerged into Comorin Area during night of 29th and intensified into Deep
Depression in the early hrs (0230 IST) of 30th and into Cyclonic Storm in the forenoon (0830 IST) of 30th
Nov. 2017 (within six hours from deep depression stage). First wind warning for 45-55 kmph gusting to 65
kmph for south Kerala, south Karnataka and Lakshadweep was first issued at 1150 hrs IST of 29th November.
First warning for fishermen along and off south Tamil Nadu, south Kerala and Lakshadweep Islands not to
venture into sea was issued also at 1150 hrs IST of 29th November.
1.2.4 The deep depression unusually intensified into a cyclone Ockhi in 6 hours from 0230 hours to 0830
hours of 30th November morning over Comorin Sea. As a result, the cyclone specific advisory was
issued from 30th Nov at 1155 hrs IST as per the protocol for south Tamil Nadu, South Kerala and
Lakshadweep. Cyclone watch/alert could not be issued due to unusual rapid intensification over the
Comorin Sea. It is quite different from cases of cyclone intensification that happens over central part of
Bay of Be ngal and Arabian Sea. In those cases, usual provision of issuing cyclone alert/watch normally
exists as per SOP. In this case, cyclone warning was to be issued directly on 30th morning only to enhance
already initiated actions taken by respective state Govt. based on the regular bulletins issued by IMD since
29th November forenoon.
1.2.5 As advised, IMD will act more proactively for every instance of weather disturbance with utmost
seriousness. IMD has also modified the SOP as mentioned under Actions by IMD under Para 1.3.13. As for
example, In case of depression over Arabian Sea during 13-15 March, 2018 IMD, headquarter along with its
concerned ACWCs, CWCs and MCs issued special bulletins to state and central disaster management agencies,
media and public from 11th March itself, the stage of low pressure area.
Further Recommendation
1.2.6 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation
having regard to its importance.
Recommendation
1.2.7 The Committee also feels the advisory issued by the IMD might not have been given wide publicity
in the mass media and through radio stations. This might be the reason for the concern raised regarding
the absence of any prior warning or alert. The people should have been alerted through media channels
and radio stations in a timely manner before cyclone Ockhi hit the coast. The   Committee recommends
that in the future, the Ministry should issue an advisory when there are weather disturbances, as a measure
of a abundant precaution, to the State Governments. All the media units and radio stations in such States

7
may be sensitized and instructed to give wide publicity, in a prioritized manner, to all the advisories,
regarding any imminent disaster, issued by the IMD and the Area Cyclone Warning Centres/Cyclone Warning
Centres.
1.2.8 The Committee also recommends that coastal communities, like fishermen, who are at grave risk due
to disasters, may be regularly sensitized about the fact that certain natural disasters cannot be predicated
well in advance and they must, in their own inter est, strictly adhere to any advisories/warnings in the
future. ( Para 2.2.3  ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.9 In order to sensitize general public and media to take the warnings issued by IMD in a serious
manner, IMD is working upon improving co-ordination with central and state level disaster management
agencies, media and general public by conducting user workshops at regular intervals in the coastal states,
conducting pre-cyclone exercise twice a year in the month of April and September as per SOP of cyclones
in the coastal states with concerned authorities. Fishermen awareness workshops are being organised by
IMD for all coastal states in collaboration with the agencies of State Governments. The workshop with
media including radio stations in the states will also be organised for all coastal states.
1.2.10  As recommended by the committee awareness workshops and awareness training on disaster
management and risk communication is already being provided to coastal communities and is still continuing
through Fisheries Department as a routine process.
1.2.11  As per standard protocol, the advisory issued by IMD are also re-circulated to the concerned State
Governments by Ministry of Home Affairs and National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA).
Further Recommendation
1.2.12 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
1.2.13  The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Government, in collaboration with ISRO,
to address this challenge. The Committee recommends that the trial of the vessel tracking system, which
consists of user terminals (transponders), installed in the fishing vessels and central hub to receive the
tracking information, should be completed at the earliest and the Central and State Governments should
provide all assistance and resources to ISRO for the purpose. The Committee also recommends that after the
completion of the trial, the vessel tracking system should be expanded to cover every boat that ventures out
for deep sea fishing and all the remaining boats may be equipped with V ery High- Frequency sets and
Distress Alert Transmitters, at subsidised rates. ( Para 2.2.11 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.14 As per the directives of National Committee for strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security
(NCSMCS), a pilot project of implementing fitment of 1000 Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) based transponder
terminals on sub-20m fishing vessels was undertaken by Special Projects, Indian Space Research Organization
(ISRO) HQ. For the Proof of Concept (POC) demonstration, the fishing vessels registered in Gujarat and
Tamil Nadu were selected.
1.2.15 The POC demonstration of these terminals have begun and planned to be completed as per the
Implementation plan given in the table below:-

8
S. No No. Of Terminals Distribution to Fisheries Departments Status
Proto-model deployment & testing
1. 12 4 to Gujarat; 8 to Tamil Nadu Oct 31, 2017
(completed)
Version-1 deployment
2. 51 25 to Gujarat; 26 to Tamil Nadu April 10, 2018
(completed)
Further trial plans
3. 100 50 to Gujarat; 50 to Tamil Nadu May 15, 2018
4. 150 75 to Gujarat; 75 to Tamil Nadu May 31. 2018
5. 300 150 to Gujarat; 150 to Tamil Nadu June 30, 2018
6. 399 200 to Gujarat; 199 to Tamil Nadu July 31, 2018
1.2.16  Subsequent to completion of the pilot implementation, ISRO would transfer the technology to
selected indigenous industry partners for production, sale and after sales support. Respective State Fisheries
Departments are expected to take necessary measures to equip the fishing boats registered in their
states.
1.2.17  As part of the pilot implementation, Ahmedabad Earth Station hub is supporting POC terminals
(Capable of handling up to 4000 terminals). Subsequently, the operations will be migrated to Information
Management and Analysis Centre (IMAC), Gurgaon with one to one redundancy with Delhi Earth Station
(DES). These terminals will also have provisions to act as Distress Alert Terminals.
Further Recommendation
1.2.18 The Committee notes the Reply.
1.3  Immediate Relief and Restoration Measures
Recommendation
1.3.1 The committee takes note of the relief measures undertaken by the Government of Kerala and
feels that these measures, if implemented sincerely, can make a positive impact on the families of the
affected persons. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within three
months. ( Para 3.1.10  ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 Families of the bereaved fishermen (51 individuals) was provided  ` 20 lakh by State Government.
They were also provided ` 2 lakh from Prime Minister s National Relief Fund (PMNRF). The final number
of missing fishermen in cyclone Ockhi is 91. Dependents of all of them were provided ` 20 lakh as ex-gratia
as in the case of deceased.  ` 33.95 crore were disbursed to provide  ` 2000/head to all active fishermen as
relief in the immediate days following cyclone Ockhi. Ration worth  `  8.31 crore was provided to the
registered active fishermen families in Kerala coast. Relief food kit worth  ` 4.61 lakh was distributed to

9
immediately affected families in Thiruvananthapuram. ` 12.14 lakh was paid to other states for facilitating,
safe docking and relief to fishermen who sailed and docked in those states. An amount of  ` 58.86 lakh was
disbursed as crop loss assistance to farmers in Thiruvanthapuram district. An amount of  ` 5.82 crore was
disbursed for house damage repair in Thiruvanthapuram District. Fisheries department is in the process of
verifying seriously injured claims to provide ` 5 Lakh/person who will not be able to continue his traditional
livelihood of fishing. Fisheries department is in the process of finalizing free education for the children of the
deceased. In addition, Government of Kerala has declared that there will be more recruitment to coastal
police in which 200 will be recruited from fishermen folk.
Further Recommendation
1.3.3 The Committee notes the reply.
1.4 Financial Assistance to the States
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee is surprised to observe a huge difference, ranging from a high of 97 per cent to 27 per
cent, between the assistance sought by the States and the amounts approval by the High-Level Committee of
Central Government in the aftermath of the disasters. The Committee is intrigued by the fact that is most of
the disasters, the shortfall between the funds sought and those approved was more than 70 per cent and in
some cases, the shortfall was more than 95 per cent. The Committee wonders as to how the State Governments,
especially those with limited sources of revenue such as the State Governments of the North- Eastern States,
are able to manage in light of such a huge shortfall. The Committee therefore recommends that the Central
Governments should sensitise the State Governments about the approved norms for assistance that exaggerated
demands are not made. At the same time, the Central Government should re-examine the norms and bring
about necessary changes in the policy of funding the damage caused by various disasters to ensure adequate
relief to the affected populace. ( Para 3.2.17 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 It is stated that the State Governments generally project their requirement over and above or on other
than approved items/ norms, which are outside the purview of norms. These factors attribute the huge
difference in projected demand of the state and actual approval from the GOI.
1.4.3 The State Governments are required to incur expenditure from SDRF/NDRF as per the items and
norms approved by Government of India.  These norms are applied uniformly and followed in respect of all
the States without any discrimination. Additional expenditure, if any, incurred over and above the norms, is
required to be met by the States from their own resources not from SDRF/NDRF.
1.4.4 State Governments have been sensitized from time to time to prepare their memorandum strictly as
per norms. As advised by the committee, they are being sensitized again by a circular.
1.4.5 It has generally been a practice to review and revise the items and norms of assistance after the
Award of the Finance Commission is accepted/ adopted by the Government. The revision of norms is a
continuous process. Subsequently, taking into account various factors including the price rise, the Government
of India has revised norms of assistance under State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and National Disaster
Response Fund (NDRF) was circulated on 8th April 2015. These norms are available on the Ministry of
Home Affairs website: www.ndmindia.nic.in.

10
Further Recommendation
1.4.6 The Committee notes the reply.
1.5 Reconstruction and Rehabilitation
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee is apprehensive as to how the families of the deceased, missing and disabled fishermen
would survive in the absence of a regular income. The Committee recommends that the Government while
implementing the reconstruction programs must focus on the concerns of the fishermen including a
comprehensive package to provide them with sufficient funds and enable them to restart their livelihood
activities. The Committee also recommends that the State Governments should undertake several positive
measures for them such as a regular monthly livelihood assistance for at least a year, debt relief, interest free
loans, subsidy for purchasing new boats, free education to their wards and training in alternate means of
livelihood for at least one member of their families. The Committee further recommends that the Central
Government should provide all necessary support and assistance to the State Governments concerned. The
Committee desires to be apprised about the progress in this regard within three months. ( Para 3.3.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 The Government of Tamil Nadu have provided special livelihood assistance to the fishermen families
of Kanniyakumari district affected by “Ockhi” cyclone. The details have already been mentioned in reply to
Para 3.1.14.
1.5.3 The Government of Tamil Nadu is conducting various need based training programmes for fisher
folk through Government agency Tamil Nadu State Apex Fisheries Cooperative Federation (TAFCOFED)
with the funding support of National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB), National Agriculture Development
Programme (NADP)  and Government of India for effective transfer of technology and propagation of
welfare schemes of the Government.
1.5.4 As a measure of offering alternative livelihood to marine fisherwomen, TAFCOFED had conducted
training programme on  Solar Lantern fabrication and servicing  to fisherwomen belong to 13 maritime
districts of Tamil Nadu, with NFDB financial assistance.  This will help the fisher women to become a self-
entrepreneur in production and serving of Solar Lanterns.
1.5.5 T AFCOFED is also conducting Training programme on “Basics of Seamanship and Navigation,
Electronic equipments and Maintenance of Marine Engine” to deep sea going fishermen of Tamil Nadu with
technical assistance from Central Fisheries Nautical Engineering Technology (CIFNET) and with financial
assistance from NFDB. 1,000 fishermen in 40 batches will be trained under this  programme.
1.5.6 T AFCOFED is also conducting training programme on “Value added fish products” for members of
fisherwomen co-operative societies in coastal districts of Tamil Nadu.  In the first phase 2,500 fisherwomen
will be trained in 125 batches at a cost of  ` 31.87 lakh under NFDB assistance.
1.5.7 In order to safeguard the coastal fishery resources for sustainable fisheries and to support the fishers
to harvest the unexploited/ underexploited oceanic fishery resources like tuna and tuna like fishes, the Chief
Minister of Tamil Nadu announced a pioneering scheme of ‘Providing 50 per cent subsidy for fishermen to
procure New Tuna Longliner cum Gill Netter’ boats for the first time in the Country. Under this scheme 50

11
per cent of the estimated unit cost of ` 60 lakh or upto a maximum of ` 30 lakh/unit is provided as subsidy
for construction of new Tuna Longliner cum-gill Netter boat.
1.5.8 In this regard, the steps taken by the State Government of Kerala have already been mentioned in
reply to para  3.1.10 above.
1.5.9 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in the Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare has already released central financial assistance of  `  194.40 lakh including 3 per cent
administrative expenses to the Government of Kerala for providing assistance to Ockhi cyclone affected
traditional fishermen in the state under the Sponsored Scheme on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development
and Management of Fisheries during the financial year 2017-2018.
Further Recommendation
1.5.10  The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
2.1 IMMEDIATE RELIEF AND RESTORATION MEASURES
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Com mittee takes note of the efforts taken by the UT Administration of Lakshadweep to
rescue its fishermen as well as those from the mainland and to provide relief materials to them. The
Committee, however, feels that a sum of  ` Five thousand provided, as an interim emergency relief, for
the damaged houses and boats, is paltry and may not be sufficient for even temporary restoration. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should undertake immediate measures
to provide enhanced and sufficient assistance, to the owners of damaged houses and boats, without any
delay.                                                                                                                      ( Para 3.1.18 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.2 Regarding extending the financial assistance to Lakshadweep, it is stated that in order to support the
affected people of the UT of Lakshadweep, the Government of India has approved an amount of  ` 15.00
crore, to Lakshadweep from UT budget on 8th January, 2018, for providing relief to the affected people and
damages to the infrastructure due to cyclone ‘Ockhi’ in the Lakshadweep. In the case of damage of houses
and boats, the extant norms provide assistance for repair of damaged houses @  ` 95,100/- &  ` 101900/-
per house for fully damaged and severely damaged (both kutcha & pucca) houses, @ ` 5,200/- per partially
damaged pucca house, @ ` 3,200/- per partially damaged kutcha house and ` 4,100/- per hut. Similarly, for
fully damaged boats assistance is provided @Rs 9600/- per unit and for partially damaged boats @ ` 4100/-
per unit. These norms are applied uniformly to all the States/UTs without any discrimination.
Further Recommendation
2.1.3 The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendation further.
2.2 Reconstruction and Rehabilitation
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Commit tee feels that neither the State Governments revenues nor the budgetary and other
forms of assistance from the Central Government are sufficient to provide adequate funds for the purpose
of restoration. The plans of the State Governments for the provision of safe housing to the homeless
fishermen, revitalisation of the agriculture and animal husbandry sectors, the establishment of the Marine
Skill Development Institutes, relief of debt of the fishermen, and revamping the coastal police may
require a significant amount of funds. The State Governments will, therefore, need to mobilize resources
from sources other than the budgetary allocation to implement such measures. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Central Government should consider measures to seek more funds from sources such
as the corporate sector by categorizing their contributions to NDRF/SDRF under Corporate Social
Responsibility funds and motivate them to contribute generously to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund and
NDRF/SDRF . ( Para 3.3.9 ibid)
12

13
Action Taken
2.2.2 After the visit of Prime Minister to the „Ockhi  cyclone affected areas on 19th December, 2017, the
prime minister had announced ` 21 crore for providing assistance for repair of fully damaged houses under
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY).
2.2.3 The State Government of Tamil Nadu has intimated that other than the budgetary allocations, the
mitigation measures are being carried out by the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Funds in the state of
Tamil Nadu.
2.2.4 The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has intimated that they have issued a series of clarifications through
General Circular dated 18th June, 2014 which inter-alia includes vide range of disaster related activities.
2.2.5 On similar grounds, activities taken up by companies for cyclone affected areas and rehabilitation of
the local population can be covered under various items listed in Schedule VII of the Companies Act. Board
of the company is fully empowered under the Act to take decisions on allocation of CSR funds to different
project of programs undertaken by them under its CSR policy. The CSR provision is aimed at involving the
corporates, to mitigate social issues, through socially responsible programmes and projects which are
innovative and efficient. This would include that CSR should not be interpreted as a source to fund the
resource gaps in any of the Government schemes. Prime Minister s Relief Fund is included as eligible funds
for CSR contribution under Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013.
Further Recommendation
2.2.6 In view of the reply furnished above the Committee does not desire to pursue its
recommendation further.

CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 MISSING FISHERMEN
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee also takes note of the efforts of ISRO in developing the Fisherman App that can work
even on basic smart phones along with a compact Bluetooth enabled NavIC device. The Committee
recommends that all the State Governments of cyclone affected areas may be advised to collect the mobile
numbers of active fishermen, as is being done by the State Government of Kerala. The Committee also
recommends that the State Government of Kerala may be requested to complete the collection of mobile
numbers of active fishermen and start the operation of the State level control room at the earliest to strengthen
the monitoring system. The Committee further recommends that the mobile phones fitted with NavIC devices
may be made available to all the fishermen within the next six months. ( Para 2.2.12 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.2 ISRO has developed the Fisherman App that can work even on basic smartphones along with a
compact Bluetooth enabled NavIC device. This makes use of messaging service along with the position
information available through NavIC system to provide alerts on cyclone, high waves, tsunami and information
on potential fishing zones. These messages are issued by INCOIS. Fishermen are also alerted on inadvertent
crossing of international water boundaries through geo-fencing mechanism.
3.1.3 Demonstration and field trials are conducted in Kerala involving State Government officials and
fishermen. The trial in Tamil Nadu is in progress. Industries are involved to fabricate the NavIC receivers
which can address the requirements of States. Communications with respect to availability of such a solution
is sent to the Chief Secretaries of the Coastal States.
Further Recommendation
3.1.4 The Ministry has not replied whether the State Government of Kerala completed the collection
of mobile numbers of active fishermen and start the operation of the State level Control Room to
strengthen the monitoring system. Further, the Ministry has not replied to the recommendation
regarding mobile phones fitted with NavIC devices that might be made available to all the fishermen
within the next six months. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for
implementation at the earliest.
3.2 Immediate Relief and Restoration Measures
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Central Government and  observes that the ex-
gratia assistance of
 ` 2 lakh, to the families of the deceased, and ` 50000, to the persons seriously injured,
are quite low. The Committee recommends that the assistance in case of death and injury may be enhanced
to at least ` 5 lakh and ` 1 lakh, respectively. The Committee also recommends that the Government must
announce a special assistance for the families of the missing fishermen and urge the States to provide them
alternate means of livelihood. ( Para 3.1.6 ibid)
14

15
Action Taken
3.2.2 The State Government of Tamil Nadu and Kerala had already provided ex-gratia relief assistance of
` 20 lakh to dependent of each bereaved fishermen as well as missing fishermen. The Families of the
bereaved fishermen were also provided  ` 2 lakh from Prime Minister National Relief Fund (PMNRF). In
addition the State Government of Tamil Nadu and Kerala have taken various steps for rehabilitation of the
families of missing fishermen.
3.2.3 W ith regard to enhanced assistance under PMNRF, it is stated that any information pertaining to
PMNRF are not admissible under rule and procedure and conduct of Business in LokSabha/RajyaSabha,
since corpus of the fund is constituted entirely with voluntary public contribution and not from any allocation
out of the Consolidated Fund of India. PMNRF has not been constituted by the Parliament. Disbursement is
made with the approval of the Prime Minister, keeping in view availability of the funds of the PMNRF. As
such, the issue of enhancing the quantum of assistance under PMNRF also comes at the sole discretion of
the Prime Minister.
3.2.4 Ho wever under the norms of assistance of State Disaster Relief Fund/National Disaster Relief Fund,
there is a provision of ex-gratia assistance of  ` 4 lakh to the families of deceased and  ` 2 lakh per person,
when the disability is over 60 per cent.
Further Recommendation
3.2.5 In connection with the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs at para 3.2.3, it may be clarified
that the recommendation of the Committee was not about ex-gratia from PMNRF. Rather the
recommendation was for the Central Government (the MHA) to enhance the assistance from
````` 2 lakh to ` ` ` ` ` 5 lakh in case of death and from  ` ` ` ` ` 50,000 to ` ` ` ` ` 1 lakh in case of injury. The contention
of the Ministry of Home Affairs that information pertaining to PMNRF is not admissible under
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Houses of Parliament and corpus of the Fund is
from voluntarily public contributions and not from the Consolidated Fund of India and enhancing
the quantum of assistance is at the sole discretion of PM has not been disputed by the Committee in
its recommendation.  What the Committee has recommended is that amount of  ` ` ` ` `  2 lakhs is quite
low and therefore, should be enhanced to  ` ` ` ` ` 5 lakhs and for serious injury from  ` ` ` ` ` 50000 to ` ` ` ` ` 1 lakh.
The Committee thus reiterates its recommendation given in para 3.1.6 of 211th Report.
3.3 Financial Assistance to the States
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee observes that Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) visits the disaster- affected
States only after submission of the memoranda by the States. The Committee understands that in the aftermath
of the disaster, the priority of the State Government is to provide relief to the people and the preparation of
the memorandum may take some time. However, by the time the IMCT visits the disaster affected states, to
make an assessment of the damage caused by the disaster , the signs of the disaster are on the verge of
diminishing. This may lead to variance in the damage assessments of the State Government and the IMCT,
as has been observed in most cases. The Committee feels that this anomaly can be rectified if the assessment
is done by a joint team of the Central and the State Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
for every disaster an inter-ministerial Central Government team should make a preliminary visit to the
disaster-affected areas, within one week of the disaster, and a joint preliminary damage assessment should

16
be done in conjunction with the State Governments concerned.  The Committee feels that will not only
eliminate the variance in the amounts assessed by the State Government and the IMCT but will also expedite
the process of approval and sanctioning of the funds. ( Para 3.2.12 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 To supplementing the efforts of the State Government, financial assistance is provided through under
the existing scheme of State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF)
in accordance with the established procedure. The SDRF is a resource readily available to the States to meet
the expenses of relief and rehabilitation works activities of immediate nature, for a range of specified disasters.
Financial assistance under SDRF/ NDRF in the wake of natural disasters is by way of relief and not for
compensation of loss as suffered/ claimed.
3.3.3 However, in the event of a disaster of a ‘severe nature’, in which the requirement of funds for relief
operations is beyond the funds available in the SDRF account, resources and coping capacity of the State
Government, additional Central assistance is provided from National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), as
per established procedure. As per this procedure, the State Government is required to submit a formal
memorandum on the damaged caused due to notified natural disaster indicating the sector-wise damage and
with justification of requirement of funds. On receipt of memorandum from the State Government, an
Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) is constituted and deputed for an on-the-spot assessment of damage
and requirement of funds for relief measures of immediate nature, as per the existing items and norms of
SDRF/ NDRF. The report of the IMCT is considered by the Sub-Committee of the National Executive
Committee (SC-NEC), headed by the Home Secretary/ Agriculture Secretary. Thereafter, the High Level
Committee, comprising of Home Minister (Chairman), Finance Minister, Agriculture Minister, and Vice
Chairman, NITI Aayog considers the recommendations of the SC-NEC thereon, norms of assistance and
balances available in the State’s SDRF and approves the quantum of additional assistance from NDRF.
3.3.4 W ith regard to the variance in demand and assessment, it is mentioned that due to various reasons,
the State Governments generally project their demand/ requirement over and above or on other than approved
items/ norms, which are outside the purview of norms. These factors attribute the huge variance in demand
of the state and actual assessed by the IMCT as well as approval from the GOI.
Further Recommendation
3.3.5 The Committee notes the procedural aspect that an Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT)
is constituted and deputed for an on-the-spot assessment of damage and requirement of funds for
relief measures of immediate nature are met, as per the existing items and norms of SDRF/NDRF.
But the Committee vide para 3.2.12 ibid had primarily recommended for evolving a new procedure
by appointing a joint team of the Central and the State Governments instead of having two layers of
assessment viz. firstly by the State Government and secondly by the IMCT so that the vital time
taken in completing the procedural formalities of making damage assessment will be minimum.
Moreover, the Committee had also recommended that within one week after every disaster IMCT
should make a  preliminary visit to the disaster affected areas.
3.3.6 In view of this Committee reiterates its recommendation made at Para 3.2.12 ibid which is as
follows:-
“The Committee, therefore, recommends that for every disaster an inter-ministerial Central

17
Government team should make a preliminary visit to the disaster-affected areas, within one week
of the disaster, and a joint preliminary damage assessment should be done in conjunction with the
State Governments concerned.  The Committee feels that will not only eliminate the variance in
the amounts assessed by the State Government and the IMCT but will also expedite the process of
approval and sanctioning of the funds.”
Recommendation
3.3.7 The Committee is also aware that the State Governments have, time and again, raised the issue of the
increase in the frequency and intensity of disasters and the spiralling costs of relief, rehabilitation, and
reconstruction. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central   Government should devise urgent
measures to diversify the sources of financing and expand the corpus of the National and State Disaster
Relief Funds. The Committee may also be apprised about the current mechanism being followed for funding
the NDRF under the GST regime. (Para  3.2.18 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.8 The NDRF is financed through the levy of a cess on certain items, chargeable to excise and customs
duty, and approved annually through the Finance Bill. The Government of India raised the corpus of National
Disaster Response Fund by a cess-backed mechanism through levying the ‘National Calamity Contingency
Duty’ on selected items and additional budgetary provision is augmented. As such 100 per cent contributions
is by the Central Government which inter-alia includes contribution of GST.
Further Recommendation
3.3.9 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has explained about the current
mechanism being followed for funding the NDRF under the GST regime. But, the recommendation
of the Committee to diversify the sources of financing and expand the corpus of the National and
State Disaster Relief Funds has not been commented upon. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its
recommendation made at para 3.2.18.

CHAPTER -IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATION
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee expresses concern over the fate of the missing fishermen and the reports that there
was a delay in the launch of “Search and Rescue” operations. The Committee, however, takes note of
the submission of the Ministry that the Government, despite the unpredictable   circumstances, launched
search and rescue operations in a timely manner. While the Central Government has made efforts to
rescue the fishermen stranded at sea, the Committee observes that nearly 244 fishermen were still
missing as on 4th January, 2018. With the search and rescue operation being called off by the
Government, the Committee painfully notes that the chances of return of the remaining missing fishermen
may now be very dim. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs collect the final
number of missing fishermen and submit a report to the Committee. The Committee recommends that
the Government must make adequate arrangements for providing a viable means of livelihood to the
families of missing fishermen and they should be provided livelihood assistance, as an interim measure,
without any delay. ( Para 2.3.5 of 211th Report)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The details of missing fishermen and financial assistance provided by UT of Lakshadeep, State
Government of  Kerala and Tamil Nadu are as under:-
(i) Lakshadweep – No fisherman of Lakshadweep is reported missing due to the consequence of
cyclone Ockhi.
(ii) T amil Nadu - In Tamil Nadu 185 Fishermen were reported missing. The State Government has
provided ex-gratia relief assistance of  `20 lakh to dependent of each missing fishermen. The
State Government have sanctioned a sum of ` 42, 50,000/- to provide special livelihood assistance
of ` 5,000/- per family to the families of the fishermen went missing due to Ockhi cyclone.
State Government also announced to provide employment in the Government organization to
any one of the legal heir of the families of the deceased/ missing fishermen based on their
educational qualification as a support to the families who had lost their bread winner due to
Ockhi cyclone. State Government also started a special scheme of meeting the educational
expenditure for pursuing / continuing higher studies (Professional, technical and academic) by
the children of fishermen who went missing while fishing is being implemented by Fisheries
Department.  To provide training in an alternate livelihood to the families of the missing /
deceased fishermen due to Ockhi cyclone is under consideration of the Government.
(iii) Kerala - In Kerala 91 Fishermen were reported missing. The State Government provide ex-
gratia relief assistance of  ` 20 lakh each to dependents of all missing fishermen. Fisheries
department is in the process of finalizing free education for the children of the deceased. In
addition, Government of Kerala has declared that there will be more recruitment to coastal
police in which 200 will be recruited from fishermen folk.  `  33.95 crore was disbursed to
provide ` 2000/head to all active fishermen as relief in the immediate days following cyclone
Ockhi for livelihood.
18

19
Further Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee notes that the proposal to provide training in an alternate livelihood is still
under consideration of the State Government of Tamil Nadu. The Committee hopes that it will be
decided soon and the Committee will be apprised of the same.
4.2 Deployment of Forces
Recommendation
4.2.1 On perusal of the details of prepositioning of the NDRF teams, the Committee comes to a conclusion
that there was timely prepositioning of the NDRF teams and the deployment was consistent with the requisitions
submitted by the State Governments of the affected states. However, the Committee feels that the State
Governments may not be able to make an optimal need based assessment of the requirements and sometimes
the number of teams requested by them may be more than the requirement, while at other times the number
of teams requisitioned may not be sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) should also make an independent assessment of the number of
battalions that may be required for deployment as per the circumstances prevalent in the ground level. Such
an arrangement is all the more necessary in case of the disasters affecting several States where each State
will make competing demands for prepositioning of the Forces. In such a situation, a rational assessment of
needs and optimal pre-positioning of the Forces may be essentially required from a national perspective
keeping the larger public interest in view. ( Para 2.4.10 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The prepo sitioning/deployment of NDRF teams are made in accordance with the ground level
requirement as well as the demand projected by the concerned state authority. Time is of essence during
response in the face of disaster. There may not be sufficient time to carry out need-assessment after a
disaster strikes. However, for disaster like cyclones where early warning is invariably available, standard
criteria could be worked out to assess pre-positioning of NDRF, as proposed by the Parliamentary
Committee. NDMA will attempt to bring out broad guidelines for such a need-assessment in consultation
with NDRF.
Further Recommendation
4.2.3 The Committee notes the assurance that NDMA will bring out the broad guidelines for need
assessment in consultation with NDRF and will apprise the Committee thereof.
4.3 Immediate Relief and Restoration Measures
Recommendation
4.3.1 The committee notes the relief efforts undertaken by the Tamil Nadu Government and the monetary
assistance that has been provided to the affected persons. However, the Committee feels the monetary
assistance, at best, could be a mere stop-gap arrangement and affected households, especially those of
deceased and missing fishermen, may not be able to sustain for long on monetary assistance in the
absence of a viable means of livelihood. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the State Government
of Tamil Nadu should make arrangements to provide free education to the children of the deceased/

20
missing fishermen and training in an alternative livelihood to at least one member of all the affected
families. ( Para 3.1.14 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The State Government provide ex-gratia relief assistance of ` 20 lakh to dependent of missing as well
as bereaved fishermen. The State Government have sanctioned a sum of  ` 42,50,000/- to provide special
livelihood assistance of  ` 5,000/- per family to the families of the fishermen went missing due to Ockhi
cyclone. State Government also announced to provide employment in the Government organization to any
one of the legal heir of the families of the deceased/ missing fishermen based on their educational qualification
as a support to the families who had lost their bread winner due to Ockhi cyclone”.
4.3.3 The State Government also started a special scheme for meeting the educational expenditure for
pursuing/continuing higher studies (Professional, technical and academic) by the children of fishermen who
went missing while fishing and the fishermen who died in shooting while fishing is being implemented by
Fisheries Department.
4.3.4 To pro vide training in an alternate livelihood to the families of the missing/ deceased fishermen due to
Ockhi cyclone is under consideration of the Government.
Further Recommendation
4.3.5 Since the proposal to provide training in an alternate livelihood to the families of the missing/
deceased fishermen due to Ockhi cyclone is still under consideration of the Government, the
Committee would like to impress upon the MHA to expedite the matter and furnish the final reply.
4.4 Financial Assistance to the States
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee takes note of the recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission and is at loss as to
why it has not been accepted and why the States still have to contribute 25 per cent of SDRF . The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the pattern of contributions to the SDRF may be revisited as per the
recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission. ( Para 3.2.5 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 In this context, the Department of Expenditure has informed that the Government has accepted the
recommendations with the modification that the percentage share of the States will continue to be as
before, and that the flows will also be of the same order (linked to the extent of cess), as in the existing
system; and that, once GST is in place, the recommendation of FFC on disaster relief would be fully
implemented.
4.4.3 Subsequently, in the light of aforesaid decision and after the rollout of GST, the matter was considered
by the Budget Division, Ministry of Finance and it was informed that ‘actual impact of GST on flow of
Union Government would be known only in next financial year. It has, therefore been decided that the
existing system of augmentation to SDRF of States by erstwhile General Category States contributing 25
per cent and erstwhile Special Category States (now NE & Himalayan States) contributing 10 per cent and
the balance being contributed by the Union Government as grant-in-aid may continue till alternate source of
financing of NDRF/ SDRF is explored’.

21
Further Recommendation
4.4.4 The Committee notes the statement of the Ministry that the actual impact of GST on the flow
of Union Government would be known by next financial year , i.e. 2019-20. Therefore, the Committee
would like to be apprised of further action taken in this regard after the financial year 2019-20.

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
MISSING FISHERMEN
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation
having regard to its importance. (Para 1.2.6)
Immediate Relief and Restoration Measures
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendation further. (Para 2.1.3)
RECONSTRUCTION AND REHABILITATION
In view of the reply furnished above the Committee does not desire to pursue its
recommendation further. (Para 2.2.6)
MISSING FISHERMEN
The Ministry has not replied whether the State Government of Kerala completed the collection
of mobile numbers of active fishermen and start the operation of the State level Control Room to
strengthen the monitoring system. Further, the Ministry has not replied to the recommendation
regarding mobile phones fitted with NavIC devices that might be made available to all the fishermen
within the next six months. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for
implementation at the earliest. (Para 3.1.4)
IMMEDIATE RELIEF AND RESTORATION MEASURES
In connection with the reply of the Ministry of Home Af fairs at para 3.2.3, it may be clarified
that the recommendation of the Committee was not about ex-gratia from PMNRF. Rather the
recommendation was for the Central Government (the MHA) to enhance the assistance from  ` ` ` ` ` .
2 lakh to  ` ` ` ` ` . 5 lakh in case of death and from  ` ` ` ` ` . 50,000 to  ` ` ` ` ` . 1 lakh in case of injury. The
contention of the Ministry of Home Affairs that information pertaining to PMNRF is not admissible
under Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Houses of Parliament and corpus of the
Fund is from voluntarily public contributions and not from the Consolidated Fund of India and
enhancing the quantum of assistance is at the sole discretion of PM has not been disputed by the
Committee in its recommendation.  What the Committee has recommended is that amount of  ` ` ` ` `.
2 lakhs is quite low and therefore, should be enhanced to  ` ` ` ` `. 5 lakhs and for serious injury from
`````. 50000 to  ` ` ` ` ` . 1 lakh. The Committee thus reiterates its recommendation given in para 3.1.6 of
211th Report. (Para 3.2.5)
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES
The Committee notes the procedural aspect that an Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT)
is constituted and deputed for an on-the-spot assessment of damage and requirement of funds for
relief measures of immediate nature are met, as per the existing items and norms of SDRF/NDRF.
But the Committee vide para 3.2.12 ibid had primarily recommended for evolving a new procedure
by appointing a joint team of the Central and the State Governments instead of having two layers of
assessment viz. firstly by the State Government and secondly by the IMCT so that the vital time
taken in completing the procedural formalities of making damage assessment will be minimum.
22

23
Moreover, the Committee had also recommended that within one week after every disaster IMCT
should make a preliminary visit to the disaster affected areas. (Para 3.3.5)
In view of this Committee reiterates its recommendation made at Para 3.2.12 ibid which is as
follows:-
“The Committee, therefore, recommends that for every disaster an inter-ministerial Central
Government team should make a preliminary visit to the disaster-affected areas, within one week
of the disaster, and a joint preliminary damage assessment should be done in conjunction with the
State Governments concerned.  The Committee feels that will not only eliminate the variance in
the amounts assessed by the State Government and the IMCT but will also expedite the process of
approval and sanctioning of the funds.” (Para 3.3.6)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has explained about the current
mechanism being followed for funding the NDRF under the GST regime. But, the recommendation
of the Committee to diversify the sources of financing and expand the corpus of the National and
State Disaster Relief Funds has not been commented upon. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its
recommendation made at para 3.2.18. (Para 3.3.9)
SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATION
The Committee notes that the proposal to provide training in an alternate livelihood is still
under consideration of the State Government of Tamil Nadu. The Committee hopes that it will be
decided soon and the Committee will be apprised of the same. (Para 4.1.3)
DEPLOYMENT OF FORCES
The Committee notes the assurance that NDMA will bring out the broad guidelines for need
assessment in consultation with NDRF and will apprise the Committee thereof. (Para 4.2.3)
IMMEDIATE RELIEF AND RESTORATION MEASURES
Since the proposal to provide training in an alternate livelihood to the families of the missing/
deceased fishermen due to Ockhi cyclone is still under consideration of the Government, the
Committee would like to impress upon the MHA to expedite the matter and furnish the final
reply. (Para 4.3.5)
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES
The Committee notes the statement of the Ministry that the actual impact of GST on the flow
of Union Governm ent would be known by next financial year, i.e. 2019-20. Therefore, the
Committee would like to be apprised of further action taken in this regard after the financial
year 2 019-20. (Para 4.4.4)

MINUTES

27
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 5th February, 2019 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
8. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
9. Shri Nagarajan P.
10. Shri Jagdambika Pal
11. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following  four draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) Draft 216th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Eleventh Report on the Cyclone Ockhi-its Impact on Fishermen
and Damage Caused by it;
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft 216th Report for consideration and adopted the same
without any change.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

28
7. The Committee authorised the chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament in the current session
itself.
8. * * *
9. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.