PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 158
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28  MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS (RE-ORGANISATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS (REORGANISATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-308


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—4
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 5—12
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 13— 20
The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Bill, 2011 ..................... 15—20

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who nominated to the Committee on
Rural Development.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fifty-eighth Report on the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation)
Amendment Bill, 2011.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha,
referred
♣ the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011 (Annexure-1)  as
introduced and pending in Lok Sabha, to the Committee on 13 th January, 2012, for examination and
report by 31 st March, 2012.
3. The Bill seeks to amend the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971. The proposed
amendments are administrative in nature.
4. The Committee considered the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
in its sitting held on 6 th February, 2012, wherein it heard the presentation of the representatives of
the Ministry of Home Affairs. As per practice, the officers of the Legislative Department and
Department of Legal Affairs were also present in that sitting to respond to the queries of the
Members. The Committee in that sitting also took up the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
4.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 13
th March, 2012 considered and adopted this Report.
5. The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) The North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011;
(ii) Detailed background Note on the Bill as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) All-India Services Act, 1951;
(iv) The North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971;
(v) Oral evidence tendered by the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Law and
Justice; and
(vi) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on the queries raised by the
Members.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13th March,  2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
♣Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 49211 dated 16 th January, 2012.

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1.1 The States in the North Eastern Region were reconstituted by the North Eastern Areas (Re-
organisation) Act, 1971. This Act provides for the establishment of the States of Manipur and
Tripura and the formation of the State of Meghalaya and of the Union territories of Mizoram and
Arunachal Pradesh by re-organisation of the existing State of Assam and matters connected
therewith.
1.2 The North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011 seeks to amend Section 61
(3) of the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971, to provide for separate Cadres of All
India Services for the States of Manipur and Tripura.
1.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs in the background note stated that according to DoPT,
constitution of a new cadre is an executive decision and in the past, bifurcation/creation of All India
Services had been made by the enabling provisions of relevant Acts passed by the Parliament.
According to Ministry of Law, it would be necessary to amend Section 61 of the North Eastern
Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971 to provide for separate All India Service cadres for the States
of Manipur and Tripura from the existing joint cadres.
BACKGROUND
1.4 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, the demand for bifurcation of Joint Manipur-
Tripura cadre was initially raised by the Chief Minister of Tripura in 2004. In the meeting held on
16
th February, 2006, under the chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to discuss various priority areas
of the Government of Tripura, the issue of ‘Splitting Manipur-Tripura Joint Cadre’ was also
discussed. A meeting of the Cadre Controlling Authorities of the All India Services namely, DoPT,
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Environment and Forest was convened on 12
th January,
2009 by DoPT to discuss the issue of bifurcation of the Northeastern cadres into independent
separate cadres. The Ministry informed that in that meeting, it was recommended to split the Joint
Manipur-Tripura All India Service Cadre into two independent State cadres. In the meeting held on
20
th January, 2010 in the Cabinet Secretariat, it was decided that DoPT would expedite taking a
final decision in the matter of splitting Manipur-Tripura Joint Cadre into two independent cadres.
It was further stated that the State Government of Tripura and Manipur have given their consent
for cadre bifurcation.
1.5 The constitution of the All India Services Cadres is governed by the provisions of Rule 3
of the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; the Indian Police Service (cadre)
Rules,1954 and the Indian Forest Service (cadre) Rules,1966 which is reproduced below:-
(i) There shall be constituted for each State or group of States an Indian Administrative
Service Cadre; an Indian Police Service Cadre and an Indian Forest Service Cadre.
(ii) The Cadre so constituted for a State or a group of States is hereinafter referred to as
a ‘State Cadre’ or, as the case may be, a ‘Joint Cadre’.
1.6 As mentioned earlier, constitution of a new cadre is an executive decision. The Ministry of
Home Af fairs informed the Committee that in the past, bifurcation/new creation was made by the
enabling provisions of relevant Acts passed by the Parliament. All India Services cadres of Madhya
Pradesh, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh were bifurcated into independent cadres of MP, Chhattisgarh,

2
Bihar, Jharkhand, UP and Uttarakhand respectively under the enabling provisions of the relevant Re-
organisation Acts of the concerned State. The Manipur-Tripura joint cadre for All India Services
was constituted as per the provisions of Section 61 (Sub-Section 2 and 3) of the North Eastern
Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971.
1.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that the Ministry of Law  advised that
splitting of joint cadre would require necessary amendments in the North Eastern Areas (Re-
organisation) Act, 1971 to provide for separate All India Service cadres for the States of Manipur
and Tripura. After receiving the advice of the Law  Ministry, the DoPT sought the comments of
the State Government of Manipur. The State Government of Manipur endorsed the proposal stating
that it would enable better  cadre management and is also expected to provide better governance.
1.8 The Committee was further informed that in the meeting held on 12.1.2009 by Department
of Personnel and Training (DoPT), the respective Cadre Controlling Authorities for All India Services
i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs (IPS) and the Ministry of Environment and Forests (for IFS) agreed
to split the Manipur- Tripura joint cadre for the All India Services into two independent cadres.
1.9 The Committee was further informed that in view of the above proposal to amend the
North-Eastern Areas (Re-organization) Act, 1971 for the constitution of separate All-India Services
Cadres in Manipur and Tripura by splitting of Joint Cadre of Manipur-Tripura was forwarded for
consideration of the Cabinet on 16
th August, 2011 along-with the draft of North East Areas (Re-
organization) Amendment Bill, 2011. The proposal was approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held
on 5
th September, 2011.
1.10 After approval of the Cabinet, the North Eastern Areas (Re-organization) Amendment
Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 07.12.2011.
PRESENTATION/ORAL EVIDENCE
1.11 The Committee in its sitting held on 6 th February, 2012, heard the Home Secretary on the
North-Eastern Areas (Re-organization) Amendment Bill, 2011. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of
Home Af fairs made a presentation on the Bill. After presentation, Members of the Committee raised
some issues pertaining to the, provisions and the implications of the proposed amendments in the
Bill.
1.12 Some Members sought to know as to why the Government dragged a small issue like
creation of a separate cadre for the States of Tripura and Manipur for more than a decade. The
Members also sought to know as to when Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh were
bifurcated, there was an inbuilt enabling provision in their re-organisation Act for creation of a
separate State cadre for All India Services, why such a provision was not there in the North-
Eastern Re-organisation Act. Responding to the query, the Home Secretary stated that they learnt
from experience. He further stated that when they had a Re-organisation Act later, an enabling
clause was provided.
1.13 Some Members drawing the attention of the joint cadre for Assam and Meghalaya and a
demand for separate cadre, sought to know the problem in creating a separate cadre for
Meghalaya. They also asked as to why the Government is not creating a separate cadre for
Arunachal Pradesh.
1.14 Responding to the query, the Home Secretary submitted that the strength of officers for
Meghalaya is very small and therefore, it may not be sustainable to have a separate cadre.
Regarding Arunachal Pardesh, he submitted that there was no demand from Arunachal Pradesh to
have a separate cadre and like Meghalaya, it is very small and comes under Arunachal-Goa-
Mizoram-Union Territories Cadre.

3
1.15 One Member drew the attention to the demand for separate High Court for Tripura for more
than two decades. The Member mentioned that people are facing a lot of problems because of the
absence of a separate High Court. A High Court building has come up. The then Law Minister,
inaugurated the building and appreciated it. The Home Minister has visited the building, but, nothing
has come yet. The Member, therefore, sought to know the present status in the matter.
1.16 Responding to the query, the Home Secretary submitted that the Government has moved in
the direction of a separate High Court for Tripura. He added that the Cabinet has approved the draft
Bill which the Ministry proposes to move in the forthcoming Session.
1.17 Some Members felt that there are seven States in the north-east, and every State has
problem and grievances not only on cadre issue but also on judiciary issues, including the
Accountant General, Police and about IAS issues. The Members sought to know as to why
the Ministry was not bringing a comprehensive Bill to amend the North-East Area Re-organisation
Act, 1971?
1.18 The representative of MHA submitted that as far as Accountants General are concerned,
now each and every State has got a separate Accountant General. He further stated that about IAS,
cadre, there are two joint cadres only. One is Assam-Meghalaya and the other is Manipur-Tripura
and Arunachal Pradesh comes under the U.T.
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE
1.19 The Committee in its sitting held on 6
th February, 2012 took up the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
1.20 This Clause proposes amendment in Sub-section (3) of Section-61 of the North-Eastern
Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971 which reads as below.
“On and from the appointed date, there shall be constituted for the States of Manipur and
Tripura a joint cadre of the Indian Administrative Service, a Joint cadre of the Indian
Police Service and a Joint cadre of the Indian Forest Service”
1.21 The proposed amendment seeks to replace the above Sub-section (3) as follows:–
■ “(3) On and from the date of commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Re-organisation) Act, 2011, there shall be constituted each for the State of Manipur
and for the State of Tripura a separate cadre of the Indian Administrative Service, a
separate cadre of the Indian Police Service and a separate cadre of the Indian Forest
Service.”
■ (3 A) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in sub section
(1) shall be such as the Central Government may, by order determine before the date
of commencement of the North-Eastern Areas Re-organisation (Amendment) Act, 2011.
■ (3 B) The members of each of the said services borne on the joint cadre for the States
of Manipur and Tripura in each category of the All-India Services immediately before
the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisati on) Amendment
Act, 2011, shall be allocated to the State cadres of the same service constituted under
sub-section (1) in such manner and with effect from such date or dates as the Central
Government may, by order, specify.

4
■ (3 C) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the
commencement of the North-Eastern Areas, (Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 2011, of
the All-India Services Act, 1951, or the rules and regulations made thereunder.”
1.22 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
1.23 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential/drafting nature, namely “2011” and ‘Sixty-Second’ to be substituted by
‘2012’ and “sixty-third” year, respectively.
1.24 Since, this Bill proposes changes which are administrative in nature, the Committee
adopts the Bill without any change and commends for being passed.
1.25 The Committee, while adopting the Bill, also suggests that the issue relating to
separate cadres for all other States of North-Eastern region may be considered in
consultation with the concerned States. The Committee desires that a comprehensive Bill
amending the North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Act, 1971 may be brought forward in
the Parliament after completing all consultations at the earliest.
1.26 The Committee also desires that the Bill for separate High Court for Tripura may
be brought forward to the Parliament at the earliest.

5
MINUTES

6

7
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 6 th February, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. V . Maitreyan
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Home Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Chadha, Special Secretary
3. Shri Anil Goswami, Additional Secretary
4. Shri G.V .V. Sarma, Joint Secretary
5. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati Rashmi Goel, Joint Secretary
7. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Joint Secretary
7

8
8. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary
9. Shri Dharmendra Sharma, Joint Secretary
10. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director, IB
11. Shri Loknath Behera, IG, NIA
12. Shri J.P.N. Singh, Director
13. Shri Avinash Mishra, Director
14. Shri R.K. Suman, Director
15. Shri Anuj Sharma, Director
** *
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
3. Shrimati Sharda Jain, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
5. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
6. Shri Gourav Banerjee, Additional Solicitor General of India
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
2. Shri S.R. Mishra, Deputy Legal Advisor
** *
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. He then
apprised the members about the Agenda of the day which was to hear the presentation of the Home
Secretary on the following Bills:–
(i) The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Bill, 2011;
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
2.1 The Chairman informed the Members that the Law Secretary would not be able to attend
the meeting because of his pre-occupation with an official tour. The Chairman, however, felt that
being mini Parliament, Committee’s business is more important than tour and the Secretary,
therefore, should have taken prior permission before going on the tour. He asked the Joint
Secretary and Legal Adviser of the Department to convey displeasure of the Committee to him.
I. Declaration of Interest by Members in Subject/Bill undertaken for examination
2.2 The Chairman then read out the following rule 294 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business of Rajya Sabha for information of the Members which says, “Whenever a
member has a personal or specific pecuniary interest (direct or indirect) in a matter being
considered by the Council or a Committee thereof, he shall declare the nature of such interest
notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the Register, and shall not participate in any
debate taking place in the Council or its Committees before making such declaration”.
*** Relate to other matters.

9
II. The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
3. The Chairman then apprised the Members that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, had
referred the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Bill, 2011 on 13 th January, 2012, for
examination and report by 31 st March, 2012. The Bill seeks to amend the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971. He further informed that at present, as per Section 61(3) of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971, there is a joint cadre of All India Services for the States
of Manipur and Tripura. According to the DoPT, constitution of a new cadre is an executive
decision and in the past bifurcation/creation was done by the enabling provisions of relevant Acts
passed by the Parliament. However, in the case of joint cadre of All India Services for the States
of Manipur and Tripura, amendment is required in Section 61 of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971 for the purpose. The proposed amendment was of administrative in
nature.
[On Arrival of Home Secretary and other officials]
4. The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials to the sitting of the
Committee. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs made a presentation on the Bill. After
presentation, Members of the Committee raised some issues pertaining to the provisions and the
implications of the proposed amendments in the Bill.
4.1 On the issue of dragging a small issue of creation of a separate cadre for the States of
Tripura and Manipur for more than a decade, and absence of enabling provision on the lines of
enabling provision in the reorganisation Acts of Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand,
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand the Home Secretary stated that they learnt from experience and
threfore, enabling clauses were provided in the Reorganisation Acts later on.
4.2 Some Members drew the attention to a demand for separate cadre for Assam and
Meghalaya. They also asked as to why the Government was not creating a separate cadre for
Arunachal Pradesh. Responding to the query, the Home Secretary submitted that the strength of
officers for Meghalaya was very small and therefore, it may not be sustainable to have a separate
cadre. Regarding Arunachal Pardesh, he submitted that there was no demand from Arunachal
Pradesh to have a separate cadre and like Meghalaya, it is very small cadre and comes under
Arunachal-Goa-Mizoram-Union Territories Cadre.
4.3 One Member drew the attention to the demand for separate High Court for Tripura for more
than two decades. The Member mentioned that people are facing a lot of problems because of the
absence of a separate High Court. A High Court building has come up and the then Law Minister,
inaugurated the building. The Home Minister had visited the building, but, nothing had come yet.
The Member, therefore, sought to know the present status in the matter. Responding to the query,
the Home Secretary submitted that the Government has moved in the direction of a separate High
Court for Tripura. He added that the Cabinet has approved the draft Bill and the Ministry proposes
to move in the forthcoming Session.
4.4 Some Members felt that there are seven States in the North-East, and every State has
problem and grievances not only on cadre issue but also on judiciary issues, including the
Accountant General, Police and about IAS issues. The Members sought to know as to why
the Ministry was not brining a comprehensive Bill to amend the North-East Area Reorganisation
Act, 1971? The representative of MHA submitted that as far as Accountants General are concerned,
now each and every State has got a separate Accountant General. He further stated that about IAS
cadre, there are two joint cadres only. One is Assam-Meghalaya and the other is Manipur-Tripura
and Arunachal Pradesh comes under the U.T.
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL

10
4.5 The Committee then took up the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
4.5.1 This Clause proposes amendment in Sub-section (3) of Section-61 of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.
4.5.2 The proposed amendment seeks to replace the above Sub-section (3).
4.5.3 The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
4.6 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which are
of consequential/drafting nature, namely “2011” and ‘Sixty-Second’ to be substituted by ‘2012’ and
“Sixty-third” year, respectively.
4.6.1 The Committee adopted the Bill without any change.
4.7 The Committee, while adopting the Bill, also suggested that the issue relating to separate
cadres for all other States of North-Eastern region may be considered in consultation with the
concerned States. The Committee desired that a comprehensive Bill amending the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 may be brought forward in the Parliament after completing all
consultations at the earliest. The Committee also desired that the Bill for separate High Court for
Tripura may be brought before the Parliament at the earliest.
5-5.5 * * *
6-6.4 * * *
7-7.3 * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

11
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13 th March, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri L.K. Advani
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
9. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
12. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
** *
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them about the agenda of
the day which was to adopt two reports namely, the draft 157
th Report on the Arms (Amendment)
Bill, 2011, and the draft 158 th Report on the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Bill,
2011. After some discussion, both the Reports were adopted with some changes.
11
*** Relate to other matters.

12
2.1. * * *
2.2. * * *
3.0. * * *
4.0. * * *
5.0 * * *
6.0. * * *
7.0 * * *
8.0 * * *
9.0 * * *
9.1 * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. to meet again on 19 th March, 2012.
*** Relate to other matters.

13
ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 107 of 201 1
THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS (REORGANISATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:–
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 61 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
Act, 1971, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(3) On and from the date of commencement of the
North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 2011,
there shall be constituted each for the State of Manipur and
for the State of Tripura a separate cadre of the Indian
Administrative Service, a separate cadre of the Indian Police
Service and a separate cadre of the Indian Forest Service.
15
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 61 of
Act 81 of 1971.

16
(3A) The initial strength and composition of the State
cadres referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be such as the
Central Government may, by order, determine before the date
of commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
Amendment Act, 2011.
(3B) The members of each of the said services borne
on the joint cadre for the States of Manipur and Tripura in
each category of the All-India Services immediately before the
commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (reorganisation)
Amendment Act, 2011 shall be allocated to the State cadres of
the same service constituted under sub-section ( 1) in such
manner and with effect from such date or dates as the
Central Government may, by order, specify.
(3C) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect
the operation, on or after the commencement of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 201 1, of the
All-India Services Act, 1951, or the rules and regulations
made thereunder.”.
61 of 1951.

17
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 was
enacted with a view to providing for the establishment of the States
of Manipur and Tripura and also for the formation of the State of
Meghalaya and for matters connected therewith.
2. Section 61 of the aforesaid Act contains provisions relating
to the All-India Services. Sub-section (3) of the said section
provides for the constitution of a joint cadre each of the Indian
Administrative Service, the Indian Police Service and the Indian
Forest Service for the States of Manipur and Tripura. The law
relating to recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to the All-India Services is contained in the All-India
Services Act, 1951 and the rules and regulations made thereunder.
3. At present, there is a joint cadre of the All-India Services
for the States of Manipur and Tripura. The demand for bifurcation
of the joint Manipur and Tripura cadre in respect of each of the
aforesaid Services was initially raised by the then Chief Minister of
Tripura in the year 2004. The issue was discussed in several review
meetings. A meeting of the Cadre Controlling Authorities of the All-
India Services, namely, the Department of Personnel and Training,
the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Environment and
Forests was convened on the 12th January, 2009 wherein it was
recommended to split the joint Manipur and Tripura All-India Service
Cadres into two independent State cadres. The proposal for splitting
the joint Manipur and Tripura cadre of the All-India Services was
considered by the Central Government after consultation with the
stakeholders.
4. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend section 61 of the
North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 relating to All-India
Services to give effect to the said proposal.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM
The 21st November, 2011.
17

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 61 of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 so as to constitute
separate cadres of certain All-India Services, namely, the Indian
Administrative Service, the Indian Police Service and the Indian
Forest Service for the States of Manipur and Tripura respectively,
by splitting up of the existing joint cadre for the said States. The
expenditure on these Services would be borne by the respective
State Governments and hence no separate expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India, both recurring and non-recurring, is
involved.
18

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE N ORTH-EASTERN A REAS (R EORGANISATION)
ACT, 1971
(81 OF 1971)
** * * *
PART VIII
PROVISIONS AS TO S ERVICES
61. (1)* * * * *
(3) On and from the appointed day, there shall be constituted
for the States of Manipur and Tripura a joint cadre of the Indian
Administrative Service, a joint cadre of the Indian Police Service
and a joint cadre of the Indian Forest Service.
** * * *
19
Provisions
relating to All-
India Services.

20
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.