PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 136
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21  OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
REVAMPING AND REVITALIZATION OF CIVIL
DEFENCE IN THE COUNTRY

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
REVAMPING AND REVITALIZATION OF CIVIL
DEFENCE IN THE COUNTRY
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-263

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)
2. C OMPOSITION  OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE ................................................................................ (ii)
3. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—7
5. C ONCLUSIONS/OBSERV ATIONS AND R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 8—10
6. M INUTES  OF S UB-COMMITTEE /COMMITTEE ........................................................................... 1 1—15

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007)
(Constituted on 5 August, 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
∝ 2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
Δ 3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
@7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
∉ 8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
•18. Shri Raghunath Jha
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(i)
∝ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 consequent upon induction in Union Council of Ministers.
Δ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  9th April, 2008 consequent upon expiration of term of membership of the Rajya Sabha.
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  2nd April, 2008 consequent upon expiration of term of membership of the Rajya Sabha.
∉ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  27th March, 2008 consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from the membership of
the Rajya Sabha from that date.
• Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 consequent upon induction in Union Council of Ministers.
* Nominated w.e.f.  12th December, 2007 vice  Shri T.K. Hamza who is nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON CIVIL DEFENCE AND
REHABILITATION OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR MIGRANTS
(Constituted on 13 April, 2007)
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia— Convenor
2. Shri N. Jothi
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Sachin Pilot
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
(Re-constituted on 9 August, 2007)
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia— Convenor
@2. Shri N. Jothi
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Sachin Pilot
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
(Revised Composition on 26 May, 2008)
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia— Convenor
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Sachin Pilot
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  27th March, 2008 consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from the membership of
the Rajya Sabha from that date.
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence
in the Country pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The Sub-Committee on Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants of Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs was constituted on 13th April, 2007 for
in-depth examination of the Civil Defence System in the country and the rehabilitation measures
taken by the Government for the J&K Migrants. The Sub-Committee was reconstituted on
9th August, 2007.
3. The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 16th October, 2007 heard the official presentation
of the Secretary, Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject. In that
presentation, the Sub-Committee was briefed of the background, aims and objectives, organizational
structure including the current status of Civil Defence set up in the country, categorization of Civil
Defence Towns, inherent weaknesses in the present set-up, new role in changed scenario and about
the changed policy perception towards Civil Defence. The Sub-Committee was also informed that
the Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted a one man High Power Committee headed by
Shri K.M. Singh, a former Director General of CISF and a Member of National Disaster
Management Authority, who had submitted a report titled ‘Revamping of Civil Defence in the
Country: National. Policy Approach Paper’ in December, 2006 containing a series of
recommendations for revitalization and revamping of Civil Defence in the country.
4. The Sub-Committee has presented its Report to the Committee based on the official
presentation on 16th October, 2007, the clarifications given by the representatives of MHA during
the said meeting to the queries raised by its members, the recommendations made in the High
Power Committee Report and the ATR thereon supplied by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
5. The Committee in its meeting held on 15th October, 2008 considered and adopted the
report.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
15 October, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
REPORT
1.0 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
1.1 According to the Background Note submitted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Civil
Defence in our country owes its origin to erstwhile Air Raid Precaution (RAP) Organisation raised
and operated during World War II by the Ministry of Defence, to safeguard the life and property
of the civilian population and also to maintain the continuity of productive and economic activity
of the nation during the war time. It was wound up after World War II in 1945. In 1956,
Government of India, in consultation with the State Governments, planned establishment of an
“Emergency Relief Board” for rendering aid to people affected by natural calamities like floods,
famine and epidemic etc. The Board comprised of official and non-official members with Minister
of Home Affairs as its Chairman. Based on the decision taken by the Board, “Emergency Relief
Organisation” was established in 1956 to meet such emergencies/eventualities.
1.2 The policy of the Government of India, till the Chinese aggression and declaration of
Emergency in 1962, was confined to making the States and Union T erritories conscious of the need
of Civil Defence measures and to ask them to keep ready Civil Defence paper plans for major cities
and towns. Two major events which gave fillip to formalization of Civil Defence in India since
independence, were the Chinese aggression in November, 1962 and the Indo-Pak conflict in 1965
during which the nation was subjected to enemy air attacks. The Civil Defence, which earlier
operated under the now defunct “Defence of India Act 1962” was given legal status by” Civil
Defence Act” passed in 1968.
2.0 CHANGING NOTION OF CIVIL DEFENCE
2.1 During the course of presentation, the Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Sub-
Committee that the definition of Civil Defence includes:—
“any measures, not amounting to actual combat, for affording protection to any person,
property, place or thing against any hostile attack.
‘Hostile Attack’ means any attack by any person or body of persons, during war, external
aggression, internal disturbances or otherwise which endangers the security of any life,
property, place or thing.”
2.2 The Sub-Committee was further apprised of the aims of the Civil Defence which are as
under:—
(i) to save life;
(ii) to minimize damage to property;
(iii) to maintain continuity of production; and
(iv) to keep up the high morale of public.
2.3 The present role of Civil Defence, in terms of the Civil Defence Act, 1968 is to provide
protection to individuals, properties and establishments against any “hostile attack”. The sub-
Committee was also informed that the MHA vide order dated 5 September, 2003, conveyed its
approval to the State Governments to utilize the services of Civil Defence volunteers for mitigation,
prevention and preparedness for disaster and also for response and relief after a disaster struck.
In pursuance of this order, Civil Defence is utilized by some of the States not only in response

2
activities during disaster, but also in pre-disaster activities, particularly in the field of community
capacity building and generating public awareness.
3.0 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
3.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Sub-Committee that the organizational structure
of Civil Defence is as under:—
(i) At the national level, the Director General Civil Defence under the Ministry of Home
Affairs is responsible for formulating Civil Defence policies and for coordination
thereof;
(ii) In the States, the Civil Defence is set up headed by a senior police officer designated
as the Director Civil Defence; and
(iii) At the district level, the District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) of
a district is designated as Controller of Civil Defence.
4.0 CURRENT STATUS OF CIVIL DEFENCE SET UP
4.1 The Ministry stated that the following is the current status of Civil Defence in the
country:—
(i) Out of the 225 categorised CD towns, only 121 have so far been activated. (The
list is enclosed at Annexure-A). As a result, as against the target of 12.98 lakh
volunteers, only about 6.64 lakh have been enrolled so far and 4.84 lakh trained;
(ii) Only 17 States are having Central Training Institutes (CTIs) and most of them are
combined training institutes for Civil Defence and Home Guards;
(iii) M any of these training institutions are virtually non-functional because of lack of
funds and infrastructure. In addition, due to non-availability of funds, a sizeable
number of posts of permanent staff in CD set-ups remain vacant;
(iv) Many of the units do not have adequate transport, proper communication network
and other infrastructure including a proper control room for their day-to-day
functioning;
(v) No Civil Defence set up exists in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and UT of Dadar and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu,
Lakshadweep and Puducherry; and
(vi) Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Jharkhand and UT of Andaman and Nicobar have deficiency of
50% volunteers.
5.0 CATEGORIZATION OF CIVIL DEFENCE TOWNS
5.1 According to information supplied by the Ministry of Home Affairs Civil Defence Towns
were categorized as under:—
Sl. No. Category Details of categories
12 3
1. Category I Within the strike range of enemy aircraft

3
12 3
2. Category IA Near Atomic Energy Establishments
3. Category II Population more than 1 lakh and 30  kms away from military
installations
4. Category III Threatened by surface to surface missiles or ship borne
weapon systems
5. Category IV Dormant sectors
6. Non-categorized Left at the discretion of State Governments/UTs towns
6.0 FUNDING MECHANISM OF CIVIL DEFENCE
6.1 During the course of the discussions, the Sub-Committee was told of the funding
mechanism for regulating civil defence in the country which is as under:—
Although, as part of the overall Defence preparedness, Civil Defence is in the Union List,
the responsibility for raising and training the Civil Defence set up has been given to the States. The
Central Government reimburses 25% of the cost of raising, training and equipping Civil Defence
corps.
6.2 To help the State Government, the Central Government reimburses, in the form of grants-
in-aid, some part of the expenditure incurred on the authorized items for raising and training of
volunteers, other equipment and services. Till 1991-92, Government of India was incurring 100%
expenditure in respect of all NE States including Assam and Sikkim and 5 Northern districts of
West Bengal. For other States, the sharing pattern was 50:50. It was revised every year upto
1996-97, from which year, the reimbursement is at the rate of 50% for six North East States
except Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. It is at the rate of 25% for all the other States. A sum of
Rs.12 crore each year during 2005-06 and 2006-07 was reimbursed to the States for this purpose
as against an annual amount of Rs.10 crores during the preceding year 2004-05.
6.3 The Sub-Committee was informed that during the year 2006-07 and 2007-08, budget
allocated for the purpose of Civil Defence was to the tune of Rs.12.00 crore for each financial
year. It was further informed that the Central Government reimburses expenditure on raising,
equipping and training of volunteers.
7.0 RECOMMENDATIONS OF GROUP OF MINISTERS
7.1 In this context it would be appropriate to consider the recommendations made by the Group
of Ministers constituted to look into issues of reforming the National Security System which had
also emphasized the need of revamping and strengthening the Civil Defence system. The
recommendation of Group of  Ministers is as follows:—
“During times of war, natural calamities and other similar emer gencies, Civil Defence
Organization has traditionally played a vital role in guarding the hinterland, supporting the
Armed Forces, mobilizing the citizens and in helping civil administration discharge its
responsibilities. Over the years, however, new and complex changes have emerged; the
preparedness of Civil Defence Personnel has also suffered. Therefore, it is, for the Ministry
of Home Affairs to carry out in-depth review of the organization’s effectiveness, identify
its weakness and the new challenges it will be required to meet, in the contemporary
scenario and evolve a concrete action plan to revamp it. This important task needs to be
undertaken in close collaboration with the State Governments. It is advisable to complete
this exercise on an urgent basis”.

4
8.0 J.C. PANT COMMITTEE
8.1 In the year 2001, a High Power Committee (HPC) under the Chairmanship of Shri J.C. Pant
was constituted which also recommended involvement of Civil Defence in Disaster Management.
The relevant recommendations of the Pant Committee are as below:
“The Central Government, under section 3 (1) (z), may ‘make rules regarding
utilization of Civil Defence Corps in disaster response so that they remain in a state of
continuous preparedness. A comprehensive role for all these services should be formalized
in a harmonized structure for Disaster Management. All the services should be integrated
into the State Disaster Management Plan and work under the concerned State Department
for Disaster Management. The State Disaster Management Act, being enacted, should
include the Civil Defence as one of the agencies of relief and rehabilitation.
State Governments may be permitted to accept donations for Civil Defence from
corporate sectors. The Chief Wardens of Civil Defence in every town should be accorded
appropriate status in Civil Administration hierarchy, especially with regard to their role and
importance in Disaster Management. Their services when utilized should be properly
recognized. To have a multi disciplinary unit, which will come into motion for activating and
following up various functions and responsibilities entrusted to DG CD under the Union War
Book during war, and to manage disasters, separate budgetary provision to be made for
Disaster Management related training, equipping and storing for these services. CD, Home
Guards and Fire Services should be placed under the administrative and operational control
of the state level management agency.”
9.0 SECRETARY, BORDER MANAGEMENT (BM) COMMITTEE
9.1 In pursuance of the recommendations of the GOM, a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, BM was constituted in the MHA. This Committee suggested revamping of the Civil
Defence organization to provide contemporary Disaster Management skills and preparedness in the
country. The Salient features of the recommendations of this committee were:
(a) Construction of 32 training institutes.
(b) Procurement of transport and equipment for the training institutes.
(c) Construction of administrative blocks/buildings for categorized Civil Defence towns.
(d) Enhancement of central share and also enhancement of duty/training allowances.
(e) Creation of additional posts in the office of the Director General Civil Defence (DGCD), MHA.
10.0 HOME MINISTER’S DIRECTIONS
10.1 While examining the recommendations of the Secretary BM Committee Report it was felt
that an examination of the Civil Defence concept and role was needed in order to make the Civil
Defence an effective instrument of civil safety in which Disaster Management should play a
prominent role. With this objective in view, Union Home Minister chaired a meeting on Civil
Defence on 5 January, 2006 wherein he desired that the Civil Defence set-up should be
strengthened and its scope widened to include Disaster Management and also to integrate National
Cadet Corps (NCC) in Civil Defence activities. In this context, he directed that a National Policy
Approach Paper should be formulated on the subject by one of the Members of NDMA.
11.0 NATIONAL POLICY APPROACH PAPER
11.1 The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs during their presentation briefed the

5
Sub-Committee of some inherent deficiencies in the civil defence apparatus which inter-alia
included lack of popularization of the concept and awareness of the people towards civil defence,
lack of training, legal infirmities, financial crunch and problem pertaining to sharing of expenditure
between Central Government and the State Governments. The present status of the Civil Defence
in terms of image, relevance and efficacy is characterized by inactivity and low morale. According
to the Ministry, the National Policy Approach Paper on “Revamping of Civil Defence in the
Country” prepared by the High Power Committee headed by Shri K.M. Singh
α  a highlighted
following deficiencies in the Civil Defence services and activities:—
(i) Civil Defence is perceived as an activity only during war. Since there has been no
war affecting the lives of people in CD towns during the last three decades, the
organization has lost its relevance in the eyes of the community as also the State
administration.
(ii) Civil Defence suffers from low morale as volunteers who had enrolled themselves in
the past had primarily been motivated by patriotic considerations. The chance to get
some social prestige on account of their proximity to the district administration was
an added incentive. However, over a period of time, not only has the patriotic
sentiment receded to the background, the volunteers have also felt neglected by the
district administration.
(iii) Civil Defence lacks proper recognition. The volunteers come from various sections
of society and many of them have a good social standing. They have been rendering
useful services during various crises situations. However, there is no system of
adequate and institutionalized recognition to these people. This has adversely affected
the participation of the general public in Civil Defence activities.
(iv) Since the requirement of Civil Defence does not have regular activity, it has been
increasingly perceived as irrelevant. There has been a steady decline in the activities
of the organization, in terms of training, mock drills and exercises. This has, in turn,
led to a lack of interest on the part of even active volunteers”
(v) People in general are not aware of the role and functions of Civil Defence. There
is hardly any publicity or awareness programmes to enlighten the general public
about the various activities of Civil Defence. This results in their apathy in
volunteering their services to Civil Defence.
(vi) There is apparent apathy of State Governments towards Civil Defence engineering as
not only do a number of sanctioned posts in the Civil Defence set-up remain unfilled,
but many of the personnel posted are also those who are not found very useful for
the normal policing duties.
(vii) Civil Defence in the States suffers from lack of motivation in the regular staff. The
success of the Civil Defence organization is very much dependant upon selection of
suitable volunteers with aptitude and motivation for voluntary work. This calls for
painstaking efforts on the part of regular CD staff in terms of talent spotting and
motivating. Since most of the regular CD staff themselves lack requisite initiative and
motivation, the process of selection and enlistment of right type of volunteers has
been a casualty.
α  Revamping of Civil Defence in the country—National Policy Approach Paper—High Power Committee Report,
December, 2006, National Disaster Management Authority, Government of India.

6
(viii) The Civil Defence training institutions in States as well as the National Civil Defence
College, Nagpur do not have proper infrastructure and facilities to undertake training
of volunteers and officials for various basic and specialized courses.
(ix) The State Governments, due to their financial constraints, are reluctant to bear the
expenditure on Civil Defence, which in their perception, is not of any immediate
utility. Though the Central Government reimburses some part of the expenditure
incurred on the authorized items of Civil Defence for raising, training and equipping
of Civil Defence services in the form of grants-in-aid, the current budget allocation
is barely adequate to meet the salary of the staff, resulting in neglect of training,
capacity building and utilization. Till 1991-92, the quantum of reimbursement of the
expenditure incurred on Civil Defence by the Government of India was to the tune
of 100% for North-Eastern States (except Assam) and 50% for other States. But
by 1996-97, the central share of expenditure came down to 50% for the North-
Eastern States and 25% for other States. The allocated budgetary provision for the
year 2005-06 was only Rs.10 crore.
12.0 RECOMMENDATIONS OF K.M. SINGH COMMITTEE
12.1 The following were the important recommendations made by the K.M. Singh Committee in
the above mentioned Approach Paper:—
• Civil Defence infrastructure may be made available in all the districts in the country
in a phased manner in the next three financial years. While doing this, the entire
concept and orientation of Civil Defence coverage has to be changed from ‘Town
Specific to District Specific’ with the area of responsibility covering the entire
district. In extending the scope of Civil Defence coverage to all the districts, the recent
report of Building Materials Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC), classifying 241
districts in the country as multi-hazard districts, is suggested to be taken as the base
and these 241 districts are proposed to be included in the initial stages.
• Civil Defence set-up should take up the implementation of the proposed new role in
community capacity building and public awareness in close coordination with the
Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI) and urban local bodies. It is also recommended that
the proposed new role of Civil Defence related to community building may be
integrated with the ongoing UNDP-Disaster Risk Management (DRM) project of
MHA.
• National Cadet Corps (NCC), Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangthan (NYKS), and National
Service Scheme (NSS), are also proposed to be integrated in the overall Disaster
Management framework with linkages with the Civil Defence set-up at the state head
quarters and district head quarters.
• Revamp the existing structure of Civil Defence by enhancing its functional and
territorial responsibilities in a realistic and cost-effective manner.
• Authorization of approximately 800 wardens per district of average 20 lakh
population is recommended, which would amount to total number of 4,80,000
wardens in the country.
• Civil Defence set-ups at all levels should be permitted to accept donations from the
corporate sector, as any contribution by the corporate sector on Civil Defence
activities and Civil Defence training programmes may be exempted from payment of
taxes, as appropriate, by the Finance Ministry.

7
• Total non-recurring expenditure relating to infrastructure (expect land, to be provided
by States) equipment and transport (Rs.2.69 crores for each Civil Defence Training
Institute) and Rs.1.90 crores for each Civil Defence Training School (CDTS), total
Rs.72.42 crores may be borne by the centre.
• The trainees at CD training institutions are presently being paid a meager allowance
of Rs. 28/- per day. This was recommended to be enhanced to Rs. 150/- per day.
13.0 FOLLOW-UP ACTION ON K.M. SINGH COMMITTEE REPORT
13.1 The Ministry informed the Sub-Committee that since the report proposed financial burden
on the States as well as restructuring of the organization and creation of 17 posts per district in
the States, consultation with the States was necessary. Consultation with Ministry of Defence was
also required as Civil Defence is considered an integral part of defence of the country. The
consultation process began in the month of January, 2007 and a copy of the report had been sent
by NDMA to all the Chief Secretaries and Directors General of Police. The Ministry of Home
Affairs had also started the process of consultation at two levels. The Director General of Civil
Defence held consultation with the officials of the State Governments during February, 2007. MHA
had solicited the views/comments of the State Governments.
13.2 In regard to the status of implementation of  the recommendations contained in the K.M.
Singh Committee Report, the Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the following information:—
(i) The recommendations contained in report of the Committee constituted by Ministry
of Home Affairs under the Chairmanship of Shri K.M. Singh, Member, NDMA, were
examined by the ‘Home Minister’s Civil Defence Advisory Committee’ chaired by the
Union Home Minister in its meeting held on 2nd April, 2008. The Advisory
Committee decided as under:—
1. Civil Defence should play a vital role in disaster management in accordance with the
recommendations of K.M.  Singh Committee.
2. The Ministry of Home Affairs should implement the project for Revamping of Civil
Defence at an estimated cost of Rs . 100 crore.
3. Civil Defence Act, 1968 may be amended to cater to the needs of disaster
management and internal security/terrorism related challenges.
(ii) Based on the recommendations of the Committee, MHA has drawn up a project
proposal for ‘Revamping of Civil Defence’ to be implemented during the Eleventh
Plan period at a total estimated cost of Rs.100 crore. The overall objective of the
scheme is to strengthen and revitalize the Civil Defence set up in the country so as
to play a significant role in disaster management and assisting the police in internal
security and law and order situation while retaining their primary role.
The scheme envisages strengthening of existing training institutes in 20 States/
UTs. The Scheme also envisages strengthening/transformation of Civil Defence set
up in 100 hazard prone districts in 16 identified States where training institutes are
existing.
(iii) An allocation of Rs.5.0 crore has been made for this scheme in BE 2008-09. This
is presently under the process of scrutiny/appraisal. After the appraisal, the scheme
will be put up to the competent authority for obtaining approval. It is expected that
the implementation would be initiated in the third quarter of 2008-09.
(iv) Amendments to the Civil Defence Act, 1968, as recommended by the ‘Home
Minister’s Civil Defence Advisory Committee’ are also being processed.

8
CONCLUSIONS/OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
ROLE OF CIVIL DEFENCE IN CHANGING SCENARIO
The role of Civil Defence should be seen in the light of the paradigm shift in the
security scenario of the country and that it should be in consonance with the changing
times. Modern civil defence cannot be effective unless it gears to the new challenges of
proxy war, terrorism, communal riots and other civic strife which cause loss of life and
property. Since traditional warfare is no longer a major component of threat, the new
security climate requires prompt response to new threat instruments like proxy war,
terrorism, acts of sabotage and subversion. (Para 14.1.1)
ASSISTING THE DISTRICT DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (DDMA).
The Committee is of the strong view that Civil Defence set up can play a major
role in assisting the District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) with the help
of its volunteers at grass root level, in different phases of disaster particularly in pre-
disaster (public awareness, community capacity building and community preparedness) and
mid-disaster (response and relief) phases. Training to the cadres of Civil Defence in this
respect would make available to the states, trained manpower in district and local
administration in the event of a disaster, and would also provide them additional resources
to generate public awareness to sensitise and prepare the community for disaster scenarios.
(Para 14.1.2)
ADEQUATE TRAINING AND PROFESSIONALISATION OF CIVIL DEFENCE APPARATUS
The Committee is of the view that Civil Defence should be made more professional
as the challenges have grown extremely complex and require a more sophisticated response.
This, in turn, requires better training and higher professionalism. The Committee is also
of the view that sense of professionalism is essential to be infused among the ranks of Civil
Defence organization across the country in order to augment its capability to deal with the
potential challenges which are growingly assuming complex characteristics warranting
sophisticated response for safety of lives and properties. The sophistication can be achieved
by encouraging professionalism in the civil defence organization and by imparting better
training. (Para 15.1)
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN CIVIL DEFENCE
The Committee recommends that private sector having good track record should be
encouraged to participate in civil defence activities through tax exemptions on contributions
made in such activities. They can also be persuaded to sponsor seminars and other
awareness programmes as part of their  social responsibility. The Committee recommends
that private sector entities, including enterprising individual citizens, should be encouraged
to participate in building and maintaining civil defence activities inter alia by way of
granting exemption from Tax to financial contributions made towards such activities,
including sponsoring of seminars and other public awareness programmes etc. as part of
their social responsibility. (Para 16.1)
8

9
NEED FOR BROAD BASING CIVIL DEF ENCE
The Committee is of the view that the present classification of Civil Defence towns
in various categories is irrelevant in today’s context as the modern missile technology has
brought virtually every inch of the country’s territory in its target. A more realistic
classification according to the present security and strategic environment should be drawn
up with a view to ensure that trained Civil Defence volunteer forces are raised in every
possible nook and corners of the country who can be called for duty to the society envisaged
inter alia  under Article 51A (i) of the Constitution of India. (Para 17.1)
The Committee is also of the considered view that the objective of Civil Defence
should cover any prospect of loss of life and property irrespective of whether caused by man
made or natural factors. It should not limit itself to ‘hostile attacks’ whose definition itself
warrants amendment in order to be broadened and bring the consequences of explosion/
triggering of WMDs by forces inimical to India, even without declaring a formal war against
the country, within the ambit of its definition. (Para 17.2)
LINKING CIVIL DEFENCE WITH DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Civil Defence organization should enhance its capacity to act as first responder
to any disaster situation with the help of its volunteers at different levels. This would make
trained manpower available to the State, district and local administration in the form of
Civil Defence staff and volunteers in the event of a disaster. The Committee recommends
that training in Civil Defence should be made part of Disaster Management. It is in this
area that civil defence has maximum potential. (Para 18.1)
PROVISION FOR ADEQUATE NUMBER OF TRAINING INSTITUTES
The success of the suggested new role of Civil Defence will largely depend on
selection of motivated cadre with aptitude for social service. The Committee is of the view
that in order to raise sufficient trained cadre Civil Defence requires more training
institutes. The Committee strongly recommends revamping of Central Training Institutes in
States and establishing more such institutes for better supply of trained cadres in times of
need. (Para 19.1)
CIVIL DEFENCE AND PANCHAYA TI RAJ INSTITUTIONS (PRIs)
The Committee endorses the recommendation of K.M Singh Committee that Civil
Defence activities should be undertaken in community capacity building and public
awareness in tandem with the PRIs and urban local bodies. Participation of the local bodies
would ensure resilience and sustainability of the disaster combating initiatives at the
grassroots level. The Committee strongly urges upon the Ministry to make efforts in that
direction. (Para 20.1)
INTEGRATING CIVIL DEFENCE ORGANIZATION WITH NCC/NSS AND NYKS
The Committee is of the view that a workable linkage between the various youth
organizations and Civil Defence for the purpose of strengthening the Disaster Management
effort can be developed by synergizing all efforts and resources of the various agencies
involved and capacity-building measures for developing trained human resource. (Para 21.1)
Youth organizations such as National Cadet Corps (NCC), Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangthan (NYKS), and National Service Scheme (NSS), which invariably comprise of

10
volunteers belonging to Schools, Colleges and Universities, although have the inherent
advantage of reaching out to the grass-roots level and their ready availability for immediate
assistance in the event of any disaster and have been rightly recommended by the High
Power Committee for focusing emphasis on greater coordination with these youth
organization, the Committee find the short-coming in the said recommendation of the High
Power Committee conspicuous in restricting the endeavour only within the youth who have
the privilege of receiving formal education in schools, colleges and universities and, thus,
leaving a vast pool of un-educated youth, whose number must be substantial in the country
where approximately 43 per cent people are illiterate, outside the Civil Defence endeavour
because they can neither be members of NCC nor NYKS nor NSS. The Committee,
therefore, urges upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to make sincere efforts in seeking the
cooperation and coordination of various youth organizations as well as to ensure
involvement as Volunteers also of non-student youths right from the village panchayat level
upto the level of each Civil Defence district. (Para 21.2)
BUDGETARY PROVISION FOR REVITALIZING CIVIL DEFENCE
The Committee noted with satisfaction that MHA has drawn up a project proposal for
‘Revamping of Civil Defence’ to be implemented during the Eleventh Plan period at a total
estimated cost of Rs.100 crore. The Project is likely to be implemented from the third
quarter of the current financial year. It is a good beginning for revamping and revitalizing
the civil defence apparatus. However, the Ministry of Home Affairs may make a re-
assessment of the financial requirement in the mid term appraisal. The Ministry may also
kindly ensure that the project positively takes off as indicated, as we are already in the
second year of the Eleventh Plan. (Para 22.1)
AMENDMENTS TO THE CIVIL  DEFENCE ACT, 1968
The Committee recommends that the amendments to the Civil Defence Act, 1968, as
recommended by the Home Minister’s Defence Advisory Committee, may be carried out in
a time bound manner. (Para 23.1)
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS
It is incumbent on the Government to ensure that the project for ‘Revamping of
Civil Defence’ is implemented within Eleventh Plan period so that Civil Defence could play
a vital role in disaster management, as envisaged by K.M Singh Committee. (Para 24.1)

11
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 16 October, 2007 in Committee Room
‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — Convenor
2. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
3. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri U.N. Panjiar, Secretary (Border Management)
2. Shri K. Koshy, Director General, NDRF & CD
2. The Convener welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Sub-Committee and officials
of the Ministry of Home Affairs to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. He asked Secretary (Border
Management) to make a presentation on the subject of ‘Civil Defence in the country’. The
Secretary made a presentation. After the presentation one of the Members pointed out the ambiguity
in the definition of Civil Defence.
5. The Secretary (Border Management) then clarified some of the issues related to the
definition of Civil Defence and explained the structure of Civil Defence in the country; its spread;
respective jurisdiction of Central and State Governments regarding Civil Defence etc.
6. One of the Members, thereafter, enquired whether the apparatus of Civil Defence was also
put to use during natural calamities in the country and also pointed out that very little was known
about Civil Defence at the ground level. The Secretary clarified that Civil defence organization
existed only in towns which were vulnerable to hostile attacks and was not available in towns only
prone to natural disasters.
7. Some more queries were raised by the Members on the subject which were clarified by the
Secretary (Border Management).
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
13

14
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 15 October, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
12. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
14. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
Shri Anwar Ehsan Ahmad, Additional Secretary
Shri I.B. Kam, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Law Secretary
Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional Legal Advisor
14

15
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
for the sitting.
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft One Hundred and Thirty-sixth report on
Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants on ‘Revamping and Revitalization of Civil
Defence in the Country’ and adopted the same with some minor modifications.
4. * * *
5. * * *
5.1 * * *
6. * * *
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.