PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
COlVIMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTY ·SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE SITUATION IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEWDELID 
December, 1995/Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka) 

RAJYASABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTY -SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE SITUATION IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 22nd December, 1995) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 19th December, 1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 1995/Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka) 
C.S. (H.A.)-41 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSmON OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. REPOKr 1-11 
3. ANNEXURES 
I. Relevant minutes of the meetings ofthe Committee ' 12-17 
II. Study Group of the Committee on Home Affairs which visited Jammu , Kashmir 
and Leh from 15th to 19th September, 1995 18 
ill. List of Representatives of Political Parties, Army and persons from cross sections 
of society, etc. with whom the Study-Group interacted during the visit 19-24 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
I. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu-Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
#4. Vacant 
5. Shri Makhan La! Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
*7. Shri N. Rajendran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan La! Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raaj Babbar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
**15. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
LOKSABHA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
##19. Vacant 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M. 0. H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. 6en. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
# Vacancy caused w.e.f the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Shri R. K. Dhawan in the Union 
Council of Ministers. 
* Nominated on 17th August, 1995 in the vacancy caused by the retirement of Shri Murasoli Maran 
from the membership of Rajya Sabha. 
** Nominated on 20th September, 1995 in the vacancy caused by induction of D'r. J agannath Mishra in 
the Union Council of Ministers. 
## Vacancy caused w.e.f the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Prof. M. Kamson in the Union 
Council of Ministers. 
(i) 

32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shn Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Sopema, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C. B. Rai, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee, 
present this 26th Report of the Committee, relating to situation in Jammu and Kashmir. 
2. The Committee, in its meetings held on the ,1Oth May, 18th July anJ 17th August, 1995, had 
discussed the situation in Jammu and Kashmir (Annexure- I) and had decided that a Study Group ofthe 
Committee may visit the State to have an on-the-sport assessment of the situation prevailing over there. In 
pursuance of this decision, I constituted a Study Group (Annexure-H) to undertake the proposed visit. 
Accordingly, the Study Group visited the State from the 15th to 19th September, 1995, and had interac­
tion with the representatives of various political parties, persons from cross sections of society, represen(f­
tives of the Army, the State Government and the Governor of the State, (Annexure-III), to find out the 
ground realities. 
3. In its meeting held on the 14th December, 1995, the Committee considered the draft Report on the 
subject and adopted the same. 
4. The main observations, conclusions and recommendations of the Committee are contained in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
5. Background 
5.1 The State of Jammu and Kashmir comprises three regions, namely (i) the sub-Himalayan Jammu; 
(ii) the Himalayan Kashmir; and (iii) the trans-Himalayan Ladakh. All the three regions are marked by 
geographical, cultural, religious and linguistic diversities. 
5.2 The State of Jammu & Kashmir has been in the news ever since its accession with the Union of 
India as Pakistan had an eye on it from the very beginning and wanted to annex it by any means. She first 
sent her invaders in the Valley, then launched aggression against India twice, in the years 1965 and.l971. 
On both the occasions her designs were frustrated. But one-third of the State's area remained under Pak 
occupation. Having failed to annex the State through military means, she embarked on overt and covert 
support to militancy in the state which erupted in the State during late 1988. She started training th.e 
Kashmiri youths, arming and inducting them into the valley. The militants resorted to indiscriminate 
killings, forcing many people, including the minorities, to migrate out of the valley, followed by large: 
scale killing of teachers, doctors, mediapersons, and rape of women. They destroyed a number of schools, 
hospitals, places of worship, damaged the roads and bridges, assassinated various political leaders . They 
issued diktats through the media, asking the people to do or not to do certain things. Some religious 
leaders also towed their line. It not only took a heavy toll of human life and property, but had an adverse 
impact on the total economy also. Entire development process was trampled. All the business activities 
came to a stand-still and tourism, the main affected. The administration was also badly affected. The 
officers usually were confined to their homes and offices. The police and the political parties became 
inactive. 
5.3 The security forces have been struggling to throw out the infiltrators, to wipe out militancy and 
restore normal life in the State. They have been able to improve their grip on the situation, but at the cost 
of tremendous sacrifices. A large quantity of arms, explosives and incriminating materials have been cap­
tured from the militants. Of late, Pakistan has started inducting a large number of foreign mercenaries, 
including a number of Pakistanis themselves, some Afghans, Libyans, Sudanese, Iranians, etc. They have 
been able to commit some incidents of sabotage, subversion, kidnapping etc., but really they are unable to 
fight the security forces. 
Jammu Region 
5.4 Th1s Region has an area of 12,837 square miles, comprising six districts and 31 tehsils. As per 
the 1981 census, population of the Region is 26,90,616. At Jammu Members of the Study Group held 

2 
wide ranging discussions with the representatives of the State Government, various political parties, the 
Kashmiri Pandit migrants and the Muslim migrants. 
5.5 The representatives of the State Government briefed Members about the proxy war unleashed 
by Pakistan and the militancy related-incidents, which have by now registered a receding trend. Due to 
heavy materials coming from across the borders the militants still have considerable striking power. They 
strike at the security forces, without getting directly involved. They are also using sophisticated arms like 
solar powered rockets and night vision devices. In the hilly areas of Udhampur and Doda districts they 
have an edge over the security forces, as they can watch their movement from the hill tops. They also 
drew attention of Members to the water and power scarc1ty, shortage of ambulances in the medical insti­
tutions/hospitals, shortage of residential quarters for doctors/para medical staff and emphasized the need 
for improvement in the television and communication services. The region had been promised seven low 
power TV transmitters, but actually ten such transmitters are needed. 
5.6 The representatives of Congress (I) favoured setting up of regional councils in the Jamtnu and 
Kashmir regions, on the pattern of the Autonomous Hill Development Council set up recently at Leh. 
They were also in favour of holding elections but did not favour the demand for autonomy to the State. 
They drew attention of Members to the cumbersome formalities involved in the Prime Minister's Rozgar 
Yojana. 
5.7 The representatives of National Conference favoured a political solution to the State's prob­
lem. They stressed that commitments made to the people of the State under the Agreement of 1952 should 
be fulfilled. They also impressed upon the involvement of all in any political process and equal treatment 
to all the three regions in respect of autonomy. Before holding elections, the State should be given eco­
nomic and political packages and an agency to monitor spending of development funds should be set up. 
5.8 The representatives of Bhartiya Janata Party stated that the Central funds are going into the 
hands of militants and the State administration is demoralised because of the nexus between the police 
and persons with crime records. There is no link between the administration and the people. Recruitments 
are being made on the commands of militants. They were of the view that while elections to the local 
bodies could be held, conditions are not conducive for free and fair elections to the State Assembly. They 
also wanted the migrants' issue to be settled before the elections, as the 1991 census was not conducted 
in the State. They demanded minority status and benefits of the Minorities Commission for Hindus, like 
other minority communities. They pointed to rising unemployment among the educated youths in the 
Region and referred to 105 days' old relay dharna by the engineering graduates at Jammu. They de­
manded waiving of wealth tax and relaxation of upper age limit for Government jobs in the Jamme 
Region, on the pattern of the Kashmir Valley, setting up of regional councils in all the three Regions, 
abrogatio n of Article 370 of the constitution and full integration of the State with the rest of the country. 
5.9 The representa tives of Janata Dal stated that almost 80% of the Central funds and assistance go 
to militants, who use the same for furthering militant activities in the State . They favoured elections to the 
local.bodies onl y. They were, however, critical of the discrimination meted out to the Jammu region in 
every matter, vis-a-vis the Kashmi r Valley. 
5.10 The representatives of CPM were o f the view that the situation in the State is not actua lly 
improving as is being claimed by the administration. They felt that a conducive atmosphere should be 
created for holding the elections. They requested to resolve the autonomy issue in the right earnest and to 
eliminate all the regional inequalities . 
5.11 The representatives of Muslim migrants complained of lack of proper accommodation , power 
shortage and lack of industrialisation in the State . They demanded that laying of the Jammu-Srinag~ rail 
line should be expedited from both the ends, so that the local people can get employment. They also pomted 
to the lack of proper focus on militant activities in the State, on the national hook-up . 

3 
5.12 The representatives of BSP were critical of the State administration and stated that the peo­
ple's representatives are getting rough deal at its hands. They mentioned about the curtailment of Assem­
bly seats for the Jammu Region by the Delimitation Commission, as per the population of the Region. 
5.13 The representatives of Kashmiri Pandit migrants were unhappy over calling them 'migrants'. 
They wanted that they should be called 'internally displaced persons'. They made a num ber of demands 
such as increase in the number of Assembly seats for the Jammu Region, creation of a temporary Division 
for providing employme nt, reservation of seats in the Jammu and other Universities in the country, be­
cause of untimely conduct of examinations by the Kashmir University due to which their youths become 
age barred , provision of two-room accommodation and expediting the housing proposals pending with 
Government. They were of the view that elections in the State should be held only after restoration of 
normalcy. 
5.14 The representatives of the Indian National Congress (Indira) stated that the State administra­
tion has failed completely. There is rampant corruption and the people have fully lost their faith in it. 
They demanded replacement of the bureaucrat Governor and his advisors by political persons. 
5.15 Members of the study Group visited migrants' camp Muthi I and interacted with the migrants. 
They found that the condition of migrants was really pathetic. They are living in one room tenements 
which are most unhygienic and unfit for human habitation. There is lack of ventilation, drainage, educa­
tional, medical, recreational and ration card facilities and they have to buy essential commodities from 
the open market, at higher prices. They complained of non-shifting of service records of migrant emp loy­
ees from the Valley, leading to difficulties in the payment of GP funds, pensions, etc. and, the discrimina­
tion meted out to them in recruitments, promotions and other benefits. They demanded raising of the 
amount of cash assistance from Rs. 1,500 per month, per family toRs . 3,000, HRA/two- room tenements 
to the faVlilies living outside the camps, easy term loans and shopping complexes to the traders, compen­
sation for crops to the agriculturists, safe custody of the houses left behind by them, ex -gratia payment for 
their burnt houses etc. They were against initiation of any political process, to the exclusion of displaced 
migrants. 
Ladakh Region 
5.16 The Ladakh Region has an area of 33,554 square miles. It comprises two districts ofLeh and 
Kargil. As per the 1981 census, population of the Region is 1,33,091 . 
Leh 
5.17 The Leh district ofLadaldi Region has five blocks ofLeh, Nubra, Nyoma, Khaltsi and Durbuk. 
Almost 50% of the population of the District is concentrated in Leh block alone. The district has 257 
educatio nal institutions, including one degree college, two Higher Secondary . Schools, 22 High Schools, 
51 Middle Schools and 181 Primary Schools. Besides, there are seven Primary Health Centres, eight 
Allopathic Dispensaries, 58 Medicill Aid Centres, 45 Sub-Centres, 52 Amchi Centres, One Sub District 
Hospital and one District Hospital. At Leh, Members of the Study Group held discussions with the Chief 
Executive Councillor, Members of the Executive Council of the Leh Autonomous Hill Development Coun­
cil and the Deputy Commissioner, Leh. The people of Leh were happy on the setting up of the Council. 
They stated that the Council has been given all the executive powers, except law and order and the judicial 
powers. It should be given more powers. Further, they needed office and other infrastructure for the Chief 
Executive Councillor, but no fund for the Council has been created. The first two Five Year Plans were not 
implemented in Ladakh. E.ven the 1991 census was also not conducted. Plan allocatio ns to the Regi~n are 
being made on the basis of population . They felt that area of as the Region should also be taken into 
consideration and one time grant, to provide basic amenities to the people, should be provided. They have 
to get essential commodities from far off places and there is delay in the winter-stocking of essential 
commodities like.foodgrains and petrol. They also face the problem of un~mployment among women. 
Therefore, they demanded setting up of local industries and development of'tourism as an industry. There 
is a problem of power shortage also. Out of 112 villages in the district. only 75 have been provided 

4 
electricity. To solve this problem they demanded that Ladakh should be linked with the Northern Power 
Grid. 
5.18 The policy of reservation for the Scheduled Tribes is not being strictly followed in the profes­
sional institutions, services, etc. All the Scheduled Tribes students are not getting scholarships and sti­
pends and all the Scheduled Tribes employees are not getting benefits of housing allowance. The Argon 
Community has not been granted the status of Scheduled Tribe. The people of Ladakh were earlier granted 
exemption from payment ef Income Tax, on the pattern of North-eastern States of the country, which was 
subsequently withdrawn. They requested for restoration of this facility. They also impressed upon the 
need for improvement in communication facilities in remote areas, especially those which mainly remain 
snow-covered in winter, installation of VLPTs/LPTs and programme generation facilities to ensure better 
TV cove.rage and, opening of trade route and Mansarovar Yatra through Demchowk. The blocks of Nubra 
and Khaltsi on the Pakistan border are included in the Border Area Development Programme, while the 
Nyoma and Durbak blocks along the China border have been excluded. They demanded inclusion of 
these two blocks also in the said programme. The people of Leh do not favour restoration of pre-1953 
status for the State but in case it is decided to grant greater autonomy to the State, the interests of minori­
ties should be protected. 
5.19 The Deputy Comm issioner of Leh gave Members an idea of development activities:in the 
Region. Out of the 18,000 students enrolled in primary schools, about 10,000 were provided scholarships 
of varying amounts. Pre-ma tric scholarships are being provided to Schedu led Tribe students. There are 
three hostels at.Nubra, Nyoma and Khaltsi and their capacity is being expanded. There is a proposal.for 
construction of a hostel at Leh with 50 beds' capacity each for boys and girls. The standard of the District 
Institute of Educat ion has been upgraded. The teachers are being provided training but there is a problem 
of posting qualified teachers. One polytechnic college has also been sanctioned for the Leh district. Ladakh 
has been getting power supply for almost all the day and the stocking position of essential commodities is 
satisfactory. Proposa ls for construction of a youth hostel at Leh, with a 46 bed's capacity, constructio n of 
an outdoor stad ium and an indoor stadium at Leh, construction of Nimmu-Padum road to connect Leh 
with Zanaskar Valley t hro~ghout the year, have been submitted to the concarned Ministries/De partments 
of the Government of India. 
Kargil 
5.20 Kargil is the second district of Ladakh Region, with an area of 14036 square Kilometres, 
comprising two Tehsils, seven blocks, with 129 villages and 461 habitations. The districts has a density 
Of population of 5 persons per square kilometre only. The whole area is mountainous and devoid of natural 
vegeta tion. On way to Srinagar , Members had a stop-over at Kargil and held discussions with representa­
tives of various political parties, persons from cross sections of society and the district officers. 
5.2 1 The representatives of National Conference stated that Kargil is the most backward of all the 
districts of the State. It remain s covered with snow and cut off from the rest of the country for seven 
months in a year, without any communication links. They drew Member 's attention to the Scarcity of 
power, drinking water and rising unemployment among the local youths and stated that people from the 
district are not recruited in the Central Government departments/agencies like Army, BSF, IB, etc. They 
demanded provision of Central funds for roads, to link all the block headquarters. Electricity is being 
supplied through generators, while there are vast potentials for genera~ion of hydel power. They d~­
manded introduction of special Central Education Scheme s, subsidy in air fare and provision of better 
commun ication facilities. 
5.22 The representatives of Islamia School related the problem of posting of teachers in the degree 
college and demanded rectification .of inaccuracies in the delimitation work. 
5.23 The representatives of Sunni Muslims pointed to the defective telecommunication systems , 
especially telegraphs and telephones. There are no projects and industries for providing employm ent to 

5 
the local youths and the representation of Muslims in Central Services is very low. The people of the area 
earlier had misgivings about womens' education, but now they have started impArting education to them. 
5.24 The representatives of Congress (I) stated that people of the area had contained communal 
tensions. There is rampant corruption in the administration. They demanded resumption of adhoc ap­
pointments, restoration of air services between Leh and Kargil, retention of helicopter services to Kai:'gil 
and special treatment to the area for granting Central funds. They also pointed to the delay in the, supply 
of ration to the people. 
5.25 The representatives of Budhists' Association. Zanaskar, also submitted their problems to 
Members. They stated that the Zanaskar area is in the grip of abject poverty and backwardness and, 
remains cut-off for nine months in winters. They requested for increasing the frequency of helicopter 
service between Padam and Kargil, separate Assembly constituency for Zanaskar, provision of a Sarai a\ 
Kargil, improvement of health services and, opportunities and preferential treatment to the local students to 
pursue higher education. 
5.26 The district officers informed that 75% of the ration supplies have already arrived, drinking 
water has been supplied in all the 127 villages and 385 of the 527 hamlets. Some water supply schemes 
like Accelerated Rural Water Supply Scheme and Gravity Water Supply Scheme, are in operation. Be­
sides, four hyde I power projects are under construction, one of which is likely to be commissioned shortly. 
Kashmir Region 
5.27 This region has an area of 8639 square miles, comprising six districts. As per the 1981 census, 
population of the Region is 31 ,30, 190. 
Tangdhar Valley (Karnah) 
5.28 The people in the Tangdhar Valley have their own problems. Members had an opportunity to 
interact with representatives of the Pahari Action Committee at Karnah, the Tehsil headquarters of the 
Valley. This area remains cut off from rest of the country for about six months in a' year. The people 
resented the level of general dearness prevailing there. They cited the case of onions which were being 
sold @ Rs. 25/-, per K.G. The benefits of backward areas being provided since 1964 were withdrawn by 
the State Government in 1970. They are not getting financial assistance like most of other States of the 
country are getting. Medical facilities are also not available. There is no lady doctor, no specialist and no 
ambulance. Moreover, when the area re!D-ains snow-bound, they do not have the helicopter service to 
carry serious patients to hospitals in big cities. But the people were all praise for the Army who has been 
very helpful and is providing medical treatment to them. 
5.29 The Pahari Ac~ion Committee has been agitating for a very long time for Scheduled Tribes 
Status to the local Paharis who constitute about 85% of the total population of the Valley. The most 
disturbing thing was that Gujars, constituting 15% of the population, had been granted this facility while 
the Paharis, who are facing the identical problems of backwardness, have not been given this facility. 
Srinagar 
5.30 At Srinagar, Lt. Gen. (Retd.) S.D. Saklani, Advisor to the Governor, briefed Members about 
the law and order situation, the State of militancy, the large scale infiltrations resorted to by Pakistan and 
the areas of the State prone 'to infiltrations. According to him militants were initially able to create fear 
among the people and cripple the police and the administration. But the security forces have been able .to 
bring down militancy from the level of 1992, to a controllable level, by about 60%, and they are hopeful 
to bring it further down within next few months. Besides the lSI of Pakistan, militants have link ups with 
other militant outfits also. The Chief Secretary, who participated in the discussions admitted that there 
have been cases of wrong persons coming to Government services, but now the situation is under control. 
Members also had an opportunity to visit the arms museum at Badami Bagh ~d see the arms and other 
articles recovered by the Army from militants. 

6 
5.31 General (Retd.) K.V. Krishna Rao, the Governor of the State, briefed Members about the 
eruption of militancy, the present law and order and political situation, the steps taken to revamp the 
administration and initiation of political activities in the State. He stressed that three things need to be 
looked into: first, the autonomy demand has to be resolved; second, if the parties are .united,.they will put 
up a good front to the fundamentalist forces; and third, the unemployment and consequent dissatisfaction 
should be looked into. 
5.32 The representatives of various political parties generally reiterated the points made out by 
their party unit at Jammu. The representatives of National Conference pointed to the lack of a national 
consensus to solve the State's problem. All the parties look at the problem from their own angles. ~ey 
resented non-implementation of the Delhi Agreement of 1975 and stated that before initiation of any 
political process, the wounds ofKashmiris should be healed, by fulfilling the promise ofnon -inteJferenc.e 
in the State's politics. According to them, autonomy is the only demand of the State, since it will have an 
impact on the people to take them along. But they were not sure if it could have any impact on the 
militants. They resented setting up of Autonomous Hill Development Council in Leh which, according to 
them, had been set up on the basis of pick and choose. The Union Government should have waited for at 
least six months, for solution of the State's problem, before setting up of the Council. Government should 
get all the allegations of corruption probed. 
5.33 The representatives of Congress (I) favoured granting of the people's rights in all the three 
Regions of the State according to the population of each Region. They stressed the need for a democratic 
Government in the State. For the solution of the State's problem they favoured a unanimous approach by 
all the political parties. According to them, the average KashJ:tliris have always stood by India. But the 
State has been victim of fundamentalists and imperialists. The parties like Hurriat are being persuaded to 
join political process. They were of the view that before going for elections, proper atmosphere should be 
created. To secure people's involvement, their wounds should be healed and the victims of terrorist violence 
should be rehabilitated. They resented reservation of seats in medical colleges in Gujarat and appointment 
of 500 teachers in Delhi from among the Kashmiri Pandits and stated that Muslims should also have been 
considered. 
5.34 They stressed the need to expedite laying of Jammu-Srinagar rail line, reduction in air fares in 
the State, declaration of Srinagar airport as international airport, creation of market facilities for local 
handicrafts, promotion of tourism, setting up of industrial units, re-opening of a passport office in Sri nagar, 
opening of Suchetgarh, Tithwal or Uri borders for movement of traffic, starting State's trade with the CIS 
countries, etc. 
5.35 The representatives of Janata Dal were of the view that the present state of instability in the 
State has come from above, with the attempts to topple elected Government. They stated that militants 
are active in the State and innocent youths are in jails. Their minds are being vitiated against the Govern­
ment of India and the politica l parties . Th~y have to be brought back in the national mainstream. They 
also held the view that Pakistan is aiding, abetting and p romoting criminals. 90% of the Government 
funds indirect ly go in the hands ofmil itants. If any politica l activity is initiated, there are apprehensions 
of rise in militancy and foreign mercenaries are likely to become active. Further, the people have to 
participate in strikes on the gun-point. Essen tial commodities are available i~ black market. Though Gov­
ernme nt have promised to give anything Jess than independence but nothing has been given so far. De­
mocracy should be established in the minds of the people at the grass-root level. No solution to the State's 
pro blem is possible without acceding the demand for autonomy, without which even election are not 
possible. Militancy cannot curbed , unless the Indian leaders pay attention to the problem. A join t effort 
by all the secular, democr adc forces of the country is needed to bring the State back to normal cy. 
5.36 The representatives of CPI and CPM were of the view that Kashmir is a political problem 
which needs a political solution. No party at the Centre has tried to solve the problem . The situat ion has 
not really improved . The Central money is not being spend properly and wrong persons are getting 

7 
employment. According to them, funds must reach the people and screening of recruits in Government 
jobs should be undertaken . Instead of giving stipends to the surrenderers , employment opportunities should 
be created. At the same time, the administration should be revamped and developmental activities should be 
started . State level Advisory Committee should be set up before whom the administration should be ac­
countable. No concessions should be given to the fundamentalists. The people are fed up with militants. 
The security forces should undertake good-will missions to win over the minds of the people. To ensure 
their participation in elections, some broad political initiative n~d to be taken. The minds of the people can 
be won over by granting them greater autonomy. The Prime Minister should invite leaders of all the politi­
cal parties and all the individual s, including those who have taken to guns, with a view to restore democ­
racy. They also stressed the need for immediate flood relief measures and pointed to the problems of 
unemployment and power shortage in the State. 
5.37 Members also held discussions with the Officers of the Army, to flJld out Army's perception of 
the situation in the State. Lt. Gen. J .S. Dillon explained that as per the Army Act, the primary role of the 
Army is to protect borders against external aggressions. The BSF, the CRPF, the ITBP, etc. are there to 
fight the militants . Army is only one of the components. The State is totally contro lled by the civjl 
administration. Army is to aid the civil authorities. There is regular inter-action and meetings between the 
security forces and the civil authorities. The State has 14,00 Kilometre long borders and the infiltrations 
are unlike in Punjab, where there is a well defined border. There are 6,000 feet high mountains and heavy 
snow fall in the State. Border fencing is not possible. The Army has to see how many troops it can spare 
and how best to handle the situation. The security forces have to work under some constraints. They have 
to keep a balance of the for.ce level. Putting in more forces can be counter-p roductive and is likely to cause 
inconvenience and harassment to the people. The situation in the State is now improving, though still it is 
not an easy situation. The over-all situation of infiltrations is also under control. Now there are not more 
than 100 to 150 infiltrations in a month. The people would rather like to have a development package . 
Political proc~ss in the State is most essential which has been delayed. People want somebody to talk to. 
If the local politicians start moving around, the situation will change. Pakistan has exploited the people 
on the basis of religion, but the educated people want to come back to normal life. They have to be looked 
after. 
5.38 Members held discussions with the Chief Secretary, Advisors to the Governor and officers of 
the State Government as well. They were informed that the State's plan for 1994- 95 had gone up by 25% 
due to intervention of the Prime Minister. There was a further increase of 23% in 1995-96. Then rigid 
financial controls were introduced . They were able to keep overdrafts under tight control. Committees 
headed by the Deputy Commissioners were constituted which inspected around 700 works during 1994-
95. Though there were some aberrations, yet over-all funds are spent for development purposes. With 
samp le checks of works by the vigilance organisation, they were able to check diver sions of funds. The 
Governor himself took meeting of District Development Boards. The schools and hospitals are mnnin~ 
normal and revamping of the Red-Cross has been undertaken. Jawahar Rozgar Yojana is being imple­
mented to generate employment opportunities. They were able to generate 147 lakh mandays during the 
last year. The Leh Autonomous Hill Development Council has been entrusted with all the development 
functions. They have also introduced special Desert Area Development Programme . With sustained ef­
forts of the administration during the last five years, the people have started coming with their develop­
mental needs. This change' has been possible due to effective implementation of developmental activities. 
During the first two years of the current Plan, no development activity could take place due to non 
capitalisation of funds and there was a backlog of development works. To stimulate public participation 
in developmental activities, the State Government has initiated a number of measures. A stringent moni­
toring mechanism for the purpose of proper, effective and productive use of Plan funds has been insti­
tuted. They hope to cover all the villages for providing drinking water. In order to provide safe drinking 
water in Jammu city, the Master Plan phase-I was started in the year 1976. Regarding power supply, they 
have recently introduced a scheme called RAC scheme, under which 300 villages have been covered so 

8 
far. Under the Border Area Development Programme, Solar Energy is also being introduced. They' are not 
able to achieve connectivity of roads due to lack of funds allocation. However, road development is 
expected to improve. Out of the total blocks in the three Regions, two blocks on the China border could 
not be covered under the BADP, ~ause the Planning Commission did not agree. They have organised 
eleven camp schools and three camp colleges for migrants at Jammu. The State Government has recently 
prepared a proposal for rehabilitation of women and children affected by terrorism . The State Govern­
ment is seriously concerned with the safety of immovable property left behind by the migrants . As and 
when they return to the Valley, the available posts at that particular point of time would be utilised for 
their absorption . They have around 3,000 sales outlets under the Public Distribution System ·throughout 
the State. This is ihe only department which has not been affected by militancy. Regarding allegations of 
corruption, it was stated that they are mostly wild allegations. To initiate a political process, security is 
being provided to the people and the politicians. 
6. Conclusions and Recommendations 
6.1 Most of the people's representatives the Members interacted with, conveyed the impression that 
people of the State have started rt?alising that Pakistan has been exploiting them for vested interests. They 
are fed up with militancy now. All the nationalist forces in the State should strive to bring Kashmiris back 
into the national main-stream and strive to restore popular Government. 
6.2 The general law and order situation in the State has registered a distinct improvement. There is 
a discernible change in the mood of the people, who earlier hestiated to speak against militants, but ·are 
now coming forward with vital clues and information to the security forces about them. Pakistar never 
wanted normalcy and restoration of popular Government in the State. Pakistan sponsored militants try to 
negate all efforts towards bringing back normalcy in the State, through their subversive activities. Gov­
ernment should deal with Pak agents and foreign elements with a firm hand. 
6.3 The Doda.Revenue District in Jammu Region has large concentration of militants, due to the 
vast hilly areas and dense forests. The security forces have to operate under great constraints. Govern­
ment ~should explore the possibility of dividing the district into different police districts, though it may 
remain one revenue district. 
6.4 Unemployment among the educated youths continues to be most critical area for the State. 
Government have taken a number of measures to ease the situation. Since the State has traditionally a low 
industrial base, a lot more needs to be done to restore its economy through development process by 
bringing back the misled youths into the mainstream of developmental activities. Small-scale industries 
based on agriculture, food processing, handicrafts, sericulture and horticulture should be developed in a 
big way, so as to generate more employment opportunities. At the same time, cumbersome procedures 
involved in getting benefits under Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana, JRY and similar other schemes, 
should be simplified. Minorities should get adequate reapresentation in Central services, including Para 
Military Forces. Government should ensure greater transparency in the administration and remove all 
allegations of corruption. Age relaxation for Government employment and waiver of Wealth Tax given in 
the Kashmir Valley, should be extended in the Jammu Region as well. Benefits of liberalisation should 
percolate down to the unemployed youths and the poor people. Benefits of Rural Development Pro­
grammes/Schemes sponsored by the Government of'India, should also percolate· down to the village~. 
Government should make distribution of Central funds for development programmes more transparent 
and balanced and see to it that these are not misappropriated. Government should also look into com­
plaints of recruitment of militants' relations/sympathisers in services and introduce some wage employ­
ment programmes, the main thrust being given to the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana and Jawahar Rozgar 
Yojana. 
6.5 Tourism industry has been the backbone of State's economy. A large number of people of the 
State are directly or indirectly dependent on it. But this sector has also received a severe blow due to 
militancy. Government should take steps to diversify the tourism industry and promote pilgrim tourism in 

9 
the State. Pending return of peace and nonnalcy in the State, Government should develop alternate tourist 
resorts in Jammu and Ladakh Regions. 
6.6 Government should create conditions conducive for safe rt;turn of migrants to their homes, who 
are living in pathetic and miserable conditions in Jammu and other parts of the State and eliminate all 
distinctions of caste and community among the migrants. Pending their return, they should be ptovided 
better educational facilities, better hygienic conditions, with all the basic amenities and other facilities 
and steps should be taken for protection of the property and business establishments left behind by them. 
One-room tenements or house rent allowance in lieu thereof should be provided to migrants living out­
side the camps. Action to clear pending housing proposals for the migrants should be expedited. The 
traders among them should be provided marketing facilities and soft loans. The agriculturists among 
them should be provided compensation for loss of crops. The amount of monthly relief being paid to 
migrants should be enhanced adequately. 
6. 7 Severe shortage of drinking water in all the three Regions of the State was also brought to 
notice of Members of the Study Group. The State has got vast potentials for generation of hyde! power. 
But the present installed capacity of the hydel power plants is not adequate to meet State's requirements 
of power. Provisions of drinking water and power generation should be taken up in the right earnest. 
Steps should be taken to complete the ongoing hydel power projects and constrUction of over-head water 
tanks in Kargil, to tide-over the drinking water scarcity. 
6.8 Health institutions in the State lack infrastructural facilities. The Jammu Region is facing short­
age of ambulances. Most of the existing ambulances remain out of order and are lying in workshops, for 
repair. Government should take urgent measures to augment health services in the State, with special 
emphasis on the remote, snow-bound and inaccessible areas. 
6.9 The Jammu-Srinagar national highway remains closed for about four months in a year due to 
heavy snow falls, which creates problem~ in the transportation of foodgrains and Oth T essential COm­
moditieS. Provision should, therefore, be made for winter stocking of foodgrains and other essenti.U 
commodities in advance, i.n the Valley as well as in the Kacgil and Ladak? Regions. 
6.10 The State has a rail line upto Jammu which is being extended further upto Udhampur. The 
Railways have also plans to lay a rail line upto Srinagac. Work on this line should be expedited. It should 
be taken up from both the ends to provide employment opportunities to the local people. 
6.11 Road sector should also be given priority. Repair of damaged roads and bridges should be 
taken up immediately. Pending proposals for construction/repair of roads should be cleared. Government 
should also consider opening of trade route and Mansarovar Yatra through Demchok. 
6.12 Subsidised helicopter services to remote and border areas like Tangdhar, Kargil, Poonch and 
Rajouri shoulc;l be introduced. Steps should be taken to improve communication and telecommunication 
facilites in the remote, snow-bound and inaccessible areas. 
6.13 Educational institutions have been the most affected and so the students the worst sufferers of 
militancy. Government should ensure provision of buildings, teachers, etc. Special drive to educate women, 
especially in the remote areas of Kargil, Tangdhac, etc. should be taken up. Problem of posting of quali­
fied teachers in the Degree College at Kargil should be looked into. 
6.14 Srin!lgar being the capital of the State, can offer facilities for export of certain handicrafts items 
to other countries, especially the CIS countries. Government should explore the possibility of declaring 
Srinagar Airport as an International Airport. Earlier there used to be a Passport Office in Srinagar which 
has been closed and people of the State, especially the haj pilgrims , have been put to great inconvenience 
due to long procedure of verification involved in the Jammu Passport Office. Steps should be taken to 
reopen the Passport Offir.e at Srinagac. Government should also take steps to provide relief to victims of 
recent floods in the State. 

10 
6.15 Some inaccuracies in the recent delimitation work were also placed before Member s. The State 
has 87 constituencies for the Legislative Assembly. The division between the three Regions is: Jammu 37, 
Ladakh 4 and Kashmir 46. A demand was made for increase in the number of Assembly seats for Jammu 
and creation of one separate seat for Zanaskar in Kargil district. Government should look into the feasibi­
lity of rational ising allocation of Assembly seats in the State. 
6.16 The crisis in the State has turned into a proxy war by Pakistan. The international media projects 
distorted versions of the activities of militant outfits. People complained of unresponsive portrayal of 
militant activities by the l~al media, including Doordarshan . Government shou ld take steps to sensitise 
the local media to portray better perceptio n of the situation and start effective campaigning against mili­
tant outfits . The minds of the people in the State are being vitiated by exposure to venomous propaganda 
over Pak TV. Government should, therefore, consider setting up of more LPTs/VLPTs and creation of 
prog.ramme generation facilities in the State, to deviate people 's minds from the Pak TY. 
6.17 The people habitating certain areas deserve some concessions due to the unique topographic 
conditions, vivid cultural traditions remoteness, inaccessibility and vastness of the terrain . The people of 
Ladakh were earlier granted exemption from payment of income tax, on the pattern of North-eastern 
States of the country, whiah was subsequently withdrawn . This facility should be restored. The monthl y 
stipend should be extended not to a few, but to all Scheduled Tribes Students. Similarly, all the Scheduled 
Tribes employee s should get benefits of reservation policy and housing loans. Government should also 
consider to grant more powers to the Leh Autonomou s Hill Deve lopment Council. Pending proposals for 
construction of sports stadia and a youth hostel at Leh should be cleared. Government should also con­
sider to include the remaining two blocks along the China border under the Border Area Dev(dopmen t 
Programme. Further, the Pahari s of Tangdhar Valley and the Argons of Ladakh have been struggling for 
Scheduled Tribes status . The Gujars ofTangdhar have been granted such status and provided with facili­
ties available for Scheduled Tribes. Such status of Scheduled Tribes should also be granted to the Pahari 
and the Argon communitie s. 
6.18 Main concentration should be focused on creating conditions for restoration of a political proc­
ess in the State. Though the fear of gun still exists, yet political process is the only solution. All the hurdles 
coming in its way should be removed. All the political parties and democratic forces should be brought 
across the table to eliminate fear of the gun, to help usher in peace and for effective restoration of demo­
cratic process. All the available resources should be mobilised to re-activate political institutions. Govern­
ment should consider constitution of a Advisory Committee comprising eminent political and social worK­
ers, to assist the Governor in ensuring greater transparency between the people and the administration, so 
that people 's confidenc e in the admini stration is restored. Some apprehensions were expressed that once a 
political proce ss is initiated, militants might step up their subversive activitie s. But the adminis tration 
should be well set for initiation of such a process. 
6.19 Kashmi r problem is essentially a political problem to be resolved politically. The demand for 
complete autonomy is a complex and sensitive issue, to be resolved through a process of understanding, 
reconc iliation and acco mmodation. A break-through can be achieved through initiation of negotiations 
with elected representat ives of the people, to the exclusion of separatist elements. 
6.20 Kashmir has been a perennial problem between India and Pakistan. Under the Shimla Agree­
ment of 1972, both the countries had resolved to settle their differnces by peaceful means, through bilat­
eral negotiations or by any other peaceful means mutually agreed upon. But Pakistan has always tried to 
internationa lise the issue by raising it at any internation al fora. The State has been a part of India cultur­
ally, historically and geographically. Its accession wilh the country is unquestionable . The country's right 
extends over whole of the State and not just upto the Line of Control. Government have to change their 
strategy, with the changing scenario and keep exposing P'lkistan at all the available fora, for having un­
leashed proxy war in the State. At the same time, pressure on mihtants and foreign elements, using extreme 
force against th6 separatists, should be maintained. Steps should be taken to effectivel y curb infiltration of 

11 
arms and militants from across the borders. The security forces should be motivated to deal with the 
situation, with due consideration for human rights. 
6.21 With the adoption of a more imaginative and consistent policy, taking special steps for reha­
bilitation of migrants and fulfilling the people's aspirations, Government can hope to restore democracy 
and peace in the State. 
NEW DELHI; 
December 14, 1995 
RAJNI RANJAN SAHU 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

ANNEXURE-I 
(See Para 2 of the Report) 
Relevant Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday the lOth May, 1995 in Committee Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu-Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Ramchandran Pillai 
6. Shri Raaj Babbar 
7. Shri Jay ant Kumar Malhoutra 
8. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOKSABHA 
9. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
10. Shri Guiucharan Singh Galib 
11. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
18. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
19. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
20. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Join~ Secretary 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
* 
* 
** • Relate to other matters. 
* 
* 
12. 
* 
* 

13 
2. * * * 
3. * * • 
4. • * • 
* * • 
5. TJ·e Committee took up for consideration the situation in 1ammu and Kashmir and felt that for a 
fruitful discussion on the subject. the Committee should undertake on-the-spot study visit to the State on 
the date(s) to be decided by the Chairman and authorised him to approach the Hon'ble Ch~irman, 
Rajya Sabha for necessary permission in this regard. 
6. * * * 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M • 
... Relate to other matters. 

14 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 18th July, 1995 in Committee Room ' A', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu-Cha irman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Murasoli Maran 
7. Mufti Mohd. Syeed 
8. Shri Krishan La1 Sharma 
9. Shri Gaya Singh 
10. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
LOKSABHA 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Shri Venkatesh Naik 
14. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
15. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
H5. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Dr. Girija Vyas 
18. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
19. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
20. Shri Ram Singh 
21. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
22. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
23. Shri Rabi Ray 
24. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
25. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
26. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
27. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
28. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 

15 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
* * * 
2. * * * 
3. * * • 
4. * * * 
* * ... 
5. The Committee briefly discussed the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and insurgency situation in 
the North-Eastern Region and decided to visit Jammu and Kashmir and the North-Eastern Region for an 
on-the-spo t assessment of the situation prevailing in those areas. The Committee. in this connection, au­
thorised rhe Chairman to finalise the details for the Comm ittee's visits and approach Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha, to obtain permission for the visits of the Comminee. 
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday. the 19th July, 
1995. 
•••Re l:lle 10 other m:lllers. 

XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday the 17th August, 1995 in Committee Room No. 62, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu- Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
3. Shri Ramac handran Pillai 
4. Shri Krisha n Lal Sharma 
5. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
6. Shri Jaya nt Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
8. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
9. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
10. Shri N arain Singh Chaudhari 
11. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
12. Shri Ram Singh 
I 3. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
.14. Shri Rabi Ray 
15. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna , Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. * 
3. * 
4. >j< 
* * 
* * 
* * 
5. The Committee then reconsidered its scheduled visit to Jammu and Kashmir and the North­
Eastern Region and decided that subject to Hon 'ble Chairman's permission, it may visit Jammu and Kash­
mir from 15th to 19th September and Assam, Tripura, Maghalaya, Manipur and Sikkim from the 7th to 
17th Octobe r, 1995. The Committee also d~cided to visit the remaining States in the North-Eastern Region 
on some future dates to be decided by the Committee. The Committee authorised the Chairman of the 
Committee to consti tute study groups for appraisal of the situation and finalise other details of the visits 
and approach Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for his permission for the proposed visits. 
6. * * * 
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 4th September, 
1995. 
•••Relate to other matters. 
16 

XXX 
THIRTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00P.M. on Thursday, the 14th December, 1995 in Committee Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliam ent House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu-Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madha vsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
4. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
5. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOKSABHA 
6. Shri M.O.H . Farook 
7. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
8. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
9. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
10. · Shri Ram Singh 
11. Shri Rabi Ray 
12. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
13. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
14. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
15. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
3. The Committee considered its draft Twenty-sixth Report on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir 
and after some discus sion, adopted the same, with some modifications. The Committee authorised the 
Chairman to cause presentation/laying of the Report in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha during the current 
session. 
4. * * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 
• •• Relate to other matters. 

ANNEXURE-II 
(See Para 2 of the Report) 
Study Group of the Committee on Home Affairs which visited Jammu, Kashmir and Leh from 
15th to 19th September , 1995 
I. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshank er Dave 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Krishan La! Sharm a 
6. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOKSABHA 
7. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
8. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
9. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
I 0. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
I 1 . Shri Rabi Ray 
1 2. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
13. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
14. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
18 

ANNEXURE-ill 
(See Para 2 of the Report) 
List of Representatives of Political Parties, Anny and Persons from Cross Sections of Society etc., · 
with whom the Study·Grou p interacted during the visit 
JAMMU (15.9.1995) 
Repres entatives of th e Government of Jamm u and Kashmir: 
1. Shri B. Goswami, Adviso r to the Governor 
2. Shri B.R. Kundal, lAS, Divisional Commissioner, Jammu 
3. Shri Rajan Baks hi, IPS, I.G.P., Jammu 
4. Shri B.S. Jaswall, lAS, Dy. Commissioner, Jammu 
5. Shri S. Panday, lAS, Dy. Commissioner, Doda 
6. Shri R.P. Sharma, IFS, Chief Conservator of Forest Department, Jammu 
7. Shri V.N. Sharma, Administrator, Jammu Municipality 
8. Shri S.D. Lone, Relief Commissioner (Migrants) 
9. Shri R.R. Bhagat, Dy. Director Social Welfare 
Representatives of Congress(l): 
1. Shri Madan Sharma, Former Minister, General Secretary PCC(l) 
2. Smt. Krishna Dev, MLC 
3. Sardar Anmalk Singh, Secretary PCC(I) 
4. Shri Dewaker Singh, General Secretary PCC(I) 
5. Shri R.S. Chib, Former Minister 
6. Shri Mangat Ram, General Secretary PCC(I) 
7. Shri Dharam Paul Sharma , Ex.-M.P. 
8. Shri Beli Ram Kunda!, General Secretary PCC(l) 
9. Shri Prakash Sharma, Secretary PCC(l) 
10. Shri Shiv Dev Singh, Ex.-M.L.A. 
11. Shri Bharat Gandhi, Ex.-M.L.A. 
12. Sardar Rangi l Singh, Ex.-Minister 
13. Smt. Luxmi Dutta, Secretary PCC(I) 
Representatives of National Conference: 
1. Mohammad Shafi, Ex.-Minister 
2. Shri Bod Raj Bali, Ex.-Minister 
3. Sardar Harbans Singh, Secretary J&K National Conferenc e, Ex-Mini ster 
4. Shri Ajay Sadotra , Vice-President, National Conference, Jammu Province 
Representatives ofB.J.P.: 
1. Shri Shamsher Singh, General Secretary, B.J.Y.M. 
2. Shri Ashok Khajuria, Secretary 
3. Shri K.R. Gupta, Vice-President 
4. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta, State President 
5. Shri Bhagwat Swroop, General Secretary 
6. Shri Mohan Singh Chohan, Secretary 
7. Miss Kosar Naseem, General Secretary, Minority Cell 
19 

20 
8. Shri Lalit Moja, Kashmir BJP 
9. Shri Upendar Batt, Secretary 
10. Shri Kewa1 Krishan Mahajan, Jammu Distt. President 
11. Shri Vaid Vishnu Dutt;State Vice-President 
Representatives of Janata Dal: 
1. Shri D.R. Bargotra, State President, J&K 
2. Shri P.L. Kaul, General Secretary 
3. Shri Santosh Gupta, General Secretary 
4. Shri Bbagwati Sharma, Jammu Urban President 
5. Shri Tirath Singh, State President 
6. Shri Pawan Dev Singh, President, Rural 
7. Shri Mohd. Shokeen Shattar 
Representatives of C.P.I.(M): 
1. Shri Kishor Kumar, Regional Member 
2. Shri Bansi Lal, Regional Member 
3. Shri Rakesh Sharma, D.Y.F.I. 
4. Shri Harichand Jalmeria, Member, Jammu Regional Committee 
5. Shri Abdul Rashid, Convenor, D.Y.F.I. 
6. Shri Parminder Singh, Asstt. Secretary for Regional Committee, Jammu 
Representatives of Muslim Migrants: 
1. Shri Mohammad Abdullah, P.S. Secretary 
2. Shri Abdul Rasid Bhat, Vice-President 
3. Shri Gulam Hassan Lone, President 
4. Shri Mohd. Abdulla Needa 
5. Shri Ab. Rashid Malik 
Representatives of B.S.P.: 
1. Shri Makhan Singh 
2. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhagat, President, J&K State 
J. Shri Roop Lal, Advocate Member 
4. Shri Thakur Dass Bhogal, Ex.-President, J&K State 
Representatives of Kashmiri Pandit Migra nts: 
1. Shri A.N. Vashnavi, President, All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference 
2. Shri M.L. Malia, General Secretary, All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference 
3. Shri H.L. Chatta, Chief Organiser, All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference 
Representatives oflndian National Congress (Indira): 
1. Shri A.K. Sahani, General.Secretary 
2. Shri Narinder Singh, District President 
3. Shri R.P. Malhotra, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Madan Lal Sharma, Chairman Labour Cell 
5. Shri S. Narinder Singh, Chairman, Minority Cell 
6. Moh. Gulam Rasool Assgar, General Secretary 
7. Dr. Tilak Raj Sharma, General Secretary District 
8. Shri Kuldeep Luthra, President, District Youth Congress 
9. Sardar Ranjit Singh Bali, General Secretary District Youth Congress 
10. Shri Sanjay Mahey, General Secretary, District Youth Congress 
11. Shri Mohan Singh, Secretary, Labour Cell 
IN 1\1684RS 

21 
12. Sardar Panninder Singh, Joint Secretary District 
13. Shri Ajay Thapa, Sr. Youth Leader 
14. Shri Kuldeep Kumar, Sr. Youth Leader 
LEH (16.9.1995) 
Members of the ExccutiYe Council of Leh Autonomous Hill Development Council and the District 
Officers: 
1. Shri Thupstan Chewang , Chief Executive Councillor, (LAHDC) 
2. Shri Rigzin Jora, Executive Councillor 
3. Shri Jonam Dawa, Executive Councillor 
4. Shri Akbar Ladakhi, Executive Councillor 
5. Shri C. Phunsog, Joint Secretary, Deptt. of Jammu and Kashmir Affairs, Govt. of India 
6. Shri P.K. Tripathi, Deputy Commissioner 
7. Shri S.K. Gupta, Chief Engineer (Electric), Jammu and Kashmir Power Development Corpn., Srinagar 
8. Shri B.L. Wali, Chief·Education Officer, Leh 
9. Shri M.L. Mattoo, General Manager, DIC, Leh 
10. Dr. S.D. Khan, Chief Medical Officer, Leh 
KARGIL (17.9.95) 
Representatives of National Conference: 
1. Shri Raman Ali Akhone, Ex.-MLA 
2. Shri Aga Ghulam Hassan, Secretary 
3: Mohd. Mussa 
4. Mohd Hussain 
5. Shri Gulam Mohd., Vice-President 
6. Mohd. Abdulla, Vice-President 
7. Shri Hazi Ali Suru, Member 
8. Mohd. Ismail Bantoo, Member 
9. Shri Abdul Rahim Kangral, Member 
I 0. Shri Hazi Mohd. Hussain, Member 
It. Moh. Raza, Member 
Representatives oflslamia School, Kargil: 
I. Shri Sheikh Muqadas, Vice-President 
2. Shri Sheikh Ahmad Mehmodi 
3. Shri Sheikh Toha, Secretary 
4. Mohd. Hassan, Commander Ex.-MP (Ind) 
Representatives of Ahli Sunnat-Wal Jamaat (Party ofSunni Muslims): 
1. Mohd. Kazim Bagh, President 
2. Hazi Habibullah, Vice-President 
3. Ghulam Rasopl, Memb er 
Representatives of Congress (!) : 
I. Aga Jammal , President District Cong.(I) & Ex.-MLC 
2. Gulam Hassan, Secretary 
3. Hazi Ali Rangin, Vice-President 
4. Aga Syed Ali 
5. Hazi Ghulam Ahmad 
6. Hazi Zakir Hussain 

22 
7. Akhone Mohd. Hassan, Block President Cong.(n Sankoro Block 
8. Hasan Khan 
9. Hazi Baqir Ali 
10. Ghulam Haider 
Represe ntatives of Government of Jammu and Kashmir: 
1. Shri A. Azim, Distt. Development Commiss ioner (Chairman, Development Board) 
2. Shri S.R.S. Madni, Distt. Superintending Engineer (Vice-Chairman, Development Board) 
3. Shri B.L. Misri, Superintending Engineer, Power Development Corpn. 
4. Dr. B. Srinivas, IPS, S.P. Kargil 
SRINAGAR (17.9.95) 
I. Representatives of Government of Jammu and Kashmir : 
1. Lt. Gen. S.D. Saklani, Advisor to the Governor 
2. Shri Ashok Kumar, Chief Secretary 
3. Shri Sudhir Blowria , ACS (Home) 
II. 1. Gen. (Retd.) K.V. Krishna Rao, Governor 
2. Shri Moses, Advisor to the Governor 
3. Shri R.K. Sayeed, Advisor to the Governor 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar, Chief Secretary 
5. Shri Pravez Diwan, Pr. Secretary to Governor 
6. Shri S.S. Blowri, Addl. Chief Secretary (Home) 
TANGDHAR VALLEY (KARNAH) (18.9.95) 
Representativ~ of all Karnah Pahari Action Committee : 
1. Shri Mehboob Ilahi, Organiser P.A., Committee 
2. Shri Kafil-ur Rehman, Chairman 
3. Shri A.R. Budhana, Ex. M.L.C. 
4. Shri Jahangir Alam, General Secretary 
5. Shri Noor Ahmad Qurashi, Dy. Organiser 
6. Shri B.A. Khan, Member 
7. Shri Qazi Abdul Majid, Member 
8. Shri Gh. Haider Mir, Secretary 
9. Shri Taja Parveen, Member 
10. Shri Juginder Singh, Member 
11. Shri Akhtar Ali Khan, Member 
12. Shri Gazi Shah, Cashier 
13. Mohd. Manzoor, Member 
14. Shri Shabir Ahmad, Member 
15. Shri Raja M. Ismail, Member 
SRINAGAR (18.9.95) 
Representatives of National Conference : 
1. Shri Bashir Ahmed Kuthoo, Advocate 
2. Shri Gul Rafiqi, Youth President 
3. Shri Khalid Shrawardi, Doda 
4. Shri Din Mohd . Chetta, Kupwara 
5. Shri Mohd . Syed Akhoon, Zonal President 
6. Shri Ab. Rahim Rather, Budgam 
7. Shri Ahmad Kichloo, General Secretary 

23 
Representatives of Congress(l): 
1. Shri Ghulam Rasool Kar 
2. Shri Maulvi Iftekhar Hussain Ansae 
3. Shri Taj Mohiuddin 
4. Shri Mangat Ram Sha'rma 
5. Shri Madan Lal 
6. Shri R.S. Chib 
7. Shri Sarfaraz Khan 
8. Shri Mohammed Sayeed 
9. Shri Hayaz Rahat 
10. Shri Salamdin (Kupwara) 
Representatives of Janata Dal : 
1. Shri Abu Nantapur, Joint General Secretary 
2. Shri S.F. Andrazi 
3. Shri Sayed Bashir Ahmad 
4. Shri G.M. Bawan, General Secretary 
5. Shri Peer Ayasidin, Vice-President 
Representatives of Congress (Tiwari): 
Shri Rafiq Sadiq, President P.C.C. (Tiwari) 
Representatives of CPM: 
1. Shri Gulam Nabi Malik, State Committee Member 
2. Mohd. Yaqab, District Member 
3. Mohd. Maqbool, State Committee Member 
4. Ab. Hamid Ulema, State Committee Member 
5. Ahmadullah Mir, Tehril Committee Member 
6. Shri Ghulam Rasool Lene, Tehril Committee Member 
7. Shri Bashir Ahmad Lene, Tehril Committee Member 
8. Shri Bashir Ahmad Sheikh, Tehril Committee Member 
Representatives of C.P.I.: 
1. Ab. Rehman Tekroo, State Secretary 
2. Ghulam Shri Rasool, State Committee Member 
3. Shri G.R. Nadeem, State Committee Member 
4. Mohd. Yousf, State Committee Member 
SRINAGAR (19.9.95) 
Representatives of the Army: 
1. Lt. Gen. J.S. Dhillon, YSM 
2. Maj. Gen. H.S. Mangat 
3. Brig. Arjun Ray, VSM 
4. Brig. P.P.S. Bindra 
5. Col. Anil Kalra 
6. Maj. K.J. Singh 
Representatives of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir: 
1. Shri Ashok Kumar, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Mohandas Moses, Advisor (M) to the Governor 
3. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) S.D. Saklani, Advisor(S) to the Governor 

24 
4. Shri R.K. Sayeed, Advisor (RKS) to the Governor 
5. Shri B. Goswami, Advisor(G) to the Governor 
6. Shri S.S. Billow.ari, A.C.S. Home 
7. Shri U. Ghosh, A.C.S. Ag. 
8. Shri M.S. Pandit, A.C.S. Finance 
9. Shri Vi jay Bakay a, Comr. Secretary Industries 
10. Shri Sammet Verghes, Comr. Secretary Health 
11. Shri Amit Kushari, Comr. Secretary Housing 
12. Shri Madhav Lal, Comr. Secretary Ladakh Affairs 
13. Shri Chathurvedi, Vigilance Commr. 
14. Shri Feroze Ahmed, MDJKTDC 
15. Shri Qasba, Director Sc. & Tech. 
16. Chief Engineer Rural Electrification 
17. Shri Kanth, Chief Engineer PHE 
18. Shri Fazili, Chief Engineer I & FC 
19. Shri G.N. Ahangar, D.C. Pulwana 
20. Shri S.K. Nayak, D.C. Badgam 
21. Shri Moh'd Hussain Shick, D.C. Anantnag 
22. Shri B.B. Vyas, D.C. Srinagar 
23. Shri B.R. Sharma, D.C. Kujmara 
24. Shri Jindial, Director Information 
25. Shri M.M. Bhat, Director Rural Development 
26. Shri A.K. Sumbli, Additional Secretary, Education 
27. Shri G.N. Parra, Secretary, Revenue-
28. Shri Mushtaq Ahmed Ganai, Secretary, Food & Supply 
29. Shri H.H. Beg, Secretary, Social Welfare 
30. Shri Razdan, Additional Secretary, Planning 
31. Ms. Sushma Chowdary, A.C.S. (Planning) 
32. Shri S.P. Kazal, Comr.-cum-Secy., PWD 
33. Shri G.M. Thakur, Comr.-cum-Secy., General Administration Department 