 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA          150 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2010-11) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 2ND JUNE 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 2ND JUNE 2011) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 1ST AUGUST, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 2ND AUGUST, 2011) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JUNE, 2011/JYAISHTHA, 1933 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.i  n
E-mail:rsc-hf@sansad.nic.in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

C.S. (H.A.)-291 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2010-11) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 2ND JUNE 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 2ND JUNE 2011) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 1ST AUGUST, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 2ND AUGUST, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JUNE, 2011/JYAISHTHA, 1933 (SAKA) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
   
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE........................................................................................ (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ (iii) 
3. R EPORT ......................................................................................................................... 1-2 
 C HAPTER-I            Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
CHAPTER-II          Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
CHAPTER-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
                           Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................................... 
 
CHAPTER-IV        The Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply  
  of the Government have not been received..................................................... 
 
 
 
69-87 
 
88-91 
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE  .................................. 92-98 
5. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE ......................................................... 99-102 
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(RE-CONSTITUTED W.E.F. ON 31ST AUGUST, 2010) 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu           ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Rishang Keishing 
 3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
 4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal 
 6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
 7. Shri Javed Akhtarf 
 8. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 9. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 10. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA  
 11. Shri L.K. Advani 
 12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 14. Shri Ramen Deka 
 15. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
 16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 17. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat) 
 19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
 21. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane 
 22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 23. Adv. A. Sampath 
 24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
 27. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 29. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
f Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 September, 2010 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who has resigned from the Membership of the 
DRSC 
on Home Affairs w.e.f. the 13th September, 2010. 

 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director  
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Fiftieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Forty-Fourth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
2.  The One Hundred and Forty-Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha 
on 27th April, 2010. 
3.  The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and 
Forty Fourth Report. The Minister of Home Affairs laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha the status of 
implementation of recommendations contained in the said report of the Committee, on 23rd 
November, 2010 pursuant to the direction of the Chairman, Rajya Sabha and presented the same in the 
Rajya Sabha on 24th November, 2010. 
4.  The Committee considered the draft Report an d adopted the same at its meeting held on 15 
April, 2011. 
5.  The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
  M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
15th April, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary 
  Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its One Hundred and Forty-Fourth Report on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs for the year 2010-11. The said Report was presented to/laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 27th April, 2010. 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. Subsequently, the Minister of Home Affairs laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on 23rd November, 2010 and the Rajya Sabha on 24th November, 2010, a 
statement on the status of implementation of recommendations contained in that Report. These have 
been categorized as follows: 
Chapter I : The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 3.1.12, 3.1.13, 3.1.15, 3.2.7, 3.3.4, 3.4.8, 3.5.6, 4.10.4, 4.10.5, 4.10.6, 4.10.7, 4.10.10, 
4.10.14, 4.10.17, 5.3.2, 5.4.2, 5.5.1 (iv), 5.5.1 (vi), 5.5.1 (xii), 5.5.1 (xv), 5.5.1 (xx), 5.5.1 (xxiv), 
5.7.5, 5.7.9, 5.8.2, 5.9.2, 5.13.2, 5.14.3, 5.16.1 (i), 5.16.1 (vii), 5.16.1 (viii), 6.9.3, 7.7.8, 7.7.9, 
7.7.12, 7.17.1, 7.17.3 & 7.17.4, 7.17.7, 7.17.8 (of One Hundred and Forty-Fourth Report) Total 
recommendations- 40 
  The. Committee is pleased to note that the Mi nistry has accepted its forty of recommendations 
as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
Chapter II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.12.1, 3.1.16, 3.3.5, 3.5.7, 3.7.9, 3.8.5, 
3.9.2, 3.10.5, 3.11.6, 3.11.7, 3.11.8, 3.14.3, 3.14.7, 3.16.5, 3.17.8, 3.17.9, 3.17.10, 3.17.11, 
3.17.12, 4.10.1, 4.10.2, 4.10.9, 4.10.11, 4.10.12, 4.10.15, 5.2.3, 5.2.4, 5.5.1 (vii), 5.5.1 (viii), 
5.5.1 (ix), 5.5.1 (x), 5.5.1 (xi), 5.5.1 (xiii), 5.5.1 (xiv), 5.5.1 (xviii), 5.5.1 (xxi), 5.5.1 (xxiii), 
5.5.1 (xxv), 5.5.1 (xxvi), 5.5.1 (xxviii), 5.11.2, 5.14.2, 5.15.2, 5.16.1 (iv), 5.16.1 (ix), 6.9.2, 
7.7.3, 7.7.5, 7.7.6, 7.7.7, 7.7.10, 7.7.11, 7.17.2, 7.17.5, 7.17.6, 7.17.9 ( ibid) Total 
recommendations- 56 
  The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, 
does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
Chapter III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 3.1.11, 3.6.4, 3.13.7, 3.15.3, 4.10.8, 4.10.13, 
5.3.3, 5.5.1 (xvii), 5.5.1 (xix), 5.10.2, 5.16.1 (ii), 5.16.1 (iii), 5.16.1 (v), 5.16.1 (vi), 6.9.4, 7.7.1, 
7.7.2, 7.7.4 (ibid) Total recommendations-18 
  The Committee expresses its concern over th e non-implementation of its recommendations 
contained in Chapter-III and desire s that the Ministry should furn ish convincing explanations in 
respect of those recommendations. 
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 3.1.14, 3.12.4, 4.10.3, 5.1.6, 5.2.6, 5.5.1 (i) (ii) 
(iii), 5.5.1 (xxii), 5.5.1 (xxvii) (ibid) Total recommendation-10 

  In respect of ten re commendations in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished interim reply 
or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should 
furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendation categorized in 
Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendation. 
3.  The details of the ATRs have been analysed  in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
1.1  Modernisation of State Police Forces (MPF) 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the Scheme is of utmost importance so far as the 
maintenance of law and order in the States is concerned. Therefore, the earmarked provision for the 
Scheme must be utilized fully and optimally. In this connection, active participation of State 
Governments is necessary. The Committee, therefor e, impresses upon the State Governments that 
Utilization Certificates may be submitted in time so that they could avail of the funds under the 
Scheme. The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that even some of the States affected by left 
wing extremism are not properly availing the Scheme. Such States have not submitted the UCs for 
2007-08 which would obviously deprive them in getting their full share of funds in future. The 
Committee finds it disturbing that on one side, the State are reeling under the impact of left wing 
extremism, as shown by the recent example of the Dantewada incident on 6.4.2010, in which a large 
number of security personnel were but chered by the ultras. On the hand, the affected States display 
lack of interest in availing of the Scheme. The Committee desires that the Minister of Home Affairs 
should discuss the matters with all the concerned Chief Ministers. (Para 3.1.12 of 144th Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2  The issue would be discussed in the next Conference of Chief Ministers on Internal Security. 
Further Recommendation 
1.1.3  The Committee may be informed of the decisi ons taken in the last Conference of Chief 
Ministers on Internal Security. 
Recommendation 
1.1.4  The Committee appreciates introduction of the system of Concurrent Audit to monitor timely 
and appropriate use of the funds sanctioned and released under the MPF Scheme. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should apprise it of the highlights as well as the 
corrective steps contemplated in the light of the Action Taken Reports received from the State 
Governments. (Para 3.1.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.1.5  The quarterly concurrent audit of utilization of MPF funds by States is being conducted by the 
Departmental Accounting Organization of Ministry of Home Affairs. The quarterly concurrent audit 
reports as and when received are being forwarded to concerned States for taking remedial action and 
furnish action taken reports (ATRs) to the Ministry. These ATRs are taken into consideration while 
considering release of funds to the States. Some of the common issues which have been noticed in the 
concurrent audit reports are as under: 

(i) The funds released by the Central Gove rnment are not being used by the State 
Governments within the financial year itself. In some cases, funds are used for items not 
included in the plan approved by the Ministry. 
(ii) State Governments are not incurring timely expenditure out of their own share under the 
scheme. 
(iii) The procurement and installation of equipm ent is taking long time. Therefore, the audit 
is asking for speeding of the process. The period between initiation of tender process and 
its finalization is long in many cases.  
(iv) Most of the State Governments are not maintaining stock registers of items purchased 
under the MPF scheme. 
(v) The State Governments are not releasing funds in time to Police Departments which is 
resulting in delay in the modernization process. 
(vi) Where the buildings are complete, the St ate Government is delaying the process of 
giving the building to the police for proper use. 
(vii) Forensic science laboratories are not optimally using the facilities due to lack of 
manpower. 
(viii) The training infrastructure is not being fully developed and in some cases calendar of 
training is not available. 
(ix) Expenditure statements from field units are not reaching PHQs in time as a result they 
are not able to furnish UCs to the Ministry in time. 
(x) In some States, there are no monitoring comm ittees to review the progress of work under 
MPF. 
(xi) In cases where procurement of weapons and equipment had been completed, no action 
has been taken to put them to immediate use. 
1.1.6  As already stated above, the audit reports are being sent to respective States with the request to 
furnish ATRs to MHA. The submission of ATRs on concurrent audit report is linked to release of 
Central funds to States. It is expected that in due course of time the system would improve to the 
satisfaction of audit requirement. 
Further Recommendation 
1.1.7  The Committee appreciates the fact that the Au dit Reports are sent by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs to respective States with the request to furnish ATRs. But the Committee is 
disturbed to note the inconsistencies and deficiencies that are there in the common issues 
identified by the Ministry in the ATRs. The Mi nistry should make it compulsory for all the 
States to take corrective measu res on all these deficiencies, a nd if necessary, at the Minister’s 
level the issues may be taken up with the Chief Ministers. 
Recommendation 

1.1.8 The Committee, while appreciating the laying of more focus on the components of operational 
buildings such as police stations, police outposts and police lines as a part of effective budgeting for 
Annual Action Plan of States under the Modernizatipn of Police Forces, feels that earmarking Rs. 
2.00 crore per district for naxal affected Districts, is meagre. Keeping in view the use of latest 
weapons by the outlaws and their strategy to attack police establishments, the allocation and facilities 
to police establishments and personnel should be appropriately increased. However, this should not 
be done across the board and should be linked to utilization.   
Action Taken 
1.1.9 The Ministry, prima-facie, agrees with the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee. 
The MPF Scheme was approved by the Cabinet upto the year 2009-10 in the year 2000. In view of the 
demands of States for its continuation for another 5-10 years, the CCS has approved the proposal of 
the Ministry for extension of the scheme for one year i.e. 2010-11 pending the study of the Scheme by 
BPR&D in order to enable the Government to take a decision on its further continuation for another 5-
10 years and suggestions/recommendations to be incorporated in the new/revised Scheme. One of the 
TORs for the study by BPR&D was about requiremen t of NE States, J&K and naxal affected States. 
In the light of this position, the implementation is dependent upon the decision of the Government to 
continue the scheme for another 5-10 years beyond 2010-11 based on the assessment of BPR&D. As 
for the current financial year i.e, 2010-11, the Scheme has been extended, on as is where is basis; no 
change in the amount of Rs.2 crore for naxal affected districts has been made. It may, however, be 
noted here that as against 31 Naxal affected Districts supported in 2008-09, 51 Districts were 
supported in 2009-10 under the Scheme and during the current financial year, 83 Naxal affected 
Districts are being supported. 
1.2 CIVIL DEFENCE 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee has made detailed recommendations in its One Hundred and Thirty-sixth 
Report on the Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the country and it intends to present 
an Action Taken Report thereon, which would contain detailed observations and recommendations in 
the light of action taken by the Government. Since the Government is revamping the Civil Defence set 
up, fund requirements may be assessed properly. Regular monitoring on the revamping may be made. 
Enrolling young and active volunteers should be made a regular feature. The total volunteer force 
should also be trained in disaster management. The Committee urges upon the Government to create 
awareness amongst all citizens for the imperative need to discharge their fundamental duties, to 
uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of the country and to defend the country and 
render national service when called upon to do so. The Committee also urges upon the Government to 
prepare detailed plans to provide training to all able-bodied citizens so that they can perform their 
fundamental duties. (Para 3.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 The assessment of requirement of funds for various components of the Revamping of Civil 
Defence Scheme in the country has been made on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee 
headed by Shri K.M. Singh, Member NDMA. 

1.2.3 The Scheme for Revamping of Civil Defence, set up in the country at a cost of Rs.l 00 crore, is 
under implementation. The scheme is being regularly monitored at various levels. 
1.2.4 The officers of the Civil Defenee at the level of Dy. Controllers have been sensitized about the 
important aspects of the scheme and have been provided with practical solutions to the problems being 
faced by the State Civil Defence Staff at the ground level. 
1.2.5 In order to enroll young and active volunteers in Civil Defence force, an intensive drive was 
undertaken across all the States to weed out the inactive, old and infirm volunteers and to enroll new 
energetic volunteers. The process has since been completed by the States/UTs, in the month of May 
2010, after screening all volunteers. A total of 57,939 volunteers have been weeded out and 39,708 
new volunteers have been enrolled after the launch of the Scheme. The process of further enrolling 
young and active volunteers is in progress in the States/UTs. 
1.2.6 As part of Pilot Project to sensitize the volunteers in the field of Disaster Management, about 
212 Master Trainers had been trained in Disaster Management Skills in addition to Internal Security 
duties at National Civil Defence College, Nagpur. These Master Trainers have further imparted 
training to 1875 volunteers, till date, at State Level. The training of volunteers will continue for the 
next few months till the whole target of training 4280 volunteers is fully achieved. Financial support 
of procurement of Disaster Management equipments , creation of infrastructure and transport to 100 
selected Multi Hazard Prone Districts through DGCD is being extended. 
1.2.7 As per the recommendations of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, 1% 
population of the country has to be brought under the fold of Civil Defence. Under the scheme of 
Revamping the Civil Defence, provision has been made for awareness and publicity. It is expected 
that the steps taken would go a long way to facilitate creation of awareness among the citizens of this 
country about their role in rendering national services when eventuality so arises. 
1.3 NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee understands the need for strengthening mitigation, preparedness and response 
measures for effective and efficient management of natural as well as manmade disasters keeping in 
view vulnerable geo-climatic conditions, of the country such as 58.6% earthquake prone landmass, 
12% area floods prone and 68% cultivable area drought prone.  The Committee, however, observes 
that most of the new programmes/ augmentation of on going programmes are at the rudimentary 
stages. It would take considerable time for the new programmes to take of. The Committee is 
constrained to note that even though the Act was passed in 2005, there is no perceptible improvement 
in the disaster management preparedness in the country. The 26/11 terrorist attack in Mumbai is a 
glaring example when it took a lot of time for the NSG commandoes to reach the spot. There are 
several instances of handling of major fires, floods/droug hts and major accidents, including recently 
radioactive leakages (Cobalt 60), which should have been tackled with great promptness and 
effectively. The Committee therefore, urges upon the Ministry of Home Affairs and NDMA to take this 
task as a major challenge so that tangible results are visible for the countrymen. National Institute of 
Disaster Management is functioning from rented premises. Land/Buildings for three battalions of 
NDRF are yet to be acquired. Though Phase I of National Emergency Communication Plan has been 

completed, the Committee apprehends that the provision of a meagre amount of Rs. 10 crore is not 
sufficient in view of the vastness of the country and its vulnerability. Therefore, fund requirements 
need to be re-assessed. The Committee also recommends that 124 posts sanctioned for the NDMA may 
be filled up at the earliest. There should not be any delay in this regard. (Para 3.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 In view of the vulnerability of several part s of this country and geo climatic conditions, a 
Central Act i.e. Disaster Management Act, 2005 was enacted. This Act paved the way for creation of 
NDMA with core function to lay down policies, plans and guidelines for disaster management for 
ensuring timely and effective response to disaster s. NDMA has since then released several specific 
guidelines on management of earthquake, floods, cyclones, biological disasters, chemical (industrial) 
disaster, chemical (terrorism) disaster, nuclear and radiological emergencies, psycho-social support 
and preparation of State Disaster Management Plans etc. Several other guidelines on the subject are in 
the process of its conceptualization & formulation. 
1.3.3 In addition, NDMA has been generating awareness on preparedness through print and 
electronic media and organizing mock drills. NDMA is also in the process of formulation of several 
Mitigation Projects such as National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project, National Earthquake Risk 
Mitigation Project, National Flood Mitigation Project, National Landslide Risk Mitigation Project. 
1.3.4 The National Policy on Disaster Management (NDPM) has been placed on the website of 
NDM Division of MHA. The Policy covers all aspects of disaster management covering institutional, 
legal and financial arrangements; disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness; techno-legal 
regime; response; relief and rehabilitation; reconstruction and recovery; capacity development; 
knowledge management and research and development. It focuses on the areas where action is needed 
and the institutional mechanism through which such action can be channelized. 
1.3.5 As far as the incidence regarding radiation from Cobalt (60) which occurred in Mayapuri area 
of Delhi during April, 2010 is concerned, it was dealt/responded promptly by an expert team of 
NDMA comprising of CBRN trained NDRF. Severity of radioactivity was assessed in the patients 
admitted in the hospital and they were advised/administered suitable medical care. The mechanism to 
deal such kind of disaster is being developed and expected to be institutionalized in due course. 
1.3.6 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) has been constituted with 8 battalions, as a 
specialist force to respond to disaster or disaster like situation. So far NDRF have undertaken to rescue 
lives of more than 21000 persons in different States including relief supply, medical aid, medicines 
and drinking water. 
1.3.7 The matter for allotment of land for NIDM for developing its own campus has been taken up 
with the DDA, New Delhi. Allocation of requisite fund has already been made in Budget. Effort is on 
to solve the problem of land availability. 
1.3.8 Similarly, the issue of acquiring land for National Disaster Response Force battalions has been 
taken up in right earnest. Land has been made available for six Battalions of NDRF viz. at Kolkata, 
Ghaziabad, Arakkonam, Mundali, Gandhinagar and Pune. For the other two battalions, efforts are on 
to make the land available. Further infrastructure is being built on the land acquired for those six 
battalions. 

1.3.9 The amount of Rs.10 crore provided for Ph ase-II of the National Emergency Communication 
Plan is only a token provision. A plan proposal in consultation with NIC, Department of Space and 
NDRF is under formulation and accordingly additional funds will be sought. 
1.3.10  NDMA has been given sanction of 124 posts of Secretariat Staff against which 73 posts have 
been filled up. Besides that, NDMA has engaged 16 consultants and outsourced 90 people for 
different works. 
Further Recommendation 
1.3.11 The Committee desires that the guidelines on  the subjects, which are at the stages of 
conceptualization and formulation, may be given final shape at the earliet and an early solution 
may be found to the problem of  land availability since requisi te fund had been made in the 
Budget. 
1.4 HOME GUARDS 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee appreciates the role played by the Home Guards in assisting police in 
maintaining law & order and in various other security related duties including disaster management. 
The Committee agrees with the suggestions made by second ARC. In the present day scenario, 
disaster management and para medical training are very important and these should be made an 
integral part of the training of Home Guards. The Committee is however given to understand that the 
picture is not so rosy as it is being projected. Home Guard Jawans do not receive the needed moral 
support, proper leadership and financial incentives. They are always under the feeling of job 
insecurity and are inducted mostly on part-time basis. The Committee is unhappy to note that the 
States are not submitting their claims on time and therefore allocation is getting reduced and so is the 
expenditure which also gets reduced reluctantly. It is an unfortunate situation where States are not 
properly making use of the scheme and the funds. The centre should write to all the States to 
implement the scheme in letter and spirit and make their claims on a regular basis. The Committee 
recommends that the Union Home Minister may ta ke up this issue with all the State Governments 
impressing upon them the need to make optimum use of the scheme, submit claims regularly so that 
adequate funds could be allocated and released A review of the role and responsibilities of Home 
Guards may be undertaken to revitalize their role and consequent augmentation of the resources.(Para 3.4.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 Home Guard volunteers are raised under Home  Guards Acts/Rules enacted by the respective 
State Governments/UT Administrations. Central Government makes guidelines/policy for proper 
functioning of Home Guards Organization in various States/UTs. ‘Home Guards’ being a State 
subject, its implementation is carried out by the States/UTs. 
1.4.3 The proposal to increase the duty/training al lowance of Home Guards from Rs.45/- to Rs.250/- 
is under consideration of the Government. This will enhance the morale of  Home Guards volunteers 
and also result in attracting better quality of manpower to this organization. 
1.4.4 During last three years  i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, Rs.48.00 crore, Rs.46.527 crore and 
Rs.44.l415 crore, respectively, have been sanction ed for re-imbursement to the States. However, the 
States are regularly being advised by DG, Civil Defence to submit all outstanding claims of previous 

years along with audit certificates. State Governme nts are being advised by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to expeditiously and regularly submit their reimbursement claims. This will facilitate optimum 
utilization of the allocated funds and will result in efficient implementation of the Scheme. 
 
... 
Further Recommendation 
1.4.5 The Committee welcomes the proposal and rec ommends that a decision in the matter of 
increasing duty/training allowance may be taken at the earliest. 
1.5 FIRE SERVICES 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee having taken note of the major fire accidents with alarming regularity in the 
country, causing heavy causalties, particularly in commercial buildings in Bangalore and the 
Stephen’s Court Building in Kolkata, wishes to highlight the weaknesses in the fire fighting 
mechanism of the country. The Committee notes with dismay that lessons have not been learnt from 
the heart-rendering incidents of Dabwali (1995) Kumbakonam (2004), and Uphaar Cinema, (Delhi) 
(1997) tragedies. The National Building Code (NBC) published in 1970 and updated in 2005 does 
prescribe the minimum fire safety and rescue measures to be provided in the buildings but what is 
missing is the actual enforcement mechanism. Transparency in giving clearance to construction of 
structures must be in place and public access to building safety data, a practice common in other 
parts of the world, ought to adopted in our country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
Government must undertake required steps for strengthening of fire fighting mechanism. The old and 
the new structures should comply with the mandated rules and the State Governments must be 
persuaded to ensure enforcement and compliance of the fire fighting measures and safety code. The 
Committee also recommends that a complete overhauling of fire services needs on an emergent basis 
be done. The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the allocation of Rs. 38 crore made at BE 
2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 14 crore at RE. This needs to be seriously looked into. (Para 3.5.6 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.5.2 It is primarily for the State Governments to ensure safety of life and property from fire related 
accidents as Fire Service is a State subject and has been included as a muni cipal function in the XII 
Schedule of the Constitution of India in terms of Article 243- W. Ministry plays an advisory role by 
issuing fire safety guidelines as recommended by Standing Fire Advisory Council, an apex advisory 
body, constituted by the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs. 
1.5.3 State Governments are also being assisted to get monetary assistan ce as soft loans from 
General Insurance Corporation and Grants-in-Aid as per recommendations of Finance Commissions. 
As per recommendations of X and XI Finance Commissions, Rs.686 crore (approximately) were 
provided for the development of Fire Service in the country. 
1.5.4 In the XIth Plan, Rs.200 crore has been allocated for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme – -
”Strengthening of Fire & Emergency Services”. Un der this Scheme, State Fi re Services shall be 

strengthened by providing them Advanced Water Tenders, High Pressure Pumps with water mist 
technology and Quick Response Vehicles. 
1.5.5 Further, Fire Risk and Hazard Analysis in th e country will also be undertaken for the first time 
for preparing a Fire Service preparedness plan for the country. 
1.5.6 As far as reduction of fund in 2009-10 at RE  is concerned, the fact is this that Budgetary 
provision against this scheme sanctioned for Rs.200 crore have started flowing to the States since 
financial year 2009-10. Since the scheme was approved only after passage of more than 6 months in 
that financial year i.e. during October 2009, the allocation was reduced to Rs.14 crore in the Revised 
Estimate. However, in the current financial year (2010-11), the allocated amount of Rs.38 crore is 
expected to be fully utilized and also further efforts are being made to step up the financial provision. 
1.5.7 Also, Ministry has considered the proposal for improvement of training standards of Fire 
Service personnel in the country. Accordingly an amount of Rs.205 crore in Non-Plan has been 
approved for the period 2010-2013 for upgradation of National Fire Service College, Nagpur. 
1.5.8 As stated above, Standing Fire Advisory Council has already recommended for adopting the 
Fires Safety Guidelines, as contained in the National Building Code of India. Compendium of 
Instruction of Standing Fire Advisory Council, containing these guidelines and recommendations, 
have been circulated to all concerned for implementation.Actual implementation rest with the local bodies /  
State Government. 
1.5.9 Further, following recommendations of the 13th Finance Commission have been accepted by 
the Central Government and accordingly funds will be available for meeting the requirement of Fire & 
Emergency Services in the country – 
(i) Finance Commission has allocated Rs.87519 crore to the local bodies. A portion of the 
grant provided to the urban local bodies will be spent on revamping of Fire Services 
within their respective jurisdictions. The State will be eligible to draw its share only if 
they comply with nine conditions out of which one of the conditions in "All Municipal 
Corporations with a population of more than  1 million (2001 census) must put in place a 
fire hazard response and mitigation plan for their respective jurisdictions. Publication of 
these plans in the respective State Government gazettes will demonstrate compliance 
with this condition". 
(ii) In addition, Rs.472 crore to the 7 Stat es namely Andhra Pradesh (Rs.17 crore), Haryana 
(Rs.100 crare), Mizoram (Rs.20 crore), Ori ssa (Rs.150 crore), Tripura (Rs.15 crore), 
Uttar Pradesh (Rs.20 crore only for Varanasi) and West Bengal (Rs.150 crore) have been 
allocated for revamping of Fire & Emergency Services. 
Further Recommendation 
1.5.10  The Committee feels that role of the Cent ral Government does not end up with 
providing monetary assistance and grant-in-aid on the plea that the Fire Services is a State 
subject. The Apex Council needs to be strengthe ned to make its presence felt. Though the 
code/Rules/Manuals/Regulations exist on paper, their actual enforcement and transparency in 
giving fire safety clearance in construction of structures , are lacking. The Committee takes note 

of reported fire and safety clearance given to so me guest houses in Gurgaon before completion 
of construction activities. Such irregularities need to be curbed with firm hands. The Committee 
also desires that the upgradatio n of National Fire Service college , Nagpur be taken up in time 
bound manner. 
1.6 NAXALISM 
Recommendation 
1.6.1 It is an admitted fact that the implementation of various schemes, particularly of the Ministry 
of Rural Development and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, is deficient and there is no proper 
administrative control and monitoring which obviously lead to dissatisfaction among the people and 
they fall easy prey to the extremists. Efforts, therefore, should be made in the direction of 
implementing the flagship programmes in a proper manner to ensure that the beneficiaries feel part of 
the mainstream of the society. 
(Para 4.10.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 The Ministry of Rural Development implements various schemes through State Governments 
and UT Administrations. A comprehensive Monitoring Mechanism is under implementation to 
monitor the implementation of the programmes, including utilization of funds through Periodical 
Progress Reports, Performance Review Committee Meetings, Area Officer’s Scheme, Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committees at the State and District levels and National Level Monitors to monitor 
quality of work and adherence to implementation of schemes as per programme guidelines. 
1.6.3 The State Governments and Union Territory Administrations have been advised to adopt a five 
- pronged strategy to improve the functioning of the rural development schemes consisting of (i) 
creation of awareness about the schemes, (ii) transparency, (iii) people’s participation (iv) 
accountability, social audit and (v) vigilance and m onitoring of rural development programmes at all 
levels. 
1.6.4 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has taken note of the suggestions of the Committee for 
compliance. Regular attention is being given to improve performance. 
Recommendation 
1.6.5 The Government should identify the factors responsible for tardy implementation of the 
schemes and ensure that its benefits reach the targeted groups and they do not feel alienated. In this 
context, the Government should address the issues related to land acquisition, landalienation, 
resettlement and rehabilitation; issues pertaining to laws applicable to the scheduled and tribal areas, 
on priority. The Committee would also like to highlight the fact that in some States elections are not 
held regularly to the Panchayats and other local bodies, which results in lack of participation of 
peoples’ representatives in the implementation of the flagship programmes. It is therefore, equally 
important that elections are held regularly to the P RI Institutions so that public representatives are 
actively involved at the grass root level in implementation of the schemes and projects which would 
directly help in bringing the people back to the mainstream. (Para 4.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 

1.6.6 Government of India brought out National Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy 2007 so that 
people affected due to land acquisition or otherwise are provided with adequate livelihood option and 
other facilities. Keeping in view the various problem s faced by the displaced person, particularly the 
tribal people, Ministry of Rural Development had introduced Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill and 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill 2009 which was passed by the Lok Sabha but was not taken up in 
Rajya Sabha in the year 2009. However, the Bills lapsed with dissolution of 14th Lok Sabha. 
Thereafter, in consultation with Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, the process is on to re-introduce the 
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill and Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill. The Bills which were 
introduced in 2009 had specific provision to protec t the interests of tribals. These two laws are 
expected to address the issues causing hardships due to land acquisition and displacement of poor 
people in general and particularly the tribal with specific safeguards for scheduled areas. 
1.6.7 As regards holding elections to the Panchayats , only Jharkhand could not do so because of the 
court case. Supreme Court has since delivered the judgement and the State Government is making 
good efforts to hold Panchayats election at the earliest. 
Recommendation 
1.6.8  The areas affected by LWE are mostly in the central parts of India which has less density of 
population, more density of forest areas; less infrastructure facilities, including education, health and 
roads. It is, therefore, essential that these infrastructure facilities are improved and developed at a 
much faster pace than has been projected and implemented so far. More and more roads are required 
to be built so that it gives employment to jobless people, including tribals while connecting those 
areas with the rest of the country. 
(Para 4.10.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.9 It is an important mandate of NRHM to ensure availability of health infrastructure like PHCs 
and sub-centres to provide services in the back ward High Focus LWE districts. The States were 
persuaded to substantially increase fund allocation to the high focus districts. This has been ensured in 
PIP of 2010-11 resulting in an increase of allocati on in the LWE district from Rs.271.85 crore in 
2009-10 to Rs.654.61 crore. In 2010-11 (an increase of almost 100% over last year’s allocation). 
Decentralized planning being the cornerstone of NRHM, districts have been allocated these funds as 
per their requirements for improving healthcare services, most important of them being infrastructure 
strengthening. 
1.6.10  The Project Approval Board for SSA has approved the Annual Work Plan & Budget of 35 
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) districts (34 focus districts and West  Medinipur district) for 2010-11. A 
statement on district-wise physical targets agains t the identified indicators and total financial 
allocation under SSA, NPEGEL and KGBV is enclosed as Annexure-I. The total allocation for the 
LWE affected districts has increased by 49% from Rs.2,03,771.84 lakh in 2009-10 to Rs.3,02,865.72 
lakh in 2010-11. The highest increase is in respect of the districts of Kankar (97%) Dantewara (85%), 
Narayanpur (86%) and Bijapur (85%). The physical targets in respect of the identified indicators have 
been approved on the basis of a detailed appraisal of  the requirements projected by the States in their 
district plans. 
1.6.11 The Government on 26.02.2010 has approved scheme for development of 1202 km. National 
Highways and 4363 km. State Roads to two lane standards at an estimated cost of Rs.7300 crore under 

Road Requirement Plan (RRP) in Left Wing Extrem ism (LWE) affected areas of 34 Districts in 8 
States. So far, detailed estimates in respect of 127 works covering a length of 3533 km. costing 
Rs.4074 crore have been sanctioned. Out of thes e 49 works covering a length of 1255 km. costing 
Rs.1437 crore have been awarded. Further, against savings in the approved RRP, proposal for 
inclusion of additional works covering a length of Rs.742.50 km. costing Rs.950 crore is under 
consideration. 
Recommendation 
1.6.12  Education is the basic ingredient of human resource development. Lack of educational 
facilities in the naxal-affected areas is an important factor accountable for the spread of the 
movement. More and more schools with free boarding are required to be opened in the affected areas. 
Vacancies for the posts of teachers may be filled up and to the extent possible, educated youth from 
those areas may be taken as teachers through a special drive. Technical and engineering institutions 
may also be opened in those areas. 
(Para 4.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.13  33 districts affected with Left Wing Extr emism were identified in the year 2009-10 for 
focused attention in the areas of development. An amount of Rs.2,03,771.84 lakh was allocated for the 
implementation of interventions under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), KGBV and NPEGEL in the 
financial year 2009-10. These districts utilized 70% of the total fund allocation, which comes to 
Rs.1,42,840.02 lakh. Status of district and State-wise physical targets and achievement in respect of 
the identified indicators and financial achievement against the total district-wise allocation for 2009-
10 is enclosed as Annexure-I.  
1.6.14  Later Ramgarh was added in the list of 33 focus district. The Project Approval Board for SSA 
has already approved the Annual Work Plan & Budget of all these 35 districts (34 focus districts and 
West Medinipur district) for 2010-11. A statement on district-wise physical targets against the 
identified indicators and total financial allocation under SSA, NPEGEL and KGBV is enclosed as 
Annexure-II. It can be seen from the Statement at  Annexure-II that the tota l allocation for the LWE 
affected districts has increased by 49% from Rs. 2,03,771.84 lakh in 2009-10 to Rs. 3,02,865.72 lakh 
in 2010-11. The highest increase is in respect of the districts of Kankar (97%), Dantewara (85%), 
Narayanpur (86%) and Bijapur (85%). The physical targets in respect of the identified indicators have 
been approved on the basis of a detailed appraisal of  the requirements projected by the States in their 
district plans. 
Further Recommendation 
1.6.15  The Government may also take action on op ening technical and engi neering institutions 
in the LWE areas as recommended earlier. 
Recommendation 
1.6.16  Drinking water is another basic requirement for the people. In most of the habitations in the 
extremist-affected areas, people do not have access to potable drinking water and even if it is 
available, people, particularly women, have to trek long distances to obtain a pot of water. The 

Government should make use of the existing schemes available and provide drinking water facilities 
in all the habitations by the end of the Eleventh Five-year Plan. (Para 4.10.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.17  Based on the progress of implementation of Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme 
(ARWSP) so far, the difficulties experienced by the States in its implementation in rural areas and the 
felt need for further refi nement in the programme, the Government of India further modified the 
programme for its implementation in the 11th Five Year Plan period. The revised programme 
rechristened as National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), came into vogue with effect 
from 01.04.2009 onwards. The modified programmes’ goal is to provide every household/every 
person, irrespective of the size, with adequate safe water for drinking, cooking and other domestic 
basic needs on a sustainable basis. This basic requirement should meet minimum water quality 
standards and be readily and conveniently accessible at all times and in all situations. 
1.6.18  The norm of 100 persons as the minimum size of a habitation to be covered, has been 
removed with effect from 01.04.2009. All habitation irrespective of the size of the population have to 
be covered under NRDWP. This will benefit small and remote habitations in tribal and forest areas as 
in LWE districts. 
1.6.19  The revised programme gives emphasis on sustainability of sources and systems and 20% of 
the allocation under NRDWP is towards attaining long-term sustainability of water supply to rural 
areas. Further, under the modified programme, priority has been given for coverage of 0% and 0% - 
25% population coverage habitations and quality affected habitations. Thus low coverage areas get 
priority. 
1.6.20  In the allocation of funds to States, 10% weightage has been given to Rural SC/ST population 
in addition to 40% weightage given to overall population of the State, which ensures more funds to 
States with higher SC/ST population which inter alia includes Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected 
areas. 
1.6.21  States are required to earmark at least 25% of the NRDWP funds for drinking water supply to 
SC dominated habitations and 10% for the ST dominated habitation. 
1.6.22  To give an impetus for implementation of water and sanitation programme in LWE affected 
area, a National Level Workshop on Drinking Water and Sanitation in LWE affected Districts was 
organized on 20-21 January, 2010 in Bhubaneswar, Orissa. The workshop was attended by District 
and State officials and was focused on providing them guidance in drawing up an action plan for IEC 
and Training and two year action plan for ensuring full coverage under Rural Drinking Water and 
Sanitation Programme in these Districts. 
1.6.23  During Annual Plan discussions for 2010-2011, the concerned States have been advised to 
give priority to LWE affected districts by taking up more schemes and investing more funds in these 
districts. 
1.6.24  The funds under NRDWP are released to the States. 
1.6.25  The allocation under NRDWP in 2010-11 to the states with LWE affected districts is as under: 

Andhra Pradesh Rs. 459.456 crore 
Bihar Rs. 341.46 crore 
Chhattisgarh Rs. 130.27 crore 
Jharkhand Rs. 165.93 crore 
Madhya Pradesh Rs. 399.04 crore 
Maharashtra Rs. 733.27 crore 
Orissa Rs. 204.88 crore 
Uttar Pradesh Rs. 899.12 crore 
West Bengal Rs. 418.03 crore 
Recommendation 
1.6.26  The Committee is of the considered view that the justice delivery system particularly in the 
lower judiciary should be revamped to reverse the dangerous trend of justice dispensation by the so 
called 'people’s courts '.    
Action Taken 
1.6.27  The Department of Justice is implementing a Plan Scheme for the setting up of Gram 
Nyayalayas in the country. The Government ha s enacted the Gram Nyay alayas Act 2008 which 
provides for Gram Nyayalayas being established for every Panchayat at intermediate level or a group 
of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate level or wh ere there is no Panchayat at intermediate level in 
any State for a group of contiguous Gram Panchaya ts. These Nyayalayas will provide affordable and 
accessible justice to the common man particularly those in the rural areas. 
1.6.28  As per the provisions of the Gram Nyayalay as Act, 2008, it is for the State Governments to 
establish Gram Nyayalayas in co nsultation with the respective High Courts. Since the coming into 
force of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 the States of Maharash tra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and 
Rajasthan have notified 144 Gram Nyayalayas, out of which 47 have started functioning. 
1.6.29  Government is implementing a scheme of computerization of subbrdinate courts for speeding-
up the process in courts and for providing designated judicial services to the litigants. The 
Government is also augmenting the resources of  the States for development of their judicial 
infrastructure. 
1.6.30  Government has accepted the recommendation of Thirteenth Finance Commission to provide 
a grant of Rs.5000 crore to States for improvement in Justice Delivery inter alia  through 
Evening/Morning/Shift Courts, promoting dispute resolution through mediation, conciliation, building 
capacities of judicial officers and prosecutors and for other measures of judicial reforms. 
Further Recommendation 
1.6.31  It appears to the Committee that the progress in setting up of Gram  Nayayalyas is not 
satisfactory. The Committee desires that Union G overnment should take a proactive lead and 
persuade State Governments to set up more and more such Nyayalayas. The Committee also 

desires to be informed of the action taken on the recommendation of the Thirteenth Finance 
Commission for improvement in justice delivery. 
Recommendation 
1.6.32  The Committee agrees with the policy of the Gove rnment that talks with the naxalites can be 
held only when they surrender their arms and abjure violence. The Committee thinks that the 
Government should request all the naxal affected States to implement the “surrender-cum 
rehabilitation” scheme for the naxalites who want to give up violence and join the mainstream of the 
society and the Centre should provide assistance to the State Governments for this scheme.(Para 4.10.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.33  State Governments are implementing their own schemes for surrender and rehabilitation of 
naxalites. As per the extant guidelines of the Security Related Expenditure Scheme, following 
provisions, inter alia, exist for reimbursement of expenditure to State Governments for rehabilitation 
of naxalities : 
(a) Immediate grant of Rs.l.50 lakh to be kept in Fixed Deposit in a bank in the name of the 
surrenderee for 3 years which can be drawn by him after 3 years subject to his good 
behaviour. 
(b) Rs.2000 as monthly stipend for a maximum period of 36 months. 
(c) Incentives for surrender of weapons depending upon the type of weapon(s) surrendered. 
(d) Training in a trade/vocation. 
1.7 MEDICAL FACILITY FOR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND OTHER 
MIDDLE 
 CLASS PEOPLE  
Recommendation 
1.7.1 It is a sad state of affairs that no super speciality treatment/services are available in the 
Islands and the people have to travel to Tamil Nadu or Kolkata for treatment for which expenditure is 
not reimbursed. The Committee does not understand why the Central Government has been indifferent 
to the woes of the people in general and its empl oyees particularly the pensioners who are living in 
that Islands. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs may take up this matter with 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for appropriate decision at an early date. The Committee 
also recommends that the Government should also formulate suitable medical insurance scheme for 
all the persons living in the Islands. 
 (Para 5.3.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.7.2 To meet the acute shortage of Super - Speci alities, the A & N Admini stration has signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Amrita Institute of Medical Science & Research Centre 
(AIMS & RC), Kochi, Kerala on 14th Oct, 2009. AIMS, in terms of the MoU, will depute Super 
Specialists in fields like Cardiology, Surgical Gastroenterology, Urology, Paediatric Surgery, 
Gynaecological endoscopic Surgery, Plastic Surgery and Spinal Surgery, to the GB Pant Hospital 

(Port Blair) for six days every month. Besides, GDMOs with PG qualifica tions (Specialists) from 
CHS also visit the islands from time to time and provide their services. 
1.7.3 Further, the UT Administration has introduced telemedicine/ tele-consultation service between 
the GB Pant Hospital and Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute/Apollo Hospital, 
Chennai where such facility already exists. A Te le - ophthalmology connectivity with the Sankar 
Nethralaya, Chennai has also been made for providing better eye care to the islanders 
1.7.4 A proposal for the establishment of a Me dical College on PPP basis is also under the 
consideration of the UT Admn. The DPR for the same has already been sent to Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare seeking their approval. Over the long term, the shortage of 
Super Specialists can be addressed with the establishment of proposed Medical College. 
1.7.5 Though CGHS facilities are not available in A & N Islands, Government employees are 
entitled to reimbursement of their medical claims under Central Services Medical Attendance Rules. 
However, pensioners do have a problem; while medical facilities in the Islands are free, they have to 
pay for any treatment outside the Islands. Therefor e, the UT Administration is preparing a Health 
Insurance Scheme for pensioners. It may not be out of place to mention that the M/o Health & Family 
Welfare proposes to replace the existing CGHS f acility with a Health Insurance Scheme titled Central 
Government Employee and Pensioners Insurance Scheme (CGEPHIS). All personnel of Central 
Government including pensioners are covered under the Scheme, which is at draft stage. 
Further Recommendation 
1.7.6 The Committee desires that the decision on  the proposed establishment of a medical 
college on PPP model for Andaman and Nicobar Islands, may be taken expeditiously. 
Recommendation 
1.7.7 The Committee is of the view that the Andaman & Nicobar Islands has a special place in our 
history of freedom struggle. It is sort of pilgrimage for the countrymen where Cellular Jail is located. 
Many of our legendary freedom fighters were lodged in Cellular Jail and served life sentence. Some of 
the freedom fighters went to the gallows also. The Committee, therefore, recommends that appropriate 
subsidy should be given on air fare, to attract tourist to the Islands. Special packages for students 
could also be considered for making them understand and appreciate the sacrifices our freedom 
fighters had made for our independence. The Commi ttee further recommends th at old ships may be 
abandoned and new ones may be brought in at the earliest. If necessary, participation of private 
sector may be explored. (Para 5.4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7.8 Abnonnal increase in Air Fare on the Mainland-Is lands Sector have adversely affected the flow 
of tourist to the islands; the number of daily flig hts has also reduced, leading to a mismatch between 
demand and supply. The matter has been taken up by the UT Administration with the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation (MoCA) for increasing the frequency of flights to Port Blair and also to direct airlines 
to operate on the Port Blair sector in accordance with the route dispersal guidelines of GOL. . 
1.7.9 Subsidy on ship fare is 90% for islander a nd 78% for non-islanders. No subsidy is provided for 
air fares, except for in ter-island helicopter travel. Subsidy on  air fare and othe r concessions for 

specialised categories from mainland to islands require consideration by MoCA and Planning 
Commission. 
1.7.10  The UT Administration has already init iated action to replace aging vessels. The Ships 
Acquisition Committee of the Ministry of Shipping has approved the acquisition of 25 Nos vessels 
having modern facilities and enhanced speed as under: 
  
A Mainland Island Sector 4 Nos.1200 pax vessel 
B Inter-Island Sector 4 Nos.500 pax vessel 
C Foreshore sector 2 Nos.200 pax 
  1 No.250 pax 
D Harbour sector 4 Nos. 100 pax vehicle ferry 
  6 Nos. 200 pax 
  4 Nos. 50 pax Motor Launchers 
  
1.7.11  Taking into consideration the lack of expertise in the UT Administration, it was decided to 
involve the Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. (SCI), in the acquisition process right from designing, 
finalisation of technical specifications, short listing of firms, tendering, awarding of work, supervision 
during construction etc. SCI has prepared outline specifications for 500 & 1200 passenger vessels and 
the same have been approved with slight modifications. SCI has floated tender for 2 Nos. 500 
passenger vessel; tender for 1200 passenger vessel is yet to be floated. 
1.7.12  EFC proposal for 2 Nos. 500 passenger vesse ls has been forwarded by the UT Administration 
to Ministry of Shipping and is yet to be approved. EFC proposal for 1200 passenger vessel is under 
process by UT Administration. 
1.7.13  Regarding 17 Nos. smaller vessels SCI informed its inability to take up the same due to 
shortage of manpower. As such Indian Maritime Univ ersity (erstwhile NSDRC) has been requested to 
provide consultancy for the project. 
Further Recommendation 
1.7.14  T he Committee calls upon the Mi nistry to let it know the status in respect of the 
following items:  
(a) Increasing the frequency of flights to Port Blair and the need for airlines to operate 
on the Port Blair Sector in accordance with the Route Disposal Guidelines of GoI. 
(b) Subsidy on airfare and other concessions for specialized categories from mainland 
to islands.  
(c) Acquisition of twenty  five numbers vessels. 
1.8 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendations 

1.8.1 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
Budgetary provision be made for residential schools at each Tehsil from class IX to XII with science, 
arts, commerce streams, for imparting quality education with adequate sanitation facilities; 
[Para 5.5.1 (iv) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 TheJ1e are 09 Tehsils in 03 districts of A & N Islands. At present, there are no residential 
schools in the Islands. However, 2 residential schools from MPLAD funds are under construction at 
Diglipur Tehsil and Nancowry Tehsil. At Diglipur, one school building, two hostels (25 bedded Girls, 
Hostel) and one warden quarter have been completed. The school building is nearing completion at 
Nancowry Tehsil. Further the main challenges before the Education Department of UT Administration 
are: 
 (1) To maintain the present infrastructure and fill the gaps; and 
 (2) Renovation of damaged building toilet etc. 
 As such, at present the UT Administration has no plans to set up residential schools. 
Recommendations 
1.8.3 The Committee is of the view that beside s the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: - 
 Five Vivekananda Kendra Zila Parishad Schools are imparting good quality education in the 
Islands. These schools are finding it difficult to retain teachers due to hike in their salary after the 
implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission and also enhancement of teachers’ salary under the 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan from Rs.9000 to 18000. As these schools are situated in remote backward 
areas, enhancement of fee from students is not desirable. To retain teachers in these schools, A&N 
Islands Administration should match the  deficit part of their salary from its funds so that teachers in 
these schools get decent salary. For this, MoU executed by the Administration may be amended.[Para 5.5.1 (vi) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.8.4 These 05 Vivekananda Kendra Zilla Parishad Schools were established by the Zilla Parishad 
under a Memorandum of Understanding with Vivekananda Kendra. The schools are run by the 
Vivekananda Kendra in terms of the MoU. Zilla Parishad/South Andaman has requested Vivekananda 
Society to submit draft revised MoU. The matter will be examined by the UT  Administration on 
receipt of revised MoU from Zilla Parishad. As per the existing MoU, salary of teachers has to be paid 
by Vivekananda Kendra from its own resources/fee income. 
Further Recommendation 
1.8.5 The Committee desires that an early decision may be taken on amending the MoU.  
Recommendation 
1.8.6 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 

Disability allowance of Rs.500/- is presently being given to handicapped persons in the A&N Islands. 
Handicapped persons in Delhi and Goa are getting allowance of Rs. 1000/ - per month since 2008. 
Tamil Nadu Government provides dhoti/saree and four kg. rice per month free of cost. Mizoram 
Government provides financial assistance for piggery @ Rs.2000/-, poultry @ Rs. 1500/-, petty shop 
@ Rs. 1000/- per head per annum with sewing machines. Disabled persons in Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands should also be given allowance of Rs. 1000/- as well as assistance as being provided by Tamil 
Nadu and Mizoram Governments.   
Action Taken 
1.8.7 Proposal for the enhancement of permanent disability allowances (100% disabled) from 
Rs.500/- to Rs.750/- per month and unemployment allowance from Rs. 400/- to Rs.750/- per month 
and extending benefits up to 48 years of age are being examined by the UT Administration. One time 
assistance of Rs.3000/- is being provided to disabled persons for self employment ventures. 
Further Recommendation 
1.8.8 The Committee urges upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to advice th e UT Admin to take 
expeditious decisions on proposed enhancem ent of permanent disability allowance and 
unemployment allowance and extending the benefits upto 48 years of age. 
Recommendation 
1.8.9 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
A large number of farmers in the both districts of A&N Islands have lost agriculture land due to 
erosion caused by rivers and canals. Therefore, erosion control measures must be initiated 
immediately and alternate land should be given to those farmers who have lost their agricultural land 
due to erosion. 
[Para 5.5.1 (xv) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.8.10  Works like Khadi bund/nallah bund are taken up under MGNREGA for preventing land 
erosion and ingress of sea water in various Gram Panchayats areas, as per the recommendations and 
approval of such works in the Gram Sabha by the beneficiaries. 
1.8.11  Constructions of sea dykes at seven places are in progress. 
1.8.12  UT Administration has informed that there is a proposal to engage consultant to prepare a 
Master Plan to control stream bank erosion and drainage line treatment for the agriculture land lost 
due to erosion. Erosion control measure would be taken after the report is ready. 
1.8.13  In  Annual Plan (2010-11), schemes “Improvement of degraded land and drainage” under Soil 
Conservation sector an amount of Rs.100.00 lakh has been kept for the implementation of stream bank 
erosion works. 
1.8.14  With regard to alternate lands, UT Administration conducted a detailed survey and found that 
the land to the extent of 131 ha. has eroded. Accordingly a comprehensive settlement plan for 
settlement of post -78 revenue and forest encroachers and for the allotment of alternative land to 
farmers has been prepared. UT Administration had approached the Ministry of Home Affairs for 

conveying their approval for the settlement plan, which was conveyed on 26th June, 2009. UT 
Administration has filed an Interlocutory Application (IA) before the Supreme Court in Jan. 2010 
seeking permission to implement the settlement plan, which is yet to be heard. 
Further Recommendation 
1.8.15  The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete measures taken to control 
erosion. The committee may also be informed of th e status of implementation of settlement Plan 
and allotment of alternative land to farmers. 
Recommendation 
1.8.16  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:––  
Seven projects under PMGSY were sanctioned in 2004. Some funds were released. However, roads 
are still to be constructed in North and Middle Andaman. Roads under PMGSY should be constructed 
at the earliest 
[Para 5.5.1 (xx) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.8.17  Revised Estimate for five works of Zilla Parishad, North and Middle Andaman has been 
received and are being processed by the UT Administ ration. Proposal is being forwarded to Ministry 
of Rural Development for sanction of additional funds. (Reply to para 5.2.6 also refers) 
Further Recommendation 
1.8.18  The Committee may be informed of the status of the proposal. 
Recommendation 
1.8.19 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:–– 
Agricultural land of a large number of farmers has submerged after Tsunami. One person of each of 
such affected family should be given Government Service. They should also be given alternate land. 
Free ration may be given till the allotment of alternate land is made. [Para 5.5.1 (xxiv) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.8.20  UT Administration has identified forest lands for allotment of alternative lands to the farmers 
whose lands are submerged. The Administration has already filed IA No.2343 dated 17.07.2008 in the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court seeking the permission to use-forest land for nonforestry purposes. The 
Hon’ble SC referred the matter to the Central Empowered Committee. (CEC ) for report. The CEC 
held meetings with the officials of the Administration on 29.09.2008, 04.08.2009 and 25.02.2010 and 
sought additional information relating to the alternative lands for the tsunami affected farmers. The 
CEC visited A&N islands from 03.03.2010 to 06.03.2010. The Administration has filed its report on 
16.04.2010 on the issues raised by the CEC during their visit. Recommendation of CEC is awaited. 
1.8.21  482 fanner families have  been extended Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) cards under which 
31 Kg rice and 4 Kg wheat are provided every month at  a subsidised rate of Rs.3/- per kg and Rs.2/- 
per kg respectively. 

Further Recommendation 
1.8.22  The Committee desires that an early action may be taken after the recommendations of 
the Central-empowered Committee have been received and it be informed of the action taken. 
1.9 DEMAND No. 96 - DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI 
Recommendation 
1.9.1 The Committee is unable to understand why the data relating to per capita income of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli is not being maintained by the UT Administration. The Committee strongly 
recommends that a survey be conducted, at the earliest, to ascertain the per capita income of the UT 
not only for assessing the economic health of the UT but also for various comparisons required for 
economic planning in the UT. 
(Para 5.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 The UT Administration had not so far compiled the data regarding per capita income as it 
requires specialized staff and training which is not yet available with the U.T. It also requires 
maintenance of specific data for the estimation of per capita income of the U.T. However, as 
recommended by the Committee, the Administration will initiate the survey work for the same. 
Possibility to engage some outside expert Research Agencies or taking help from Central Statistical 
Organization and other States/UTs regarding the same would also be explored. 
Recommendation 
1.9.3 The Committee is of the view that adequate number of teachers in the UT is an essential pre-
requisite to make the ‘Right to Education’ a reality. The interest of those who are working on daily 
wages should be protected. In this light, the Committee recommends that the UT Administration’s 
request to the Union Government to approve regularization of adho/daily wages teachers who were 
recruited against the anticipated creation of vacancies by the Government of India and who fulfil 
educational qualification as prescribed in the Recruitment Rules, as an one time measure, may be 
accepted. The Committee also recommends that expeditious action may be taken to fill up other 
vacancies of teachers. (Para 5. 7.9 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.9.4 The Department has already initiated the process for filling up the vacan t posts of teachers in 
Education Department through promotion as well as direct recruitment. 
Promotion Quota 
1.9.5 Three Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) meetings had been convened on 30.03.2010 
for the promotion of Trained Graduate Teacher, Post Graduate Teacher and Head Masters. As per the 
recommendations of the DPC, 58 Primary School Teache rs are promoted to the post of TGT and 11 
TGTs are promoted to the post of PGT and 04 PGTs are promoted to the post of Head Masters. 
Direct Quota 

1.9.6 An advertisement has already been published seeking applications from the eligible candidates 
for filling up the vacancies of PGT and TGT posts. Simultaneously, other necessary steps are being 
taken to complete the recruitment process. 
1.9.7 As regards regularization of daily wage/ contractual teachers, MHRD vide their letter dated 
25.5.2010 advised the UT of DNH to take action as per Recruitment Rules. The UT Administration 
again requested the MHRD for approval for regularization of services of these teachers. The matter is 
being followed up regularly. 
Further Recommendation 
1.9.8 Status of survey work for compilation of da ta of per capita income in D&NH, may be 
sent to the Committee 
1.10 PAY OF HOME GUARDS IN DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI VIS-A-VIS OTHER 
UTs 
Recommendation 
1.10.1  The Committee recommends that the allowances of Home Guards may be suitably enhanced, 
at least at par with the private security services. (Para 5.8.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.10.2  The proposal for enhancement of allowances  of Home Guards has been forwarded to Ministry 
of Finance with the recommendations of MHA. The same is under consideration in the Department of 
Expenditure. 
Further Recommendation 
1.10.3  The Committee desires that an early decisi on may be taken on the proposal for 
enhancement of allowances of Home Guards in the D&NH. 
1.11 AVAILABILITY OF DRINKING WATER 
Recommendation 
1.11.1 The Committee recommends that the water projects at Mandoni and Dudhani Patelad be 
completed at the earliest as a permanent solution to the drinking water problem especially during the 
summer season. 
(Para 5.9.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11.2  The UT Administration has already invited the tenders five times dated 12.05.2008, 
31.07.2008, 09.10.2008, 19.02.2010 and lastly dated 15.03.2010 for implementation of water supply 
works at Mandoni. The tenders issued on 15.03.2010 are under scrutiny. Similarly for Dudhani Water 
Supply Scheme (1 st phase and 2nd phase), the tenders have been invited on 19.02.2010 and 
15.03.2010, respectively. The tenders are under scrutiny. The scrutiny of the tenders in respect of both 
the schemes will be completed by the end of July, 2010 and furthe r necessary action would be taken 
after the finalization of tenders.  
Further Recommendation 

1.11.3  Steps may be taken for early co mpletion of the projects so that the people may not face 
drinking water problem, especially during summer. 
DEMAND No. 97-DAMAN AND DIU 
1.12 GOALS/TARGETS 
Recommendation 
1.12.1  The Committee recommends that a holistic Vision Statement regarding overall development of 
the UT be prepared comprising of realistic goals achievable within a given time frame and 
quantifiable benchmarks prescribed so that progress made in the Plan period could be measured and 
the development policies/schemes adjusted according to the performance on the ground. (Para 5.13.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.12.2  UT Administration of Daman and Diu has decided to accept the overall vision of Planning 
Commission for 11th Five Year Plan Period with specific attention on Health, Education, Water 
Supply, Energy, Transport, Touris m, Urban Development and Industry. UT Administration has also 
prepared the Annual Action Plan specifying quantifiable targets to be achieved during 2010-11 by all 
the Departments and the progress made/performance of all the Departments shall be measured in 
terms of the targets/benchmarks achieved in implementing all the Plan Schemes/Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, etc. vis-a-vis the targets/benchmarks set in the Annual Action Plan. This exercise shall be 
repeated in future years as well. 
1.12.3  The Sector specific vision is as under: 
1.  QUALITY HEALTH FOR ALL 
1.12.4  One of the targets fixed for 11th Plan under Health Sector is reduction of Infant Mortality 
Rate (IMR) to 28 against present rate of 60 for India. In the U. T. of Daman and Diu. IMR for the 
calendar year 2009 was 31/1000 live birth. However, the aim of UT Administration will be to improve 
quality of health services particularly in rural areas during 11th Plan period. In order to bring and 
improve all health facilities in Rural areas under one umbrella, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, 
National Rural Health Mission is being implemented in the U.T. of Daman and. Diu. Major Schemes 
proposed for 11th Plan under this sector are establishment of Oncology Centre at Daman, setting up of 
three additional PHCs in Daman and one additional PHC in Diu, increase in bed capacity, upgradation 
of Primary Health Centres to Community Health Cent res, establishment of one Mental Health Unit at 
CHC, Ghoghla, Diu and Statistical Cell/Health Information Cell in all the institutions. 
2.  100% LITERACY AND DEVELOPMENT OF SKILL 
1.12.5  Education is the most critical input for empowering people with skills, knowledge and access 
to employment in future. Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan is being 
implemented in U.T. of Daman and Diu also which aims at free elementary education to all children in 
the age group of 6-14 years by 2010. This is necessa ry to achieve literacy rate of 80% proposed after 
end of Eleventh Five Year Plan. The literacy rate has increased from 71 % in 1991 to 78% in 2001 in 
U.T. of Daman & Diu. The literacy ra te in this U.T. is much higher than the Literacy Rate of India, 
which is 64% in 2001. Literacy Rate is comparativel y lower for weaker sections of the society such as 
SC, ST and Women for whom various schemes for providing educational incentives such as 

Textbooks, Stationery, Uniform and Scholarship, are being implemented. Gender gap in literacy is 
proposed to be reduced to 10% by the end of Eleventh Plan. 
1.12.6  There is one Government College (for Graduation), Six Higher Secondary Schools, 21 
Secondary Schools, 23 Middle Schools, 51 Primar y Schools and 19 Pre-Primary Schools including 
private schools. Besides, two Ashramshalas for tribal boys and one Navodaya Vidyalaya are 
functioning in Daman. For Technical Education, there is one Polytechnic College and one B.Ed. 
College in Daman. One Technical Training Institute and one Industrial Training Institute is in each 
District. 
1.12.7  Elementary Education has been entrusted to District Panchayat which need major amount for 
construction of additional classrooms and toilet facilities for primary and middle schools. Under 
Secondary Education, some Middle Schools are proposed to be upgraded as Secondary School and 
some Secondary Schools are proposed to be upgraded as Higher Secondary School. During the 
Eleventh Plan, it is proposed to establish one Government College and one Kendriya Vidyalaya at 
Diu. The grants given to Local Bodies and the incentives given to Scheduled Castes students like 
Scholarship, Uniform, Books etc. are also proposed to be substantially enhanced during the Eleventh 
Plan. 
3.  SAFE DRINKING WATER FOR ALL 
1.12.8  Safe drinking water has been considered as the most important and basic requirement for all 
population. Under this Sector, schemes for procurement of raw water from Sardar Sarovar Dam of 
Gujarat for Diu District, establishment of Reverse Osmosis Plant at Diu District and creation of 
infrastructure facilities for water supply in rural and urban areas of Daman and Diu Districts have 
been proposed. 
1.12.9  It has also been planned to provide safe drinking water to Daman District through pipeline 
from Madhuben Dam thereby avoiding chemical contamination of water which is being carried 
through open canal at present. 
1.12.10  Similarly, it has been planned to procure Raw Water from Sardar Sarovar Canal of Gujarat 
State for Diu. The water will be supplied through pipeline from Una, Gujarat to Diu. 
4.  PROVIDING UNINTERRUPTED AND RELIABLE POWER SUPPLY 
1.12.11  Rapid Industrial growth has led to tremendous increase in electric power demand. In the U.T. 
of Daman and Diu, all villages have been electrified. The U.T. of Daman & Diu does not have its own 
power generation. Power supply is drawn from Central sector power stations and the same is 
transmitted and distributed by Electricity Department in Daman & Diu through one Sub Station at 
Daman of 220/66 K.V. and seven Sub Stations of 66/11 K.V. ( six in Daman and one in Diu). Total 
capacity of all Sub Stations is 332 M.V.A. against peak demand of 240 M.V.A. Annual requirement of 
power is around 1600 M.U. costing Rs. 490 crore approximately. 
1.12.12  In order to provide uninterrupted and reliable power supply, overhead lines are being 
converted into under ground lines in phased manner which will be completed by the end of Eleventh 
Five Year Plan. Capacity of various Sub- Stations has been proposed to be enhanced during Eleventh 
Five Year Plan. 

1.12.13  In order to meet the increasing need of power supply by industries of Dabhel and Kachigam, 
a new Sub Station of 220/60 K.V. with capacity of 100 MY A has been proposed to be installed at 
Ringanwada Village of Daman District during Eleventh Plan. One Sub Station of 66/11 KV with 
capacity of 30 MVA has also been proposed at Bhimpore Village of Daman District. 
5.  QUALITY ROADS UP TO THE DOOR STEPS OF EVERY HOUSE 
1.12.14  It is necessary to improve mobility and easy  accessibility in order to achieve desired level of 
growth in development. Transport sector is key for development in all economic activities. As a part 
of modernization of the Transport Department, the Pilot Project of VAHAN Software has been 
implemented for maintaining the registration records of the vehicles during the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan in Daman District. 
1.12.15  In U.T. of Daman and Diu, all villages are connected by all weather motorable roads. Rural 
roads are being constructed and repaired by District Panchayat under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). Besides roads, Bridges are very important for 
development activities in this V.T. In Daman District, construction of a new bridge over Damanganga 
river joining Moti Daman and Nani Daman has been completed during the Financial Year 2008-09. In 
addition, following new bridges have been proposed to be constructed during Eleventh Plan. 
(i) High level bridges at Zari Causeway and Pataliya Causeway in Daman District. 
(ii) Bridge at Diu connecting Va nakbara (Diu) to Kotda (Gujarat) 
(iii) Completion of Tud Bridge connecting Diu to Una (Gujarat) 
(v) Major roads in Daman District are being converted into four lanes. 
1.12.16  UT Administration has taken up construction of new four-lane bye-pass road (i.e. Coastal 
Highway) from Patalia to Bhenslore at Nani Daman for a length of 5.500 Kms. During the Financial 
Year 2009-10 and the same will be completed during the current Financial Year 2010-11. 
6.  TOURISM WITH ADVENTURE AND PEACE 
1.I2.I 7  Tourism sector has great potential for rapid growth in economy. In U.T. of Daman and Diu, 
there is good scope for tourism development. Daman and Diu both have natural and historical tourist 
spots like beaches, forts, churches, temples etc. Tourists come here not only from India but also from 
foreign countries. Nearly 10 lakh tourists visit Daman and Diu annually. Hence, new projects have 
been proposed under tourism for providing Ropeway from Gangeshwar at Fudam to Pothiadada 
Temple at Kevdi. Construction of Modern type fish aquarium, construction of Ultra Fast Action 
Musical Fountain at Diu, purchase of 60 Seater new Luxury tourist boat and development of gardens, 
beaches, tourist spots, water sports activities have been proposed in Daman and Diu. 
7.  URBAN DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES 
1.12.18  Urbanisation is increasing rapidly all over India. Daman and Diu have the oldest history of 
urbanization as these Districts have oldest Municipalities in Asia formed during 15th Century under 
Portuguese rule. In order to provide necessary infrastructure and improve civic amenities, a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of Urban Infrastructure Development of Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) is 
being implemented in selected cities and towns including Daman & Diu. The underground sewerage 

project has been proposed under this scheme in Moti Daman. The said project is going to be 
implemented in 2010-11 if approved by the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. 
UT Administration proposes to substantially increase the Grant-in- Aid to Municipal Councils of 
Daman & Diu so that they can execute important Urba n development projects such as construction of 
slaughter house, construction of Fish Market, Vegetable Market, construction of Municipal Council’s 
office building, construction of Community Hall, construction, repair and maintenance of Urban 
roads, construction of Sea Protection wall, providi ng drainage facilities, cleanliness of Urban area, 
maintenance of Parks etc. 
8.  GROWTH WITH HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT 
1.12.19  Industries contribute to National Income as well as provide employment to local people. 
Industry Sector has gained good strength over past  fifteen years as a consequence of liberalizing 
industrial policies for integration with world economy. 
1.12.20  In order to provide better infrastructure facilities for Industries such as Roads, Street Lights, 
drainage system and raw materials, higher outlay has been proposed by UT Administration under 
Industry Sector during Eleventh Plan. To display/ex hibit different industrial products of Daman and 
Diu Districts, UT Administration propose to participate in National and Inter - National Trade 
Industrial Fairs during the Eleventh Plan. It also proposes to enhance the equity share in the Omnibus 
Industrial Development Corporation, Daman during the Eleventh Plan, and also to generate additional 
revenue for the Government. 
1.13 PROBLEM OF FISHERMEN 
Recommendation 
1.13.1  The Committee is also of the considered view that  the Coast Guard should take up the issue of 
safeguarding the fishermen who venture into the deep sea and ensure their safe return. The Committee 
also recommends that the MHA may take up the matter with MEA, so that the fishermen languishing 
in the Pakistani jails are released at the earliest. (Para 5.14.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2  The issue was reviewed in a meeting on 02.07.2010. Foreigners Division in the MHA is 
actively pursuing the matter with Pakistan Government through Ministry of External Affairs. 
Further Representation 
1.13.3  The Committee desires that the matter may be pursued vigorously with the Government 
of Pakistan for early release of fishermen languishing in Pakistani jails. 
1.14 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendations 
1.14.1  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
The main sources of livelihood of D&D are Fisheries and Tourism. Some development activities like 
Distillery in Daman, have come up but the main economic activity is coastal tourism on which a 
substantial part of the population survives. D&D is one of the most beautiful Union Territories in the 

country with vast sandy beaches and non-polluted coastal waters. The Committee recommends that 
the tourism potential of this Union Territory may be harnessed fully, so that tourists visit in large 
numbers to the UT and the means of livelihood of its residents multiply with the income generated 
from the proceeds of tourism. Steps should also be taken for encouraging the opening of resorts and 
hotels in the UT. [Para 5.16.1 (i) ibid]  
Action Taken 
1.14.2  Daman & Diu is a tourist place with natural and historical tourist spots like beaches, churches, 
forts, temples which attract both national and international tourists. 
The Main activities undertaken/to be undertaken for promotion of Tourism in U. T. of Daman & Diu 
are as follows :––  
1. With a view to enhance the tourist infrastructure, the UT Administration is encouraging 
the construction of more hotels of various categories and no luxury taxes are collected 
from the hotels. 
2. The UT Administration has started water sports activities like para sailing, speed 
boat/motor boat riding and other related water sports activities at Jampore Beach. 
3. Jogger Parks have been developed in Moti Daman and Nani Daman areas and dedicated 
to the public. 
4. High Mast lights are installed at various places to attract more tourists and to provide 
better facilities to the tourists. 
5. A State of the Art swimming pool has been constructed at Sports Complex, Moti Daman.  
6.  Beautification and renovation of Sea face beach at Nani Daman has been completed. 
7. A public Toilet and Changing Room for Ladies and Gents has been constructed at 
Jampore Beach for providing better facilities to the Tourists. 
8. A beautiful fountain with decorative lights has been installed to attract more tourists in 
Diu District. 
9. A state of art Auditorium with a capacity of 700 seats has been set up which can be used 
for organizing entertainment programmes and holding Seminars and Conferences. 
10. The renovation of the S eaface Jetty has been done by  providing granite seating 
arrangements and provide paver blocks on entire jetty.  
11.  Development of Children Park at Diu.  
12.  Flower pots with flowering plants have been placed on the Damanganga Bridge for 
decorative purpose. 
13. Beautiful dust bins have been placed at various locations of tourism importance like 
Beaches, Gardens, Parks etc. 
14. Widening and beautification of important roads have been done to improve public 
transport. 
On going and Planned Tourism related activities 
1. The U. T. Administration of Daman & Di u has initiated a PPP pr oject for development 
of tourism facilities in the Island territory of Diu keeping in view the tourism potential of 

this area. The main components of this project are Five Star Hotel and Resort, Golf 
Course, Convention Centre, Amusement Park. OIDC has been designated as the Nodal 
Agency for carrying out this project. The beautification of Ghoghla beach and a path 
way will be developed to attract tourists at Diu. 
2. Three Parks are being taken up for upgradation, landscaping and beautification in Moti 
Daman and Nani Daman. 
3. The river front of Damanganga river near new bridge is planned to be develop so as to 
attract tourists. 
4. In order to promote adventure tourism, the construction of Rope way from Gangeshwar, 
Fudam to Pothiadada Temple, Kevdi, Diu is proposed to be taken up. 
5. UT Administration plans to construct a modern fish aquarium in water channel 
connected with sea for which necessary land/space, etc. has already been identified.  
6.  An Ultra Modern Musical Fountain will be set up at Diu.  
7.  UT Administration plans to purchase 60 Seater Luxury Tourist Boat (Santa Monica 
style, Goa) for attracting more tourists. 
8. The fort road of Diu is proposed to be converted/ renovated on the line of Marine Drive 
Mumbai Style. 
1.14.3  Repair and Maintenance of fort wall in Diu is proposed to be taken up by UT Administration. 
Recommendations 
1.14.4  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
The UT of D & D does not produce electricity and are dependent on NTPC and the Western Grid for 
their requirement. A solution to the demand-supply gap has to be filled in at the earliest so that the 
existing industrial units are not forced to shift base. [Para 5.16.1 (vii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.14.5  UT of Daman and Diu does not have its own Power Generation. The whole power requirement 
is met from the power allocation of Government of India from central sector power stations. Prior to 
April 2009, there was a gap of 60 to 70 MW in demand and supply. However with constant efforts 
made by the U.T. Administration and MHA, Ministry of Power allocated 58.3 MW of power from 
unallocated share of power. The UT also got 92 MW power from NSPCIL-Bhilai including 22 MW 
for one year on temporary basis and thus total al location of power is 329.24 MW. The power position 
after April 2009 till 23rd April 2010 was thus better. 
1.14.6  However, Ministry of Power has revised the power allocation from unallocated quota w.e.f.  
23rd April and 6th May 2010 and the allocation has been reduced from 10.58% to 2.54% during peak 
hrs i.e. from 329.24 to 241.18 MW resulting in shortfall of 88 MW of power. 
1.14.7  UT Administration has signed the PPA for power from Mauda (25 MW) , Barah (40 MW ), 
Ratnagiri Gas Power Plant (38.8MW), Solapur Power station (8 MW) in addition to commitment 

payment for 50 MW power from Akaltara Power pr oject. Supply of power from these project will 
however start from 2012 and later years. 
1.14.8  UT Administration has requested the Ministry of Power, Government of India, vide  letter 
dated, 24.04.2010 for relooking into the revision of the power allocation to reduce the gap between 
supply and demand. 
1.14.9  The UT of Daman and Diu is providing uninterrupted and reliable electricity at the average 
rate of Rs.2.84 per unit which is much less in comparison to the rates of Rs.5.00 to Rs.5.50 per unit in 
Maharastra and Rs.4.75 to Rs.5.00 per unit in Gujarat. Industrial Units which has applied power 
connections upto 31.03.2009 have been released power by UT Administration. These measures have 
helped in obviating the problems faced by industrial units in so far as supply of power is concerned. 
Further Recommendation 
1.14.10  The Committee desires that efforts be made to restore the allocation reduced by the 
Ministry of Power with effect from 23 April and 6 May, 2010. The shortfall may be met from 
other sources until power supply starts from  the power plants as mentioned in para  1.14.7 
supra
.  
Recommendations 
1.14.11  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
To improve health care, a Government or Government sponsored Super Speciality Hospital is the 
need of the hour for Diu and should be considered on top priority. [Para 5.16.1 (viii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
1.14.12  The District Hospital Diu is presently functioning from CHC, Ghoghla, Diu, since the old 
building of Government Hospital Diu is under repairs and renovation. The repairs, rehabilitation and 
retrofitting of old Government Hospital Building will be completed in July 2010 and then the Hospital 
will be functional from old Building from 15th August, 2010. 
1.14.13  The UT Administration has also planned to construct 60 bed Government Hospital at 
Gandhipara, Diu. The construction work has been given to OIDC as deposit work. 
1.14.14  Health Department has allocated Rs.30.00 lakh for the construction of the compound wall. 
OIDC has completed the construction of compound wall in the year 2008. 
1.14.15  OIDC has appointed the Architect who has submitted the estimate of Rs.9.9 crore for 
construction of the said 60 bed Hospital. After issue and finalisation of the tenders, the construction of 
the new 60 bed hospital is likely to start during financial year 2010-11. 
Further Recommendation 
1.14.16  The Committee desires that the construction of 60-bed hospital should start immediately, if 
not already commenced and may be completed as per target. 
1.15 CENSUS 2011 AND NATIONAL POPULATION REGISTER 

Recommendation 
1.15.1  With regard to the confidentiality of the Census Data, the Committee apprehends that it would 
be difficult to hold back information contained in the Census Schedule in view of the RTI Act, 2005. It 
is quite likely that even if exemption clause is in voked under RTI Act, 2005, the CIC, the Supreme 
Court or the High Courts may pass orders for disclosure of information. The Committee therefore 
recommends to Government to keep this aspect in mind. (Para 6.9.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.15.2  The Office of the RGI has had to face a number of petitions seekin g confidential Census 
information under the RTI Act, 2005. The Office of the RGI has not divulged the information under 
the plea that the information pertains to individuals and cannot be divulged without the written 
consent of that individual under Section 8(1) of the RTI Act, 2005. So far, the Information 
Commissions and Courts have accepted this plea. A proposal has been moved separately to DOP&T 
for specific exemptions under the RTI Act, 2005. 
1.16 HOUSING SCHEME FOR DELHI POLICE 
Recommendation 
1.16.1  In the non-plan scheme also, things are not moving in the right direction. Out of 17 P S 
buildings, only 3 were expected to be ready by 31.3.2010 and out of 1,481 staff quarters, 13 were 
expected to be ready by 31.3.2010. This needs to be looked into and steps may be taken for timely 
completion of the buildings and quarters.   
Action Taken 
1.16.2  Till 31.03.2010 the construction works of 2 PSs (Sector-3, Rohini and Prashant Vihar, Sector-
16, Rohini), 2 PPs (AU Block, Pitampura & Jamrudpur), 3 Buildings (MP Hall, Barracks & MT 
Block), 1 Central District Line (Todapur) and 429 Staff Quarters have been completed under Non Plan 
(PMS). 
1.16.3  During the current financial year 2010-11 the construction work of 07 Police Stations (PSs) - 
(Mandawali Fazalpur, Mansarovar Park, Jafrabad, Ma lviya Nagar, Mandir Marg, Barakhamba Road 
and Anand Vihar), 01 PP (Mayur Vihar Phase-II), 02 Buildings (EOW Mandir Marg and ITS Malviya 
Nagar) and DCP East Office Mandawali Fazalpur) an d 104 Staff Quarters will be completed as 
planned in Action Plan 2010-11. Their progress is closely monitored through the Project Monitoring 
Committee set up in MHA under the Chairpersonship of AS(UT). 
Further Recommendation 
1.16.4  The Committee hopes that the physical targets have been met by the end of 2010-11. If 
not, steps may be taken for completion of the physical targets without further delay. 
Recommendation 
1.16.5  It is a welcome step that about 5,202 quarters are proposed to be constructed under Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) model at Dheerpur and Police Headquarters are proposed to be 
constructed at Parliament Street. As mentioned in the Outcome Budget, the financial mode for the 

projects may be finalized quickly. All other steps may also be taken to ensure that both the projects 
are completed by 2013. (Para 7.7.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.16.6  New Police Headquarters at Parliament Street and 5202 staff quarters at Dheerpur are 
proposed to be constructed through PPP mode. 
1.16.7  Request For Qualification (RFQ) was prepar ed by IDFC, Transaction Advisor of Delhi Police 
and the advertisement was published in 03 leading news-papers on 19.05.2010. The prebid conference 
took place on 07.06.2010. A proposal along with re quisite set of documents has been forwarded to 
Ministry of Finance for placing these documents before the PPP AC  for final approval. A token 
provision of Rs.2 crore has been made in BE 2010-11 for these projects. However, Ministry of 
Finance/Planning Commission are being approached to provide allocation for payment of annuity 
liability. With these efforts projects should be completed by 2013. 
Further Recommendation 
1.16.8  The Committee may be informed of the status of the projects. 
Recommendation 
1.16.9  The Committee appreciates that a Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (UT), Ministry of Home Affairs has been set up to monitor the 
building plans of Delhi Police. The Committee desires that this Committee should strictly monitor the 
implementation on a regular basis and ensure that the projects are completed in time. (Para 7.7.12 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.16.10  A Project Monitoring Committee has been set up under the Chairpersonship of JS(UT) now 
Additional Secretary (UT), MHA to monitor the Delhi Police projects. First meeting of PMC was 
convened on 23.10.2009 and so far 7 meetings have been held wherein progress of each project is 
minutely discussed. Till 31.03.2010, the construction of 12 projects/buildings under Non Plan Head 
(PMS) and Plan Head have been completed as under : 
Non Plan Head
 
 1) PS at Sector-3, Rohini; 2) ACP Office-cum  PS and 15 Staff Quarters at Parshant Vihar, 
Sector-16, Rohini; 3) PP and 22 Staff Quarters at AU Block, Pitampura; 4) PP Jamrudpur; 5) Central 
District Lines and 30 Staff Quarters at Todapur; 6) Police Housing (342 Quarters) at 16-B, Dwarka; 7) 
03 buildings i.e. MP Hall, Barrack and MT Block at DAP Line, Sector-9, Dwarka; 8) 20 Type IV Staff 
Quarters at PS Mandir Marg. 
 Further 3 projects for construction of 104 staff quarters, 3 PS and 1 office building also have 
been completed upto 30.06.3010. 
Plan Head
 
 1) PS & 05 Staff Quarters at Timarpur; 2) PS & 35 Staff Quarters at Seemapuri; 3) PS Nabi 
Karim; and 4) PP CBD Shahdra. 

1.16.11  As mentioned in reply to Para 7.7.10 above, Annual Action Plan 2020-11 covering the 
projects of Plan Head and Non Plan Head (PMS) have been drawn in consultation with the Executing 
Agencies and the civic bodies wherein a time-sch edule has been fixed with regard to obtaining 
mandatory clearances from civic bodies, finalization of tender documents by Executing Agencies and 
the completion of projects during 2010-11. It has been impressed upon all concerned to achieve the 
targets set, so as to avoid cost and time over-runs. 
1.17 HOUSING SCHEME FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES 
Recommendation 
1.17.1  The Committee observes that just a little more than 15% of the force personnel entitled to 
family accommodation, are able to avail the facility. Force personnel, who remain deployed at 
international borders as well as in violence infested regions, are engaged in grappling with militancy 
and insurgency throughout the year. They do not even have the mental comfort of their families having 
proper accommodation, medical facilities etc., while they are away from home. (Para 7.17.1 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.17.2  To address this issue of deficient accommodation in force personnel, a Mega Housing Project 
has been launched to construct houses across the co untry wherever land is available. The project is 
being taken up on Public Private Partnership basis on annuity mode. It is proposed to construct 
approximately 66,000 houses at approximately 250 sites, through the project. At the first instance, 
RFQ has been issued for the pilot project consisting of 5 clusters/30 sites, for construction of 13,026 
houses. Evaluation of the applications received has also been completed. In the second lot 
approximately 20, 000 houses are proposed to be built in 10 clusters / 63 sites. It is expected- that 
when completed, this project will meet the deficiency in accommodation for CPMFs satisfactorily. 
Medical facilities :-
 
1.17.3  For improvement of health care and extent of medical cover to the force personnel, the 
medical set up in CPMFs has been restructured in 2004 which provides better career prospects to 
Medical Officers so as to make it more attractive. The restructuring also provides for pooling of 
facilities for all CPMF personnel as Composite Hospital irrespective of force affiliation, upgradation 
of infrastructure and equipment and introduction of specialist treatment through upgradation/sanction 
of 6 Nos. 100-bed and 32 Nos. 50-bed composite hospitals along with one 200-bed referral hospital, 
which would be available to all CPMF personnel. 
1.17.4  In addition, uniform staffing pattern for all these composite hospitals has been approved and 
sanction for net creation of 947 Nos. of posts  has been issued. Moreover, considering the huge 
vacancy, approval has been obtained for appointment of Medical Officers (both specialist and general 
duty) on contractual basis and existing instructions relating to period of contractual appointment (1 
year) and age limit (60 years)  have been relaxed, so as to allo w contractual appointment upto 3 years 
or 65 years of age, whichever is earlier. 
Further Recommendation 
1.17.5  The Committee desires that the all formalitie s concerning RFQs for first and second lots 
may be completed at the earliest. Efforts may also be made to  take up construction of the 

remaining proposed flats. The Committee appr eciates the concept of  composite hospital. 
Vigorous efforts may be made to open the hospitals expeditiously. 
Recommendation 
1.17.6  The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the deficiency of the housing units as on 
1.4.1009 was 114634. If the new battalions, which had been approved by the Government and were 
likely to be raised by 2013-14 were also taken into account, forty thousand personnel would be further 
added. The allocations have been made as per the current requirements only. As this rate, the gap 
would keep on increasing and it would be a never ending phenomenon. The Committee agrees that the 
allocations have not kept pace with the increase in number of personnel in various Central Police 
Forces and this situation is likely to go from bad to worse. The Committee therefore recommends that 
the Government should seriously assess the financial requirements for the housing of the CPF 
personnel. The Ministry informed the Committee that due to massive housing shortage, the funds were 
inadequate and they would move for additional funds at RE stage. The Committee suggests that 
additional funds may be sought at RE 2010-11 stage.   
1.17.7  The Committee recommends that to supplement th e funds requirement, not covered by the 
Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance may be allowed to make adequate allocation from the 
‘Non-Plan’ side also so as to enable the forces to meet the housing requirements. (Para 7.17.4 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.17.8  A Mega Housing Project for CPMF personnel under Public Private Partnership was 
announced by Finance Minister in budget speech during 2009 to meet the deficiency in CPMF 
housing. The project has been launched as a Public Private Partnership project to Annuity mode as per 
details given in para 7.17.1 above. The payment for this project will be in the form of annuity for 
which approximately an amount of Rs.43,053.02 crore will be required from 2013-14 to 2025-26. A 
request has already been made to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
requisite funds. 
1.17.9  The Mega Housing Project under Public Private Partnership basis will cover the major portion 
of construction of housing. This project is under Plan Scheme for which Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance have already been requested to allocate funds. The housing, which will not be 
covered under the PPP project, wi ll continue under the existing Re sidential Buildi ng (Plan) and 
Residential Building (Non-Plan) scheme for which Ministry of Finance is requested to allocate funds 
in each financial year. The requirement of funds under Residential Building (Plan) and Residential 
Building (Non-Plan) will come down with the completion of the PPP project. 
Further Recommendation 
1.17.10  The Committee recommends that the matter may be regularly pursued with the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds. 
Recommendation 

1.17.11 The Ministry proposed to launch a mega housin g project for CPFs to address problems of 
accommodation for the forces personnel on Public Private Partnership basis. The Committee desires 
that an early decision may be taken in this regard. (Para 7.17.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.17.12  The Mega Housing Project for CPMF has already been launched as given in Sl. No. 7.17.1. 
The RFQ for 5 clusters/30 sites for 13026 houses has already been issued and applications received 
have also been evaluated for these 30 sites. RFP for the first 30 sites as well as RFQ for the 63 sites in 
the 2nd lot have been submitted to Department of Economic Affairs for PPPAC approval. 
Further Recommendation 
1.17.13  The Committee recommends that the matter may be regularly pursued with the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds. 
Recommendation 
1.17.14  The Committee appreciates the amendment made in Rule 126 of GFR allowing the 
involvement of other Public Works Organisations as the same would help in avoiding unnecessary 
delays and other regulatory bottlenecks in completion of housing projects for Central Police Forces in 
time. However, the purpose will be defeated if there are inordinate delays in giving nod/concurrence. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that areaso nable time limit should be imposed in giving 
clearance by Ministry of Urban Development/CPWD. The Committee also recommends that 
Engineering Wings of CPFs be further strengthened so that they can be entrusted more project works 
for speeding construction of residential as well as other type of accommodation.   
Action Taken 
1.17.15  The matter of general exemption from consultation under GFR for execution of construction 
works of CPMFs by Government agencies other than CPWD, like NBCC/Publ ic Work Organizations 
has been taken up with Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD). In this regard, a proposal for 
amending GFR was taken up with MoF, who assured that the proposal of amending Rule 126 of GFRs 
would be considered on priority  basis on receipt of the same from MoUD. MoUD has been requested 
to expedite submission of the proposal to MHA. Copy of the communication sent from HS to MoUD 
is enclosed (Annexure-III). Response from MoUD is awaited. 
Further Recommendation 
1.17.16  The Committee desires that the matter may be further pursued with the Ministry of 
Urban Development. If needed, the matter may be  taken at the Minister of Home Affairs with 
the Minister of Urban Development. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
2.1 DEMAND NUMBERS 95, 96, 97, 98 & 99 - UNION TERRITORIES (WITH 
LEGISLATURE) 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee observes the decline in allocations in both Plan and Non-Plan schemes. It 
hopes that the reduction in funds will not adversely affect the major schemes being implemented at 
present otherwise every effort be made for enhancing the budgetary allocation at the RE stage.  
(Para 2.12.1 of 144th Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 The decline in the Plan allocations is only in respect of the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
for which the allocation of Rs.1536.81 crore in BE /RE 2009-10 had been reduced to Rs.954.36 crore 
in BE 2010-11. This doesn’t include Rs.3.70 cror e allocated in BE 2010-11 under Roads & Bridges 
and reflected under Demands for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. Planning 
Commission has, however, subsequently agreed and recommended to Ministry of Finance to enhance 
the Plan allocation by Rs.332.97 crore during the year. Ministry of Finance has assured that it will be 
considered at RE stage, keeping in view the pace of expenditure and the overall availability of savings 
at that stage for re-allocation to the Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
2.1.3 The actual requirement of funds during the year for all UTs under both Plan and Non-Plan will 
also be assessed at the time of finalization of Revised Estimates 2010-11 and the additional 
requirements, if any, will be projected to Ministry of Finance. 
2.2 MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE FORCE (MPF) 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee feels that in addition to providing the State and Centre Police Forces modern 
arms, equipment, surveillance devices, better communications facilities, etc., it is equally important to 
provide them basic and specialized training. The Government should also not only train them for 
better interaction and communication skills with the public; but also raise their discipline, attitude, 
behaviour, responsibility and accountability quotient and motivation & morale levels. (Para 3.1.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2  Developing professionalism (Qualities mentioned in the recommendations) in Police Forces is 
an ongoing process. To make them professional policemen, appropriate modules have been designed 
for the induction training programmes of the new entrants and various in-service training courses, 
specialized and refreshers training courses are also conducted in the police training institutes and 
reputed professional management institutes like the Indian Institutes of Management, Management 
Development Institute, etc. 
2.2.3 In so far as the recommendation of the Committee pertaining to State Police Forces is 
concerned, it is stated that under the M PF Scheme, funds are being provided to States, inter-alia, for 

infrastructure development, i.e. construction of police buildings for poljce training schools, purchase 
of teaching/training materials like projectors, sc reen, firing simulators, etc. Recurring cost on 
manpower, training fees etc. is to be borne by the State Governments themselves, as ‘Police’ is a State 
subject. 
2.3 NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation 
2.3.1 The Committee in its 115th Report on the Disaster Management Bill 2005 dealt with in detail 
about the mechanism to be put in place for tacklin g the natural disasters like earthquake, cyclones, 
floods. The Committee understands that there should be requisite mechanism for drawing up and 
monitoring implementation of the disaster management plans, ensuring measures for preventing and 
mitigating disaster. The NDMA may also chalk out a plan for giving training to government officials, 
on disaster management. Training on this should be made compulsory for all new recruits.(Para 3.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 The Disaster Management Act, 2005, envisages the creation of the National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA), headed by the Prime Minister, State Disaster Management 
Authorities (SDMAs) headed by the Chief Ministers, and District Disaster Management Authorities 
(DDMAs) headed by the Collector or District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner as the case may be, 
to spearhead and adopt a holistic and integrated approach to Disaster Management. There is a 
paradigm shift, from the erstwhile relief-centric response to a proactive prevention, mitigation and 
preparedness-driven approach for conserving devel opment gains and also to minimize losses of life, 
livelihood and property. 
2.3.3 NDMA under its responsibility for laying down policies, plans and guidelines for DM and 
coordinating their enforcement and implementation, has released guidelines on management of 
disasters like earthquake, floods, cyclone, biologic al, chemical (industrial), chemical (terrorism), 
nuclear and radiological emergencies, medical preparedness and mass casualty management, landslide 
and snow avalanches etc. It has also released  guidelines for National Institute of Disaster 
Management, formulation of State Disaster Management Plans and Revamping of Civil Defence and 
Fire Services. 
2.3.4 The requisite mechanism for drawing up and monitoring implementation of the disaster 
management plans has already been enshrined in the DM Act, 2005. The DM Act, 2005 envisages 
preparation of National Plan for Disaster Manageme nt for the whole of the country, State Disaster 
Management Plans and a Plan for Disaster Manage ment for every district. State plans shall be 
prepared having regard to guidelines laid down by the National Authority and district plans shall be 
prepared having regard to National Plan and State Plan. Concerned Ministries / Departments of 
Government of India have already been requested to prepare disaster mitigation plan concerning the 
disaster(s) coming under their purview. The Disaster Mitigation Plans prepared by Ministry of 
Railways, Department of Atomic Energy, Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Defence are under 
scrutiny and examination. 
2.3.5 The mandate of training and capacity building of Government officials is given to National 
Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) which works within the framework of broad polices and 

guidelines laid down by the NDMA and as new statutory body. To ensure that the Institution becomes 
a Centre of Excellence for institutionalizing training  of trainers, a comprehensive set of guidelines on 
the National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) have been issued by the NDMA. 
2.3.6 The NIDM has taken up capacity development as one of its major responsibilities, along with 
training, research, documentation and development of a national level information base. It networks 
with other knowledge-based institutions and functions within the broad policies and guidelines laid 
down by the NDMA. It organizes training of trainers, Government officials and other stakeholders. 
The NIDM is developing and facilitating the implementation of the national training schedule for DM. 
It is the nodal institution for regional and international cooperation for training. NIDM has conducted 
287 programmes in past five years i.e. from 2005-06 to 2009-10 and trained 8150 persons. 
2.3.7 NIDM is also preparing the “National Human Resource and Capacity Building Plan” which 
aims at enhancing the capacity and quality of human resource available with some key government 
departments in India, mainly in the State Governments, for more efficient and effective disaster 
management in the country. 
2.3.8 NIDM is also implementing a programme for capacity building of Engineers & Architects for 
earthquake risk management. Under this programme, 266 Master Trainers (Architects), 308 Master 
Trainers in the field of Engineering, 2906 prac ticing Engineers and 1825 practicing Architects have 
been trained so far. The approach also includes according priority to training for developing 
community based DM systems for their specific needs in view of the regional diversion and multi 
hazard vulnerabilities. 
2.4 FIRE SERVICES 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Committee desires that reassessment of the fire and emergency preparedness for the 
Commonwealth Games in Delhi may be done as any untoward incident during the Games may bring 
bad name to the nation.     
Action Taken 
2.4.2 (a) The major emphasis is on prevention of fire and therefore, all the stadia/training venues 
have been issued with detailed fire safety guidelines in accordance with the provisions 
contained in National Building Code. These are being incorporated at the 
construction/modification stage. The guidelines were issued well in time i.e. year 2007-
09 and will ensure reasonable fire safety during the event. The provision of these 
guidelines will be ensured prior to the games by taking inspections on a continuous 
basis. 
 (b) Contingency plan has already been prepared and circulated to all agencies. 
 (c) All enclosure within the stadia will have fireguards equipped with hand held water mist 
fire extinguisher to deal with any localized fire. 
 (d)  Outside the stadium, fire engine with trained staff will be on standby during the entire 
period of the game. 
 (e) Group of fire station near each stadia have been identified and will be put on high alert 
during the games period. 
 (f) Fire control rooms for coordination of all activities have been planned at each stadium. 

 (g)  The facilities of TETRA Communication sy stem shall also be extended to this 
department as per the decision taken by the Government. 
 (h) The employees of Delhi Police, voluntee rs etc. identified for the Commonwealth Games 
shall be trained in first aid fire fighting/evacuation. 
 (i) Resources such as standby fire engines, operational staff and nodal officer and their 
backup have been identified and are ready for deployment. 
 G) Fire station with adequate resources exclusively for Commonwealth Games Village 
shall be opened during the period of games and in addition 1 more fire station at Mayur 
Vihar District centre shall be made operational. 
 (k) All Hotels have been directed to examin e their existing Fire Protection systems and to 
ensure that they are in good working condition. 
2.5 DISPLACED PERSONS FROM SRI LANKA 
Recommendation 
2.5.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that a large number of Sri Lankan Tamils have crossed 
over to India during the internal disturbances in that country and the Government of 1ndia is 
providing relief to them on humanitarian grounds. The Committee, however, desires that no Sri 
Lankan Tamil who has crossed over to India, should starve, even if India was not a signatory to the 
1951 Convention, and its 1967 Protocol.   
Action Taken 
2.5.2 As per Committee of Secretaries (COS) decisi on of 1983, various relief facilities are provided 
to Sri Lankan refugees during their stay in Refu gees Relief Camps. As on 1st March 2010 about 
72,665 Sri Lartkan refugees are staying in 114 refugee camps in Tamil Nadu and one camp in Orissa. 
Besides, about 26,729 refugees are staying outside the camps on their own after getting themselves 
registered in the nearest police station. 
2.5.3 Relief facilities being provided to Sri La nkan refugees include shelter in relief camps, cash 
doles, clothing, subsidized ration, utensils and medical care etc. 
2.5.4 In Quarantine Camp refugees are provided cooked food @ Rs.35/- per day, per adult and 
Rs.20/- per day, per child. Refugees in special camps are provided cooked food @ Rs.45/- per day per 
adult. Subsidized rice at the rate of 0.57 per kg. are distributed to the refugees through the fair price 
shops located in the camps or near the camps. Enti tlement of subsidized rice is at the rate of 400 
grams daily to adults above 8 years of age and 200 grams daily in case of children below 8 years of 
age. Cash doles assistance to Sri Lankan refugees in camps are given as follows: 
Sl. Family Members Cash doles at present (Rs.) 
No.  (01.08.2006 onwards) 
1. Head of the Family 400.00 
2. Other Adults 288.00 
3. First child 180.00 

4. Other children 90.00 
  
2.5.5 Besides subsidized ration and cash doles, Sri Lankan refugees are also given clothing 
materials, utensils and medical assistance. 
2.6 DISPLACED PERSONS FROM AFGHANISTAN 
Recommendation 
2.6.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that a large number of displaced persons from 
Afghanistan have crossed over to India due to internal disturbances in that country and that 
Government is providing relief to them on humanitarian grounds. (Para 3.8.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 Further extension of stay in India to Afghan nationals beyond 30.06.2010 (upto 30.06.2012) 
has been recommended vide MHA’s letter No. 25022/106/2004-F.V dated 26.05.2010. 
2.7 COASTAL SECURITY 
Recommendation 
2.7.1 The Committee wishes to highlight the imperative need for a robust coastal security in the 
backdrop of the modalities of the 26/11 attack. The Committee recommends that the Government 
should make all efforts to ensure that comprehensive and fool-proof coastal security is put in place so 
that another 26/11 type attack may not take place. (Para 3.9.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.7.2 Subsequent to the Mumbai incidents on 26/1 1, the entire coastal security scenario of the 
country has been subjected to multi-level inter-mi nisterial review by the Government of India and 
several important decisions/initiatives have been taken, which are briefly outlined below :–– 
(i) The Indian Coast Guard has been additionally designated as the authority responsible for 
coastal security in territorial waters including areas to be patrolled by the Coastal Police. 
The Indian Navy is designated as the authority responsible for overall maritime security, 
which includes coastal security and offshore security. 
(ii) The Director General, Coast Guard has been designated as Commander, Coastal 
Command and will be responsible for overall coordination between Central and State 
agencies in all matters relating to coastal security. 
(iii) Ministry of Defence (MoD) has set up four Joint Operation Centres (JOC) at Mumbai, 
Visakhapatnam, Kochi and Port Blair. 
(iv) MoD is in the process of creating ‘Sagar  Prahari Bal’ for protection of coast line. 
(v) Draft Standard Operating Procedures (SoP) for coordination among various agencies has 
been circulated by Coast Guard and most of the States/UTs have given their comments. 
MoD is now finalizing the SoPs. 

(vi) Government has decided that all the fishing/non-fishing boats plying in Indian waters 
will be registered under a uniform system. The Ministry of Shipping has issued two 
notifications in June 2009, one for amending the MS (Registration of Fishing Vessels) 
Rules along with revised format for registration and another for notifying the list of 
registrars. States/UTs are taking follow-up action in this regard. 
(vii) It has been decided that all type of boats should be fitted/provided with transponders to 
facilitate vessels identification and tracking. 
  The DG, Shipping has issued the two circulars to ensure that all types of vessels 
including fishing vessels, other than fishing vessels of less than 20 mtr. category, are 
installed with AIS type B transponders. St ates/UTs are taking necessary steps for 
compliance of these circulars. 
  As for vessels of less than 20 mtr. category, a Committee under the DG, Coast 
Guard, has carried out NCNC trials of suitable tracking systems for sub-20 mtrs. boats, 
which are - (a) Satellite based; (b) AIS/ VHF based; and (c) VHF/GPS based. While the 
final deliberations for the most suitable technology or a mix of technologies are in 
progress, it has been recommended that RFID device should be installed on all the boats. 
(viii) Government has decided that all the fishermen should be issued ID cards which should 
be related to a single centralized data-base. 
  Ministry of Agriculture has, on 11th December, 2009, launched Central Sector 
Scheme on ‘Issuance of Biometric Identity cards  to coastal fishermen’ at a total cost of 
Rs.72.00 crore. A Consortium of three P ublic Sector Undertakings led by Bharat 
Electronics Limited (BEL) has been identified for the work of digitization of data, card 
production and issuance. DAHD&F has released a sum of Rs.8.00 crore to the coastal 
States/UTs for implementation of the project. An amount of Rs.25.00 crore has also been 
released to the three PSUs of the aforesaid c onsortium. This project of issuance of ID 
cards to fisherman is being funded by the RGI, MHA. 
(ix) Registrar General of India (RGI), MHA, is working a project for preparation of National 
Population Register (NPR) for the coastal population of the country, ahead of Census 
2011. Under this project, Identify (Smart) Cards would be issued to all the usual 
residents of the coastal villages, who are above 18 years of age. In the first phase, 3331 
villages on the coastline are being covered (in A&N Islands, all the villages and towns to 
be covered in Phase – I). The biographic data  collection as well as biometric capture is 
expected to be completed by the end of June, 2010. 
(x) Implementation of ongoing Coastal Security Scheme, including supply of interceptor 
boats has been expedited. Till May 2010, 125 boats have been delivered to States and 
UTs. The Coastal Security Scheme has been extended till March, 2011, with an 
additional non-recurring outlay of Rs.95 crore (approx.), by the CCS decision taken on 
June 10,2010. 
(xi) In pursuance of one of the major decision taken by the Government after 26/11, the 
coastal States/UTs have carried out vulnerability/gap analysis in consultation with Coast 
Guard to firm up their additiona l requirements for formulation of Phase-II of the Coastal 

Security. Based on the input s/proposals received from th e Coast Guard and coastal 
States/UTs, the Coastal Security Scheme (P hase-II) has been formulated and necessary 
clearances being taken. 
2.8 CRIME AND CRIMINAL TRACKING AND NETWORKING SYSTEM (CCTNS) 
Recommendation 
2.8.1 The Committee appreciates the adoption of principles of e-governance and creation of a 
nationwide networked infrastructure of IT-enabled state-of-the-art tracking system of “investigation 
of crime and detection of criminals” in real time, wh ich is a critical requirement in the context of the 
present day internal security scenario. The Committee believes that the project would enable a 
comprehensive and integrated system for enhancing ih e efficiency and effectiveness of policing at the 
police station level and arresting the increasing cr iminal activities. The Committee recommends that 
the allocated funds for the purpose should be optimally utilized for timely completion of the project.(Para 3.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 During the financial year 2009-10, the CCTNS project was allocated Rs.1l7.00 crore 
(Rs.104.00 crore plus additional funds for Rs.13 .00 crore) towards project implementation. Out of 
this amount, Rs.115.39 crore was released to the States/UTs for Capacity Building efforts during 
2009-10. To ensure optimal use and monitoring of the fund utilization, a detailed project monitoring 
and reporting system, which includes monthly progress reports, quarterly financial reports and 
quarterly utilization certificates from the States/UTs, has been put in place. 
2.9 SECURITY FOR COMMONWEALTH GAMES 
Recommendation 
2.9.1 Organization of a sporting event like the Commonwealth Games is a major challenge for any 
country not only from the point of view of investment in infrastructure but also from the security 
aspect, given the global security scenario. The Committee urges upon the Central Government, 
Government of NCT, Delhi and all agencies concerned to  ensure that there should not be any lapse in 
security arrangements for want of resources. Government may therefore provide funds to put in place 
a fool proof security system. 
(Para 3.11.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.9.2 Delhi Police and Central Intelligence Agencies  are fully prepared to meet any contingency 
arising out of terrorist attacks, shootout, hostage situations or any other terrorist act before or during 
the Commonwealth Games (CWG) 2010. 
2.9.3 As far as security of visiting HOS/HOGs during the games, participants/organizers, visitors, 
spectators, venues of the Games/Stadia, Games Village, Hotels where the VVIPs/Foreign Heads 
would be staying, Airports, Routes  etc. is concerned, preparation for the same are being made, which 
include (a) identification of routes from Airport to Hotels, Hotels to Sports Venues/Stadia; (b) 
Security of the Stadia; ( c) A rrangements at the Airport during arrival and departure of VVIPs; (d) 
Security arrangements at Hotels and other places  etc. Emphasis on intensive Anti-Sabotage checks, 
Route-Security and frisking and searching will be done to ensure security arrangements. 

2.9.4 Further, coordination meetings are being regularly organized by IB with the representatives 
from the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi Police and Government of NCT of Delhi for 
working out the detailed security plans for the CWG-2010. 
2.9.5 Delhi Police would ensure that there is no security lapse in the security arrangements for want 
of resources. Venue Commanders and Nodal Officers for the Games Venues and Games Village have 
been nominated. 
2.9.6 The Cabinet has approved Rs.370 crore for installation of integrated Security System which 
will be provided by M/s Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL). Contract Agreement between 
the Venue Owners and M/s ECIL has been executed in  respect to 26 venues. Execution of contract for 
the remaining 10 venues, are in process. 
Recommendation 
2.9.7 T he Committee takes note of the fact that an Empowered Security Committee (ESC) has been 
constituted to co-ordinate, oversee and approv e the security arrangement for the Commonwealth 
Games 2010. 1n this regard, the Committee would like to recommend that coordination and 
monitoring need to be done at every level right upto the lowest level of security deployment. 
1ntelligence agencies should also be actively invo lved in coordination. There should not be any time 
gap in the dissemination and percolation of intelligence inputs. The Committee also recommends that 
the security personnel may be sensitized to be people-friendly.   
Action Taken 
2.9.8 The Commonwealth Games (CWG) are scheduled to be held from 3rd to 14th October, 2010. As 
per the “Host City Agreement”, all venues associated with the Commonwealth Games 20 I 0, are to be 
provided with specified facilities, including security. The security arrangements for the 
Commonwealth Games are being coordinated in the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) through two 
high level committee i.e. the Empowered Security Committee (ESC) under the Chairmanship of the 
Union Home Secretary and Commonwealth Game s Security Review Committee (CWGSRC) under 
the Chairpersonship of Special Secretary (CS). In this regard several meetings of ESC have been taken 
by Union Home Secretary, the latest being held on 25.11.2009, 17.12.2009, 16.02.2010, 03.03.2010, 
31.03.2010, 05.04.2010 and 06.04.2010. 
2.9.9 The Empowered Security Committee (ESC) has also constituted an International Security 
Liaison Group (ISLG) headed by Special Director IB with members of MEA; MoD; Cabinet 
Secretariat (R&AW); Delhi Police and Organizing Committee, Commonwealth Games, Delhi – 2010 
to share and address the security concerns of the participating countries and other stakeholders. 
2.9.10  Delhi police remains in regular touch with the Central Intelligence Agencies while making 
arrangements for the Commonwealth Games. Important intelligence inputs are promptly disseminated 
to all concerned for necessary action on the ground. Staff being deployed for the security and law and 
order arrangements during the Commonwealth Game s is being sensitized to be people-friendly and 
courteous and specific behavioral courses are being organized for them. 
Recommendation 
2.9.11  The Committee expresses its displeasure over the under-utilization of funds meant for 
modernization of Traffic and Communication Network for which Rs. 40 crore was allocated in BE 

2009-10 but only an amount of Rs. 10.63 crore could be utilized, which indicates serious lacunae in 
the implementation aspects of the project. It is a matter of great concern that the project was not 
initially timed to be completed before the Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee is perturbed to 
note that the remaining amount has been appropriated for other purpose namely, ‘Delhi Police 
Building Programme’. (Para 3.11.8 ibid}  
Action Taken 
2.9.12  The project was approved by the Government only in August 2009. As such, as the project 
was at pre-investment stage with any physical implementation yet to take off during 2009-10, only an 
amount of Rs.10.63 crore could be utilized. As no further utilization under the scheme during the year 
2009-10 was envisioned, savings had to be re-appropriated to other schemes which needed additional 
funds on the principle of prudent management of budget. 
2.9.13  The implementation of the project is being monitored regularly since the beginning by a 
Project Monitoring Group set up in the Ministry. Home Secretary had also taken several meetings 
with all stake-holders and sorted out various initial hurdles in the implementation of the project. 
2.10 REDRESSAL OF GRIEVANCES OF CISF DIRECT RECRUIT OFFICERS 
Recommendation 
2.10.1 The Committee, while noting the steps taken by the Government in regard to the redressal of 
‘grievances of Group ‘A’ CISF Officers, expresses its concern that despite the recommendations made 
in 54th, 5f1h, 83rd Reports of this Committee, the Nikhil Kumar Committee and Bhandari Committee 
recommendations and the few steps taken by MHA, the grievances of Group ‘A’ officers of CISF 
remain unresolved. There has been a severe attrition amongst these officers and the rest are totally 
demoralized. The very fact that many of them have been petitioning the authorities for the redressal of 
their grievances is a pointer for immediate action on the part of the Government (Para 3.14.3 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.10.2  The core issue raised by the offices in various fora including the Department Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs is the problem of Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ 
Officers of CISF and this has arisen due to false impression on account of recruitment through Civil 
Services Examination conducted by the UPSC. 
2.10.3  On this issue Hon’ble Home Minister had assured the Lok Sabha on 20th December, 1999 that 
he would have a candid interaction with the CI SF officers and assured that if there were any 
grievances on the issue of parity, they would be removed. Accordingly, the Home Minister met the 
delegation in April, 2000 and July, 2000. 
2.10.4  Based on the discussions, MHA considered the issue through three different Committees, 
headed by senior level officers of the Ministry, na mely, (i) Shri V.S. Mathur, Spl. Secretary (ISP) in 
1997; (ii) Shri Nikhil Kumar, Spl. Secretary (ISP) in 1999; (iii) Shri S.K. Bhandari, Spl. Secretary 
(ISP) in 2001 were appointed to look into this issue. 
2.10.5  Based on the recommendation of the Committees the following action has been taken by the 
Government :- 
(a) The reduction in deputation quota of IPS offices in CPFs & consequent enhancement of 
promotion quota of departmental officers including Direct Recruit Group ‘A’ officers; 

(b) Reduction in the residency period for promotions to various ranks; 
(c) Grant of Senior Time Scale of (Rs.10,000-15,200) to Assistant Commandants (8,000-
13,500) after rendering 4 years of service; 
(d) Relaxation in 8 years - service requirement for deployment in UN Missions. 
2.10.6 As a result of the step taken by the Government the following Group ‘A’ Officers got 
promotion : 
(i) Senior Time Scale granted to 315 Group ‘A’ officers, including 93 Direct Recruits; 
(ii) 67 officers were promoted as Senior Commandants, including 12 Direct Recruits; 
(iii) 77 officers promoted as Commandants, including 15 Direct Recruits. 
(iv) 131 officers promoted as Dy. Commandants, including 75 Direct Recruits; 
(v) The Government also ordered the re-structuring for creation of higher level Group ‘A’ 
posts in order to further enhance their career prospects. Consequently, additional 80 
Group ‘A’ posts upto DIG level were sanctioned in December, 2004. Except 2 posts of 
DIG filled by deputation of IPS officers as per the Recruitment Rules, all the remaining 
posts have been filled by promotion of cadre officers of CISF. 
2.10.7  The aforesaid action taken by the Government was submitted in the form of note for the 
Cabinet and the Cabinet considered the same and approved the proposal in their meeting held on 
31.07.2006. 
2.10.8  Subsequently, MHA has also submitted Action Taken Report (ATR) to Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat in January, 2007. In the ATR, it ha s been clearly mentioned that career prospects of 
officers in CISF can be compared only with simila rly placed officers in ot her Central Police Forces, 
and the former i.e. CISF are not in disadvantageous position in the matter of career progression. Their 
career has nowhere been blocked, but on the other hand, all of them have already got promotions in 
higher ranks. 
Recommendation 
2.10.9  The Committee urges upon the Government to implement the scheme at the earliest so that the 
outstanding grievances of the Direct Recruit Officers could be addressed substantially.  
(Para 3.14.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.10.10  In this regard, it is submitted that MHA vide their D.O. NO.I-1106/4(Part)/2009-IPS-I dated 
19th April, 2010 had asked all the CPMFs to submit data to MHA that how many numbers and names 
of CPMFs officers who have 05 years of service and are in various age brackets. 
2.10.11  CISF vide their letter No.E-32015(4)/1/LDCE-IPS/2010/402 dated 16th April, 2010 had 
furnished the information as follows : 
  
SI. Category 
 
Age -35 years 36-40 years 41-45 years 
No.     

1 General 03 15 68 
2 OBC 01 06 09 
3 SC 00 03 05 
4 ST 00 01 03 
 T OTAL 04 25 85 
  
Of these officers, only three officers who had come through Central Civil Services Examination 
between CSE 1998 to CSE 2000 were below 35 years of age. .  
2.10.12  The other officer below the 35 years age bracket is one who had come through combined 
examination for Assistant Commandant/Executive for CPMF held by UPSC. 
2.10.13  It is also pointed out that none of direct officers who had entered CISF through Central Civil 
Services Examination from CSE-1987 to CSE-1996 is below 35 years of age. 
2.11 PROCUREMENT OF BULLET PROOF JACKETS 
Recommendation 
2.11.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the level of body armour provided to the Central 
para-military forces should be raised to level IV category. The Ministry should make concerted efforts 
to ensure that the next procurement takes place on time as per level IV category, so that those could 
be used by our forces in combat operations. It should also be ensured that the armour is made 
available to all the personnel in the combat zone.   
Action Taken 
2.11.2  BPR&D is in process of formulating of ‘Body Armour’ QRs for threat level-IV. In this regard, 
several meetings have been held with the body armour manufacturers experts and the CPMFs working 
in the field. Draft QRs for threat level IV have been prepared and last discussion on these draft QRs 
was held in BPR&D on 11.06.2010. The fabricator s and CPMFs have given some suggestions and 
QRs are being redrafted in view of the suggestions . Process for revision of the QRs is on and is 
expected to be completed soon, after which the revised QRs will be notified after approval of the 
competent authority. 
2.12 TRAINING OF POLICE PERSONNEL 
Recommendation 
2.12.1  The current security scenario of the country being what it is, the urgency to have Quick 
Response Teams and Commandos in State Police and Central Police Organisations needs hardly to 
be emphasized. In fact during the meeting of the Committee held on 23 March, 2010, the Home 
Secretary informed that the suggestion that all forces should have Quick Response Teams and 
Commandos right across the States, has been accepted.   
Action Taken 

2.12.2   A decision has already been taken by the Ministry that Quick Response Teams will be raised 
by the concerned State Governments. 
2.12.3  As regards raising of Commandos, a decision was taken that two coys in each IR Battalion 
sanctioned during 2007-08 onwards will be raised by State Government as Commandos. Ministry of 
Home Affairs will provide assistance @ Rs.3 crore per coy for raising of these commando coys. In 
addition, the State Governments which are not c overed are also advised to raise two coys of 
Commando in their existing SAP/ IR Battalions. 
2.12.4  In addition, 10 COBRA battalions (Commandos battalions) have been sanctioned to CRPF to 
be raised during 2008-09 to 2010-11. Six have alre ady been raised as per schedule and 4 are being 
raised during the current financial year. 
2.12.5  Total estimated strength of CPMFs as on 30.05.2010 is 8,25,996. 
Recommendation 
2.12.6  The total strength of the police force in all the States and UTs as on 30
th September, 2009 stood 
at 15,04,153 which was projected to go up to 15,81,439 by 3rd March, 2010. The total strength of the 
CPMFs as on 1st April, 2009, was 7,79,552. As agains t this massive force, the infrastructure in terms 
of four training institutes offering commando training with only 4270 slots available during the last 
five years, as informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs, present a dismal picture of the preparedness 
of the police forces to fight terrorists, insurgents and left wing extremists, who have no dearth of latest 
arms and weapons who are highly trained in guerrilla warfare and highly politically and ideologically 
motivated. (Para 3.17.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.7  As per records available in Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D), 4270 slots 
were made available to States and to other CPOs in ‘Commando Course’ during the last five years by 
the 4 training institutions of BSF, ITBP and NSG. Th is figure reflects the number of personnel whose 
training are organized through BPR&D. However,  these figures do not include the number of 
personnel trained in ‘Commando Course’ by thes e CPMFs in respect of their own personnel. 
Likewise, number of State Police Personnel trained in ‘Commando Course, in their own State. Police 
Training Institutes has also not been reflected in  this chart (Annexure-IV). Accordingly, the actual 
number of personnel trained in ‘Commando Course’ is higher. 
Recommendation 
2.12.8  The Committee believes that in addition to the information furnished by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to it, there would be more specialized training centres in some States, particularly the Naxal 
affected States, to impart commando training to the forces, but their numbers would be miniscule as 
compared to the need of training of 8.5 % of th e total strength of the State Police Forces. While 
surfing the net, the Committee came across the information relating to a training centres for jungle 
warfare located in Kanker (Chhattisgarh) and an other training centre Chandaka (Orissa) and yet 
another recently set up by Government of Maharashtra to train the recently raised Force One battalion 
of Maharashtra Police.                                                                                   (Para 3.17.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 

2.12.9  The Government has approved setting up of 20 Counter Insurgency & Anti-Terrorist (CIAT) 
Schools in naxal affected States. Funds for 15 such CIAT Schools has been released by the Central 
Government so far. 
Recommendation 
2.12.10  The Committee also learnt that the Central Government proposed to set up an Advanced 
Training Centre for CRPF Commandos in Uttar Pradesh. The Government of Bihar is also reported 
to have plan to set up four institutes to impart training in counter insurgency and jungle warfare.(Para 3.17.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.11  There is no proposal from CRPF for setting up of Advanced Training Centre in Uttar 
Pradesh. As regards, Bihar, the Government of India has already approved setting up of four 
temporary Counter-Insurgency and An ti-Terrorist Schools in Bihar un der the Plan Schemes to train 
their personnel. 
Recommendation 
2.12.12  Be that as it may, the Committee, therefore, with all the emphasis at its command, urges upon 
the Ministry of Home Affairs to take this aspect of commando training seriously and reformulate its 
Policy on Education and Training of Central Police Forces with a view to ensuring that adequate 
number of police personnel, especially trained in commando, counter insurgency, anti-terrorist and 
guerrilla warfare, are available to counter the menace of terrorism, insurgency and left wing 
extremism in all their hues. Besides, the inadequacies in training infrastructure, the Committee has 
been given to understand that there is shortage of trainers and the Government should look into this 
aspect by recruiting sufficient number of trainers and also updation of the Training of trainers’ 
programme. The Central Government may also proactively assists the State Government particularly 
those affected by cross-border terrorism, insurgency and left wing extremism, in setting up Training 
Centres for training their police personnel in guerilla and jungle warfare and help them set up special 
units like the Greyhound of Andhra Pradesh Police and COBRA of CRPF.  
(Para 3.17.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.13  Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) is already taking steps to train State 
Police personnel in Commando, Coun ter-Insurgency, Anti-Terrorist and Guerrila Warfare etc. at the 
Central Police Training Institutions and with the help of Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence 
(Army). 
2.12.14  Every year BPR&D allots more than 3000 slots to the States in the training courses on 
Counter Insurgency & Commando, Bomb Disposal, Weapons & Tactics, Anti-Terrorist & VIP 
Protection Commando, Counter Insurgency & Jungle Warfare and Counter Left Wing Extremist etc. 
as per details at Annexure-IV, in training scheduled/regular courses at the Central Police Training 
Institutions and Indian Army. 
2.12.15  The Indian Army has also been providing training in Counter Naxal and Explosives etc. to 
the State Police personnel. They have trained 38646 State Police Personnel during the last five years. 
(Annexure-V). 

2.12.16  The Indian Army has also given more than 5500 training slots in Counter Naxal and 
Explosives for training of State Police Personnel during the year 2010-11. (Annexure-VI). 
2.12.17  The Government of India has already approved setting up of a Central Academy for Police 
Training at Bhopal. Besides, training directly recr uited Dy. Superintendents of Police of the State 
Police Forces, this Academy will also conduct cour ses on ‘Training of Trainers, programme’ for the 
benefit of State Police Personnel. 
2.12.18  The Finance Co mmission has approved Rs.2160 crore (A nnexure-VII) for strengthening of 
existing Police Institutes and construction of new Training Centres in the States. This will enhance 
capabilities of the State for providing training to their Police Personnel. 
2.13 NAXALISM 
Recommendation 
2.13.1  It is public knowledge that the Maoists have become an impediment to development projects in 
most backward regions and tribal dominated forest areas and are running parallel administrations, 
siphoning money from government funds and indulging in extortion from local people, contractors 
and others. The Maoists propagate that administrative and political institutions are inadequate; 
espouse local demands; take advantage .of the prevalent dissatisfaction and feeling of injustice among 
exploited segments of the population and claim to form an alternative utopian Government. The 
Committee understands that by providing livelihood, land and proper wages, with good governance 
and proper utilization of funds allocated to the respective States for various government sponsored 
development schemes, people could be weaned away from naxalism and this menace could be 
contained. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the approach to the naxalite problem needs a 
blend of firm handling with sensitive approach to the developmental aspects. The Government should 
also involve the political parties, people’s representatives, Panchayati Raj institutions and above all 
the masses, in all its initiatives to contain the menace. (Para 4.10.1 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.13.2  The Government has adopted an integrated approach in dealing with LWE activities in the 
arenas of security, development and public perception. State Governments deal with the various issues 
related to naxalites activities in the States. The Central Government supplements their efforts over a 
wide range of schemes. 
Recommendation 
2.13.3 The Committee is of the view that capacity building is required to be done in the agriculture 
sector, bringing in modern technologies, so that th e young people in the ar eas affected by LWE are 
able to take up agriculture for a gainful employment. (Para 4.10.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.13.4  Modern Technologies in the form of hybrid and improved seeds, farm mechanization, 
cultivation practices like SRI, pest management and nutrient management techniques, protected 
cultivation etc. have been developed by various institutions under Ministry of Agriculture and under 
development programmes of the Ministry. These modern technologies are required to be taken up in 
Left Wing Extremist affected areas also. This is being done but can be further enhanced by State 
Governments under various programmes of the Ministry. Funds are also provided to State 

Governments and implementing agencies for capacity building, training in latest technologies and 
demonstration, so that young people are able to take up agriculture for gainful employment in the 
country including in the areas affected by Left Wing Extremism. 
Recommendation 
2.13.5  The Committee understands that most of the habitations in the affected areas are devoid of 
electricity, which makes them an easy haven for the extremists. Therefore, the Government should 
start a new programme of electrifying all the habitations in the extremist-affected areas with specific 
targets fixed. Electricity is a basic requirement in the modern days and once this is available, people 
will be able to take up various activities for gainful employment and children will be able to devote 
their time for studies, etc. 
(Para 4.10.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.13.6 All the projects in the Left Wing Extremism districts have been sanctioned under RGGVY. The 
projects are under different stages of implementation. MNRE is mandated to electrify habitations 
having population less than 100. Therefore, there is no need to launch any new scheme. 
Recommendation 
2.13.7  It is a fact that in naxal violence, people, from all sides, including the local people, extremists 
as well as the security forces lose their lives. Though the multi-pronged development strategy is 
required to be planned and implemented, it should also be kept in one’s mind that violence also needs 
to be addressed. Everyone knows that people in the affected areas do not support the movement by 
their heart but circumstances, coercion and the under-development make them surrender to the 
movement. Therefore, while taking up developmental activities, the strategies, as per the area and 
location, will have to be adopted to counter the violent activities. One particular strategy will not help 
for all the areas and States. There needs to be a coordination between the Central para-military 
forces and the State security organizations. While preparing strategy for such operations by security 
forces, sufficient training should be given before sending them to the field for facing the extremists. In 
fact, the local-youth are the right persons, who know the topography of the areas. Therefore, local 
youth on a large scale should be involved through employment in the police forces and CPMFs for 
operations within those areas to resist any attack from the extremists. Police force should be 
modernized in terms of latest and modern weaponry, communication, mobility and infrastructure. 
They should be supplied more Mine Protected Vehicles and the Central Para Military Forces should 
be deployed on long-term basis.   
Action Taken 
2.13.8  Government has adopted an integrated appr oach in dealing with LWE activities in the arenas 
of security, development and public perception. State Governments deal with the various issues 
related to naxalites activities in the States. The Central Government supplements their efforts over a 
wide range of schemes. 
2.13.9  The Government has decided to set up Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorism Schools 
(CIATS), to begin with in the States of Assam, Jharkhand, Bihar, Orissa and Chhattisgarh under a 
centrally sponsored scheme in the 11th Plan period for providing training to the State police personnel 

of these States in Counter-Insurgency and Anti-Terrorism  with a view to tackle the menace of 
naxalism insurgency. Approval has been granted to establish 20 CIAT Schools, 04 each in five States 
of Assam, Jharkhand, Bihar, Orissa and Chhattisgarh. The Ministry of Home Affairs would provide an 
amount of Rs. l.5 crore to each school for develo pment of temporary infrastructure. The Ministry 
would also bear recurring expenditure towards honorarium to be paid to the trainers. 
2.13.10  The Government has sanctioned 13,566 Special Police Officers (SPOs) to the Left Wing 
Extremism affected States. The State Government  appoints these SPOs by locally recruiting them. 
These SPOs act as a guide to the police force as they are local and have better knowledge of the 
terrain. They are a source of loca l intelligence and some State Governments have given them training 
in use of arms. 
2.13.11  To supplement the efforts of the State Governments in modernizing their police forces, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs has been implementing Scheme for Modernization of State Police Forces 
towards capacity building of the State Police Forces , especially for meeting the emerging challenges 
to internal security in the form of terrorism, naxalism, etc. 
Recommendation 
2.13.12  The Committee also feels that the Central Para Military Forces trained in guerilla warfare 
should be deployed in all the sensitive districts of the affected areas. There should be more Counter 
Insurgency and Jungle Warfare (CIJW) Colleges opened on the lines of Vairengte in Mizoram and 
another training centre at Kanker in Chhattisgarh, for training of Police Personnel for counter-
insurgency operations. The Committee understands that the biggest limitation while conducting 
counter-naxal operations, is the lack of helicopt er support from the Go vernment. The Government 
should therefore provide helicopter support for conducting operations and for reconnaissance.(Para 4.10.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.13.13  At present, besides 06 CRPF SAF (COBRA) Units, 67 CPMF Battalions have been deployed 
in the sensitive districts/areas of 09 LWE affected States (i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Mahara shtra, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal). These Battalions 
are carrying out joint operations in conjunction with State Police to support the State authorities in 
countering the naxal menace. For training purpos es, the Central Government has already sanctioned 
04 Counter Insurgency Anti-Terrorists (CIAT) Schools each for 04 naxal affected States i.e. Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa. The amount for 03 CIAT schools to be established in each of 
these States has been already sanctioned and released  to the States. Further, a total of 07 helicopters 
i.e. 04 MI-17 helicopters of Indian Air Force and 03 DHRUV helicopters of BSF have been already 
positioned in Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh to prov ide necessary air support to the ground forces 
deployed in these focused States. 
Recommendation 
2.13.14  Money is the life-line of every extremist activit y. Therefore, all the channels from which the 
naxalites get funding, should be blocked. There should be a proper mechanism to investigate and 
check the extortion rackets being run by the naxalites and to punish all those who are found guilty of 
funding naxalites. 
(Para 4.10.15 ibid) 

Action Taken 
2.13.15  ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ being State su bjects, action with respect to maintenance of law 
and order lies primarily in the do main of the concerned State Governments, who deal with the various 
issues related to naxalites activities in the States. The Central Government also closely monitors the 
situation and supplements their efforts in several ways, both on security and development fronts. 
2.14 UNION TERRITORIES WITH LEGISLATURE  
Recommendation 
2.14.1  The Committee takes serious note that Plan allocation for the year 2010-11 has been reduced 
by 30% from RE 2009-10. This is bound to affect several schemes. The Committee desires that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs may take up the issue with the Planning Commission for enhancement of the 
Plan allocation at the RE stage so that no projects suffer for want of finance. (Para 5.2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.2  The decline in the overall Plan allocation is mainly due to reduced allocation under Tsunami 
Rehabilitation Programme. The allocation under TRP was Rs.755.02 crore within the overall Plan 
allocation of Rs.1536.81 crore in BE 2009-10 wher eas the allocation under TRP is Rs.100 crore only 
within the overall Plan allocation of Rs.954.36 crore in BE 2010-11. 
2.14.3  Planning Commission has subsequently agreed and recommended to Ministry of Finance to 
enhance the Plan allocation by Rs.332.97 crore to Rs.1291.35 crore. Ministry of Home Affairs had 
also requested the Ministry of Finance in this regard and the Ministry of Finance has assured that it 
will be considered in RE stage, keeping in view the pace of expenditure and the overall availability of 
savings at that stage for re-allocation to the Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
Recommendation 
2.14.4  The Committee notes that the budgetary provision for Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme has 
been reduced to Rs. 100 crore in BE 2010-11 in comparison to Rs. 647.77 crore in RE 2009-10. The 
Committee presumes that major part of the rehabilitation programme must have been completed in 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands. In case the allocation is not sufficient for the purpose, efforts be made 
for enhancing the provision at the RE stage. The Committee feels that due to reduction in allocation 
for Tsunami Rehabilitation, the remaining part of the rehabilitation programme should not suffer.(Para 5.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.5  Out of the approved package of Rs.2654.69 under TRP, the UT Administration of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands has utilized Rs.2429.14 crore till March 2010. The Empowered Group of Ministers on 
TRP had, in its meeting held on 11.02.2010, decided that in case of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Planning Commission will assess requirement of funds to be met through Plan provision and no 
further funds would be provided under TRP. 
2.14.6  Subsequently, Planning Commission has agreed and recommended to Ministry of Finance to 
enhance the allocation to Rs.203.31 crore for ongoing tsunami related projects. Ministry of Finance 
has assured that it will be considered at RE stage, keeping in view the pace of expenditure and the 
overall availability of savings at that stage for re-allocation to the Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 

2.15 GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
Recommendation 
2.15.1  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:–– 
As per the criteria fixed for quantity, calorie and protein under Mid-day Meal Scheme, the ceiling of 
Rs.6.60 is not sufficient for the children of the A&N Islands as the prices of essential commodities in 
the Islands is the highest in the country due to its remoteness. The ceiling needs to be increased to 
Rs.10-15 in view of the prevailing market rates. [Para 5.5. 1 (vii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.2  UT Administration has increased the ceiling of Mid-day Meal for Primary and Middle from 
Rs. 5.88 to Rs.6.02 (for Primary) and from Rs.6. 02 to Rs.7.02 (for middle) from the current session 
i.e. 2010-11. UT Administration has no proposal to enhance the ceiling further. 
2.15.3  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
Mid-day Meal Scheme may be extended from class VIII to XII in consonance with the facility extended 
in Lakshdweep, Delhi and Tamil Nadu; [Para 5.5.1 (viii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.4  Cooked Mid Day meal programme is a centrally aided programme and as per this programme, 
the scheme is applicable to studen ts of Class I to VIII only. UT Ad ministration is not in favour of 
extending it up to class XII. 
Recommendation 
2.15.5  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
Hostels in Islands particularly in remote backwar d areas like Mayabunder Boy’s Hostel are in a 
dilapidated condition. The entire Islands fall under Seismic Zone V and these hostels may crumble in 
case of any earthquake, causing loss of lives. Therefore, hostels in Rangat, Diglipur, Kishorinagar are 
in dire need of repair/renovation. There are many schools having broken tin roofs, broken thatched 
walls with no pucca floor, drinking water and toilet facilities. Those schools should properly be 
constructed with all basic amenities. Some schools in the islands do not have class rooms, science 
labs, and staff quarters. These facilities must be provided immediately; [Para 5.5.1 (ix) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.6  There is a token provision in Annual Plan 2010-11 for renovation of hostels at Mayabunder, 
Swarajgram in Diglipur, Kishorinagar etc. APWD ha s been requested to initiate the works on priority 
basis. 
2.15.7  In Annual Plan 2010-11, token provision exists for repair of 381 classrooms as against 1466 
classrooms which need major/minor repairs. Repair  works of other classrooms will be initiated in 
subsequent plans in phased manner. 

2.15.8  Additional fund requirement for both school buildings and hostels has been projected by the 
UT Administration to the Planning Commission. 
Recommendation 
2.15.9  The Committee is of the view that be sides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
Since 2008 bicycles are be ing provided to Nicobari  ST students in Class VIII under Sarva Shikhsha 
Abhiyan. Lakshadweep, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Puducherry are providing free bicycles to all the 
students. A& N Islands is considered as mini India on account of having harmony among different 
castes and creeds. Students have to walk 10-12 kms to come to main road for buses and students are 
not getting timely reimbursement for their bus passes. Therefore, bicycles should be provided to all 
the students to avoid any discrimination between tribals and non-tribals. [Para 5.5.1 (x) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.10  Under Sarva Shikhsha Abhiyan (SSA), bicycles are provided to Boys and Girls of class VIII 
belonging to Scheduled Tribes, whose schools are at a distance of 1.5 km and more from their 
residences. The objective is to encourage tribal children to attend schools. However, UT 
Administration will explore the possibility to provide bicycles to all students who qualify their 10th 
class examination with B1 & above grades of mark s i.e. 70% or above in order to encourage better 
performance amongst students. 
Recommendation 
2.15.11  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
Old age pension of Rs.500/- was last revised in 2005-06. Goa and Delhi have revised the pension to 
Rs.1000/-   in the year 2008. Besides dhoti, Saree and four kg. rice per month is also given by Tamil 
Nadu Government. Old persons in A&N Islands should be given pension of Rs.l 000/- per month. They 
should also be given two dhotis/Sarees in a year. [Para 5.5.1 (xi) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.12  The recommendations of the Committee for enhancement of pension under various schemes 
are being examined by the UT Administration, keeping in view funds position. The additional funds 
required are Rs.8.40 crore per annum. 
2.15.13  UT Administration is not in favour of providing two dhotis/sarees in a year. 
Further Recommendation 
2.15.14  The Committee desires that an early decision may be taken in regard to enhancement of 
pension under various schemes. 
Recommendation 
2.15.15  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:–– 
Destitute/single/abandoned/divorced women in Delhi are getting a pension of Rs.1000/- per month. 
No such scheme has been extended to A&N Islands. Pension of Rs.1000/- for 

destitute/single/abandoned/divorced women in A&N Islands should be given. Government of NCT 
Delhi provides marriage assistance of Rs.20000/- to orphan girls and daughters of widows. This 
scheme should also be extended to A&N Islands. 
[Para 5.5.1 (xiii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.16  A new scheme for providing an allowance of Rs. 1000/- per month to unemployed, single and 
destitute women has been formulated and is under consideration for implementation by the UT 
Administration during Annual Plan 2010-11. UT Administration is not in favour of providing 
marriage assistance of Rs.20,000/- to orphan girls and daughters of widows. 
Recommendation 
2.15.17  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
There are 1400 Anganwadi Workers and Helpers.  Workers are getting Rs.1800-2000 while the 
helpers are getting Rs.990/- per month. These Workers/Helpers are working since the last 15 to 20 
years. Puducherry and Tamil Nadu Governments have granted regular pay scales to them. Tamil 
Nadu Government also pay HRA, City Allowan ce and medical reimbursement. Workers/Helpers 
should be given at least minimum wages till such time, regular pay-scale for them are granted.[Para 5.5.1 (xiv) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.18  Anganwadi Workers and Helpers are honorary, part-time workers and not regular 
Government employees. 
2.15.19  UT Administration is not in favour of enhancing Honorarium to Anganwadi workers and 
helpers or to provide regular pay scales. 
Further Recommendation 
2.15.20  The Anganwadi workers and Anganwadi helpers  are the backbone of Integrated Child 
Development Services Scheme. An increase in the remuneration of Anganwadi workers from 
Rs. 1,500 per month to Rs. 3,000 per month and for Anganwadi helpers from Rs. 750 per month 
to Rs. 1,500 per month was announced by the Un ion Finance Minister in his Budget (2011-12) 
speech with the likelihood of  improving lives of around 22 lakh Anganwadi workers and 
helpers. The Committee is of the view that th e UT Administration also should enhance 
Honorarium of Anganwadi workers and helpers, as has been promised in the Union Budget 
(2011-12). 
Recommendation 
2.15.21  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the. 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
Yatri Niwas/Dharamshala run by  Municipal Corporation was c onstructed 50 years ago. However, 
with the increase in population, no additional rooms have been added in spite of foundation stone laid 
down by the then Union Minister of State for Home Affairs. Municipal Corporation should be 
provided funds for construction of Dharamshala.                                               [Para 5.5. 1 (xviii) ibid] 
Action Taken 

2.15.22  The foundation stone for construction of a Yatri Niwas at Phoenix Bay was laid by the then 
Union Minister of State for Home Affairs on 06.04.2000. A proposal for CRZ clearance was sent. 
However, after the tsunami of 2004 , the site is affected by tidal action and hence it was not 
considered appropriate by the UT Administration to go ahead and pursue the CRZ clearance for this 
site. Consequently, the Revenue Department was requested to allot an alternate land at Anarkali. 
Allotment of suitable land for construction of Yatri Niwas is being pursued. 
2.15.23  At present the Yatri Niwas at Haddo has 1 dormitory and 6 rooms. The Yatri Niwas at 
Delanipur has 8 rooms with common toilet at affordable rates. 
Recommendation 
2.15.24  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
Police Personnel in the A&N Islands should be granted Ration Money like their counterparts in Delhi 
Police and CRPF.    [Para 5.5.1 (xxi) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.25  The proposal was examined but was not agreed to by the Integrated Finance Division of this 
Ministry. However, the same is being taken up with IFD (H). 
Further Recommendation 
2.15.26  The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for not agreeing to the proposal by 
Integrated Finance Division (IFD) of the Minist ry. The Committee may be informed of the final 
decision of IFD and the present status thereof. 
Recommendation 
2.15.27  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
About 80,000 agitated educated youth are jobless. Group ‘D’ Posts in various departments of A&N 
Islands Administration has been banned. The youth in the Islands does not have job opportunities as 
compared to their counterparts in the mainland. Therefore, special attention needs to be paid for 
employment of youth in the Islands.   
Action Taken 
2.15.28  UT Administration has informed that with the implementation of CCS (RP) Rules, 2008, all 
Group ‘D’ posts have been upgraded to Group ‘C’. 
2.15.29  As per Live Register of Employment Exchange, Port Blair there are around 40,000 male and 
female registrants. Further scope for employment in Government Sector is limited; relative to the size 
of the economy, it is already quite substantial. Th erefore the UT Administration has put considerable 
focus on developing and implementing skill oriented training programmes. As a part of flagship 
programme of Skill Development Mission of GOI, the UT Administration’s mission is to train jobless 
youth to enable them to get employed/ take up self-employment during the mission period (2008-
2012). Under this scheme, 25 Vocational Training Providers have registered so far and 1700 youth 
were already trained and given NCVT certificate af ter being tested in different trades such as 

agriculture, fisheries, tourism and short-term engineering trades. ITI, Dollygunj is the sole 
Government Institute providing vocational training in 10 engineering trades. Special efforts are taken 
to place trainees through placement process. 
2.15.30  Vocational Guidance and Career Programme in different parts of A & N Islands for the 
unemployed youth. The Employment and Training Department also conduct camps with financial 
Agencies/Departments who are extending loans to unemployed youth for self-employment. 
2.15.31  Fisheries are one of the prime sectors offering ample scope for employment in the islands. 
The Fisheries Department is already implementing various schemes/ programmes, whereby financial 
assistance and training is extended to the local youths to take up various fisheries related activities as 
self-employment. Schemes presently implemented are as under :- 
1. Subsidy for construction of mechanised/motorised boats. 
2. Subsidy for purchase of fish transport vehicles/deep freezers. 
3. Deputing local youths to mainland for training in Fisheries-related activities. 
4. Subsidy for purchase/construction of deep sea fishing vessels and purchase of deep 
freezers under RKVY. 
5. New programmes are also in the pipeline under RKVY to encourage setting up of ice 
plants, cold storages and fish retail outlets in the islands by the interested unemployed 
youths. 
2.15.32  The Industries Department of UT Administration also provides financial assistance through 
Prime Minister Employment Guarantee Scheme (PMEGP) to educate unemployed youth. 
2.15.33  Co-operative societies promoted and managed by unemployed youth are being encouraged 
with a view to generate employment avenues, especially in the field of construction, tourism, contract 
etc. At present 281 Co-operative Societies with more than 3000 youths as member, having paid-up 
share capital of Rs.38.21 lakhs have been formed by the educated/ unemployed youth of this UT, of 
which 82 societies have been organised and registered during 2008-2009 and 2009-2010. The UT 
Administration provides financial assistance to the needy and eligible Co-operative societies in the 
shape of working capital loan, share capital loan, loan-cum subsidy, managerial subsidy, grant-in-aid 
for infrastructure development etc. as per approved pattern of assistance. 
Recommendation 
2.15.34  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
According to BPL Census 2000, BPL famiiies in Nicobar Tribal Area were 67%, South Andaman 
District 13%, North Andaman District 7%. Many families living in de-reserved blocks or jungles in 
North and Middle Andamans have been left out in BPL list. The cut off score for identifying BPL 
families is discriminatory. As per Planning Commission there should be 28000 BPL cards whereas 
only 17000 BPL/AY cards have been issued. Remaining 11000 BPL cards should be issued 
immediately.  
[Para 5.5.1 (xxv) ibid] 

Action Taken 
2.15.35  BPL Census is carried out by the UT Administration as per the guidelines issued by the 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD). The numbers of rural poor so derived are restricted to 
poverty estimates of the Planning Commission and States/UTs are given the flexibility of increase 
upto 10% more than the Planning Commission’s estimate. 
2.15.36 The Planning Commission poverty estimate 1999-2000 for A & N Islands was 11600 BPL 
families; MoRD had communicated 14600 BPL families for BPL Census 2002. BPL families in A & 
N Islands are 15768. 
2.15.37 Initially, the BPL census covered only re venue villages, but there are some encroached 
pockets of forest lands. These areas were also e numerated in the survey but were not taken into 
account while finalising the BPL list. 
2.15.38  The cut-off score of 18 was fixed for Andaman District and 33 for Nicobar District taking 
into consideration that Nicobar District is at a di sadvantage compared to Andaman District due to the 
remoteness and with a predominant tribal population. 
2.15.39  The comparative figures of the Below Poverty Line population, total population and % of 
BPL population to total population and % of BPL population to total population in rural areas for the 
years 1997 and 2002 are given below: 
District BPL Census 1997 BPL Census 2002 
 BPL 
Population 
(families) 
Population 
Census 
1991 
BPL% BPL 
Population 
(families) 
Population 
Census 
2001 
BPL%  
Andaman 25495 166498  15.31 37654 197886 19.03 
 (5569)   (10692)   
Nicobar 24931 39208 63.59 29409 (5076) 42068 09.91 
 (2048)      
A&N Islands 50426 205706 24.51 67063 239954 27.95 
 (7617)   (15768)   
    
2.15.40  The BPL population/families identified in BPL Census 2002 are more than BPL Census 
1997. Period of BPL Census 2002 was 2002-2007, which is already over and new guidelines for BPL 
Census 2010 are under issue from MoRD. Fresh BPL cards will be issued only after new BPL census. 
Recommendation 
2.15.41  The Cammittee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government shauld also cansider the following suggestions:- 
Ladli Scheme on the pattern af Delhi, far promotion of sex ratio institutianal birth and education af 
girls shauld be implemented in the Islands. [Para 5.5.1 (xxvi) ibid] 

Action Taken 
2.15.42  UT Administration has informed that the problem of gender discrimination is not serious in 
the UT. Sex ratio at birth is 961 females for 1000 males. Literary  was 75% for females and 86% for 
males as per 2001 census. Enrolment in schools in 2008-09 was 48.39% girls enrolment and 51% boy 
enrolment. Enrolment of girls in Sr. Secondary schools is 50.56%. 
2.15.43 UT Administration is implementing a Scheme called the Planned Family Scheme, wherein the 
girl child in the age group of 13 to 21 years are provided Rs.2000/- on passing 10th standard. An 
incentive of Rs.2000/- is provided for delayed marriage up to the age of 21 years. Additional incentive 
of Rs.500/- per year up to a maximum of Rs.2000/- is provided for further delay in marriage between 
the ages of 21 to 25 years. 
2.15.44  As Social Security incentive the girl child on completion of 50 years, will be provided an 
amount of Rs.65,000/- for one child or no child and Rs.30,000/- is provided for two living children. 
2.15.45  No cases of female foeticide have been re ported in A&N Islands. In view of the above, there 
is no proposal to implement the Ladli Scheme in these islands. 
Recommendation 
2.15.46  The Cammittee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions:- 
The earthen bunds have not been constructed scientifically, by the Zilla Parishad, South Andaman and 
the same are in the danger of collapse/wash out. These bunds should immediately be reinforced 
otherwise the Andaman Trunk Road and some villages will be submerged in the sea waters.[Para 5.5.1 (xxviii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.15.47  UT Administration has informed that the earthen bunds were constructed by Zilla Parishad, 
South Andaman following all technical formalities. Only sluice gates are to be installed in particular 
places of the bunds. Thes e earthen bunds are not in a state of collapse under ordinary circumstances. 
The estimates for sluice gates are in final processing stage. The sluice gates will be installed by Zilla 
Parishad in required places of the bunds for reinforcement which in turn shall strengthen the bunds. 
DAMAN AND DIU AND DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI 
2.16 MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME 
Recommendation 
2.16.1  The Committee, however, has been given to un derstand that the quality of food provided is of 
inferior quality and has compromised on the health and hygiene of children. The Committee is also 
constrained to learn that there were instances in the recent past when children had fallen ill after taking 
such food. The Committee desires that an inquiry may be held into the irregularities in 
implementing the Scheme. The Administration should ensure that the Scheme is implemented in a 
proper manner and carefully monitored on regular basis.   
Action Taken 

2.16.2  The Administration has taken all precautions to prevent such incidents and to ensure that the 
proper quality of food is provided to the students.  
2.16.3  For proper implementation and monitoring of the scheme, following steps have been taken by 
the UT Administration; 
(A) A committee of following three officers has been constituted; 
 1. Deputy Secretary (Home) 
 2. Assistant Director of Education 
 3. Deputy Secretary (Panchayat); 
This Committee visits frequently the schools where Mid-Day-Meal is being served and reports 
the status of effectiveness of the scheme to the Administrator with a copy to the Collector. 
(B) The officers including Chie f Medical Officer, Child Development Project officer, Asstt. 
Commissioner (Food and Civil supply), Asstt. Director of Education visit all schools 
frequently for monitoring and supervising the effectiveness of the Mid-Day-Meal, 
overseeing the food quality and distribution at Hostels and Anganwadis and report about 
the same to the Collector. It is now being continuously monitored in monthly 
coordination meeting of the District Officers Chaired by the Collector. 
(C)  A District level Committee for the UT comprising Hon. Member of Parliament, 
President (District Panchayat), Vice-Presid ent (District Panchayat), Chief Executive 
Officer (District Panchayat), Asstt. Director of Education, Education Officer, Child 
Development Project Office, Asstt. Commissioner (Food and Civil Supply) has been 
constituted under chairmanship of the Collector to ensure effective monitoring of the 
Mid-day-meal scheme. 
(D) A Village Education Committee chaired by Sarpanch of the respective Village Panchayat 
also monitors the effectiveness of the scheme. 
2.16.4  The “Mother to Watch” scheme is also being implemented in the District to ensure better food 
quality and effectiveness of the ‘Mid-day-meal’ scheme. 
2.16.5  An unfortunate incident of the death of two tribal students in Social Welfare Hostel, 
Kharadpada took place in August, 2009. An enquiry has been made. Action has already been taken in 
pursuance of the Enquiry report. In addition followin g corrective measures have been taken in all the 
Hostels after the incident: 
Health Sector: 
2.16.6 The Medical Officers of all PHCs, Medical Officer (DP) and ANM / MP W in their respective 
jurisdiction visit Social Welfare Hostels for Heal th checkup of the studen ts on weekly basis In 
addition, the Hostel students are also being checked by team of Doctors in School Health Programme 
in their respective schools. First Aid Box with  necessary medicines have been provided in each 
Hostel. Emergency contact numbers of PHC/CHC and Vinoba Bhave Civil Hospital along with 
telephone numbers for Ambulance are displayed at every Hostel Notice Board. 

Infrastructure: 
2.16.7  The Social Welfare Hostels at Kharadpada  (Boys) and Amboli (Boys) have been renovated 
completely providing the entire basic facilities required. Tenders are in process for maintenance and 
repair of other Hostels. A Solar hot water system has been installed at SWH, Amboli. 
Food and Water: 
2.16.8  Only monthly required food stuff is being supplied to the Social Welfare Hostel to avoid 
spoiling of material. 
Resident Dy. Collector(S) and Resident Dy. Collector (K) have been directed to visit the social 
welfare hostel in their respective ar eas once in a week and testify that the food is being tested by the 
Hostel Superintendent and Cook. 
The Water Coolers of adequate capacity with RO Plants have been installed at all the Hostels. 
Establishment: 
2.16.9  Visitor books have been maintained at each hostel, wherein the Officer visiting the hostel 
makes entry and gives necessary directions to the respective Hostel Superintendent. 
The Hostel Superintendents are directed not to leave the Hostel without prior permission of Chief 
Executive Officer (DP). In the absence of Hostel Su perintendent, the work of Hostel Superintendent 
will be looked after by Head Master of the Central Primary School concerned. 
Suggestion/Complaint Box are being kept at each Hostel. 
Co-ordination with Elected representatives of the Panchayat : 
2.16.10  A meeting of Elected representatives and concerned officers of the District Panchayat was 
convened by the Collector as per the direction of the Administrator, DD & DNH and various decisions 
were taken to improve the Hostel condition and to take precautionary measures to prevent untoward 
incidents in Hostels. Accordingly, corrective measures are being taken in coordination with local 
elected representatives such as organizing regular monthly meeting of parents, Hostels inmates and 
hostel superintendent etc. 
Action taken against erring officials :- 
2.16.11  The Hostel Superintendent (SWH) Shri Rajesh S. Patel and the Cook Shri Raghu B. Halpati 
have already been suspended by the District Pa nchayat and disciplinary  proceedings are being 
initiated against them. 
Simultaneously an offence was also registered in the same incident with silvassa Police Station  vide 
CR.No.227/2009 u/s 304-A of IPC on 30.08.2009. The investigation in the case has already been 
completed by the police and charge-sheet in the case would be filed shortly with the competent Court. 
2.17 VILLAGE AND SMALL INDUSTRIES 
Recommendation 

2.17.1  The Committee has learnt that the subsidy provid ed to the fishermen has been increased but 
the number of fishermen covered under it has been drastically reduced which is quite surprising. This 
does not augur well for the welfare of the fishing community. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
matter needs to be reviewed.  (Para 5.14.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.17.2  Details of subsidy and number of beneficiaries in respect of all the schemes pertaining to 
fishermen are given below: 
(1) ASSISTANCE TO THE FISHERMEN FOR PURCHASE OF FISHERIES REQUISITES: 
2.17.3  Under the Scheme, financial assistance in the form of 70% Loan and 20% Subsidy is being 
provided to fishermen for purchase of Fibre Cannoe, Nets, Plastics Floats, Ropes, Ice boxes, and 
electronic equipments like V.H.Fs, Fish finders, G.P. S. etc. Details of assistance provided are given 
below: 
Year Loan (Rs. in lakhs) Subsidy 
Rs. In lakhs 
   Nos. of Beneficiaries 
  Datnan Diu Total Daman Diu Total Daman Diu Total 
2008-09 6.89 —- 6.89 1.97 6.28 8.25 10 51 61 
2009-10 7.00 —- 7.00 2.00 11.35 13.35 10 87 97 
 
(2) SUPPLY OF INSULATED ICEBOXES AND DISPLAY BOXES TO THE FISHER 
WOMEN: 
2.17.4  Under this scheme, Insulated ice boxes and display boxes along with transparent lids are 
provided to the fisherwomen in the form of 75%  subsidy maximum up to Rs.5,000/- per Fisher 
women, and 25% beneficiary’s contribution. Financial assistance has been provided to the 
fisherwomen as follows : 
  
Year Subsidy Released No. of Beneficiaries 
2008-09 Rs.1.5 lakh 32 
2009-10 Rs.3.37 lakh 68 
  
(3) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING THE FISHING VESSEL 
DURING 
 MONSOON SEASON: 
2.17.5  In order to assist the fishermen in bearing the cost on loading of fishing vessels before 
monsoon and thereafter for unloading of fishing vessels from fishing jetty after the monsoon, 

assistance is provided to the boat owners in the form of 50% back ended subsidy maximum upto 
Rs.2,500/-. Details of assistance provided to the fishermen are as following: 
Year Financial Assistance Released 
(Rs. in lakh) 
No. of Beneficiaries 
 Daman Diu Total Daman Diu Total 
2008-09 2.99 21.65 24.64 121 193 314 
2009-10 2.92 15.34 18.26 126 435 561 
  
(4) GROUP ACCIDENT INSURANCE OF ACTIVE FISHERMEN: 
2.17.6  Under this scheme, all the active fishermen/fisherwomen of Daman and Diu have been 
covered. They have been insured for a sum of Rs.l,00,000/- for death and Rs.50,000/- for partial 
disability. 100% annual premium is being borne by the Government of India. Details of assistance 
provided are as below: 
Year Fishermen covered Premium No. of claims settled 
2008-09 11949 Rs.3,58,470 6 claims for 
   Rs.50,000/- 
2009-10 11949 Rs.3,58,470 –– 
  
(5) FISHERMEN DEVELOPMENT REBATE ON HSD OIL : 
2.17.7 Sales tax/Vat free Diesel is being provided to the registered boat owners of Daman and Diu up 
to the admissible limit of 11000 liters per year for the boats having engine below 50 H.P. capacity, 
16000 litres per year for the boats having engine above 50 - 100 H.P. Capacity, and 24,000 litres per 
year for the Boats having engine above 100 H. P. Capacity. 
2.17.8  Further, under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme, a development rebate of Rs.l.50 per litre of 
HSD was also being provided to all the owners of the registered mechanized Fishing Vessels below 20 
Metres length. The details of assistance provided are as below: 
Year Subsidy Released No. of Beneficiaries 
2007-08 Rs.68,34,353/- 501 
2008-09 Rs.89,88,195/- 618 
2009-10 —* —* 
  
* Govt. of India has modified the scheme from 2009-10 and rais ed the amount of rebate from Rs.1. 50 to Rs. 3.00 per 
litre with ceiling of 5 00 litres per fishing boat per month during the active fishing months and subsidy shall be 
provided to the vessels of size less than 20 meters, registered before loth Plan and owned by fishermen of BPL category 
only. As no boat owners come under the BPL category, no appl ication was received from any applicant/beneficiary for 

release of Subsidy under this scheme during 2009-10. Due to aforesaid reason,  there is a strong demand by the 
fishermen to extend the benefit under this scheme to all the fishermen. 
(6) DEVELOPMENT OF MODEL FISHERMEN VILLAGE: 
2.17.9  Under this scheme, 100% financial assistance maximum up to Rs. 40,000/- (now Rs.50,000/- 
w.e.f. 2009-10) is being provided to fishermen for construction of house in their own land. Details of 
assistance provided are as follows: 
  
Year Subsidy Released No. of Beneficiaries 
2008-09 Rs.l,20,000/- 3 
2009-10 Rs.2,50,000/- 5 
  
(7) MOTORISATION OF TRADITIONAL CRAFT: 
2.17.10  Under this Centrally Sponsored Scheme, 50% financial assistance maximum upto Rs.20,000/- 
was provided up to 2007-08 which has been further raised to Rs.30,000/- from the year 2009-10 and is 
provided to the small boat owners for purchase of outboard/inboard 8-10 H.P. engine. 50 % cost is 
borne by the beneficiary. Details of assistance provided are as below: 
Year Subsidy Released No. of Beneficiaries 
2007-08 Rs.4,00,000/- 20 
2008-09 —* —* 
2009-10 Rs.6,00,000/- 20 
* Fund not received from the Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture. 
2.18 EDUCATION 
Recommendation 
2.18.1  In the light of remoteness of the UT, physical proximity of schools and other educational 
institutions is essential so that children get schooling closer to home and do not have to travel long 
distances for the same. The Committee is also of the view that upgradation of schools and syllabi 
should be done at regular intervals to meet the requirements of the local students. (Para 5.15.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.18.2  There are 86 Primary and Upper Primary Schools situated in UT of Daman & Diu. The 
bifurcation of Primary and Upper Primary Schools is as under:––  
Category Govt. Aided Total 
Primary  52 0 52 
Upper Primary 30 4 34 

 
2.18.3  All the 291 habitations in the UT of Daman & Diu (236 in Daman and 55 in Diu) are served 
with the facility of Primary Schools within a radi us of 1 km. and Upper Primary Schools within a 
radius of 3 kms. As per the norms of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. 
2.18.4  So far as upgradation of schools is concerned, 4 Primary schools have been upgraded to Upper 
Primary schools. The Department of Education regularly reviews the requirements of additional 
schools and upgradation of schools. 
2.19 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendation 
2.19.1  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
The Committee was informed that the 51st Battalion of the India Reserve Battalion, with headquarters 
in the UT of Lakshadweep, has a very peculiar recru itment policy. The recruits to this Battalion cater 
to the needs of the UTs of D&D, DNH and Lakshadweep. The recruitment to this Battalion is from 
these three UTs. However these recruits are posted for a total period of four years away from their 
native place causing a lot of hardship, mainly due to the language problem. The Committee feels that 
the local recruits should stay within their Territory which will help them to lead a better family life 
and thereby improve their operational efficiency.   
Action Taken 
2.19.2  India Reserve Battalion was raised by recrui ting 50% of its strength from UT of Lakshadweep 
and remaining 50% from UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli and to maintain the 
cosmopolitan character of the Battalion, the Jawans recruited for Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu and 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli were mixed in all the Companies and Platoons. This battalion is having six 
service Coys and two support Coys. All the three UTs of Lakshadweep, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Daman & Diu are having deployment of 2 service Coys in each UT with one support Coy in the UT of 
Lakshadweep and one Support Coy in UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli. Sub Para 6 of the Standing Order 
No.3 issued on 16.12.2000, which explains the Rotation Policy of IR Battalion, is reproduced below : 
–– 
“The Coys deployed at Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli will have 
frequent even rotation at the interval of two years i.e. a Coy deployed at Lakshadweep will 
come to DD and DNH after two years of time a nd the Coy in rotation replaces them. The 
rotation of Coys will be in alphabetical order i.e. A to F and two years tenure will be followed 
without fail...” 
2.19.3  IR Battalion personnel are transferred from one UT to another after completion of two years 
tenure. The aforesaid policy is followed to ensure due objectivity, neutrality and transparency in 
functioning of the IRBN Jawans. 
Recommendation 
2.19.4  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu:  

 More incentives to industrial houses to set up units in Daman and Diu to help generate 
employment for the locals and also to generate revenue for the UT, may also be considered.[Para 5.16.1 (ix) ibid] 
Action Taken 
2.19.5  The provision of exemption on Central Sales Tax for Medium Scale Industries/Large Scale 
Industries units in the UT of Daman & Diu was extended by the UT Administration for a period of 15, 
10, 5 years from the date of its se tup or till 31st December, 2017 whichever is earlier, irrespective of 
its date of se tup vide Notification dated 05 February, 2003. 
2.19.6  Further, vide Notification dated 28.1.2008, the Medi um Scale Industry (MSI)/ Large Scale 
Industry (LSI) were also made eligible for the benefit of Central Sales Tax exemption upto 31.12.2017 
or for 15 years, whichever is earlier. 
2.20 CENSUS 2011 AND NATIONAL POPULATION REGISTER 
Recommendation 
2.20.1  The Committee observes that the first phase of the Census 2011 will be held during April and 
September 2010 for collection of data on Houselisting and Housing Census as well as for preparation 
of National Population Register. The Committee apprehends that it will be difficult and improper to 
carry out both exercises together for the following reasons: 
(i) The Census information is collected under the Census Act, 1948 which guarantees 
complete confidentiality of the individual and household data collected. This 
confidentiality clause is known to be a key-stone that ensures accuracy and sanctity of 
the Census Data; and 
(ii) The National Population Register (NPR) information is to be collected under the 
Citizenship Act, 1955 read with the Citizenship (Registration and Issue of National 
Identity Cards) Rules, 2003 and the data collected are not confidential and are meant to 
be used for identifying individuals and household. These make the purpose, objectives 
and the process of the two exercise different and, hence, it is important to keep the two 
exercises separate in order to maintain sanctity of both. (Para 6.9.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.20.2  The Committee has rightly observed that the Census information is collected under the Census 
Act, 1948 and the National Population Register (NPR) information is to be collected under the 
Citizenship Act, 1955 read with the Citizenship (Registration and Issue of National Identity Cards) 
Rules, 2003. Keeping the distinct nature of both these activities, separate Notifications have been 
made under both the Acts. Similarly, two distinct questionnaires have been designed for NPR and 
Housing Census. The two questionnaires have only 2 questions in common - Name of the Head of the 
Household and Sex of the Head of the Household. The enumerators appointed to carry out the 
enumeration have also been appointed under appropriate sections of both the Acts namely, Section 
4(2) of the Census Act 1948 and Rule 5 of the Citi zenship (Registration and Issue of National Identity 
Cards) Rules, 2003. Instructions manual for the two are separate and separate honorarium is being 
given for the two exercises. Only the infrastructure of the Census is being used for NPR. In all other 
respects, the NPR is a distinct exercise. In othe r words, the NPR exercise is piggybacking on the 
Census exercise. 

2.20.3  The Committee has rightly pointed out that the information gathered for Housing Census under 
the Census Act, 1948 is kept confidential. The Housing Census questionnaire carries a legend 
“Confidential when Filled”. The NPR Questionnaire do es not carry this legend. In fact, data collected 
under NPR will be published in the local areas during the process of authentication. 
2.20.4  Thus all efforts have been made to keep the two exercises separate and maintain the sanctity of 
both. 
2.21 HOUSING SCHEMES FOR DELHI POLICE 
Recommendation 
2.21.1  The Committee feels that on the one hand Delhi Police faces scarcity of housing for its 
personnel and on the other the funds allocated, particularly non-plan allocation, are not spent fully. 
During 2006-07 only a fraction was spent whereas in 2007-08 and 2008-09, more than 10 per cent 
could not be spent. For achieving physical targets, achieving financial targets is necessary. Delhi 
Police should take necessary steps to achieve financial targets.  (Para 7.7.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.21.2  The physical targets set under housing for Delhi Police were difficult to be met in the earlier 
years due to time taken in getting land from land owning agencies and in getting subsequent 
clearances from them as well as from other civic agen cies. Consequently, there had been difficulty in 
meeting the financial targets as well. 
2.21.3  Delhi Police has now set the physical targets more realistically. Out of 15 projects targeted to 
be completed till 31.03.2010, 12 projects for construction of 469 staff quarters and 15 office buildings 
(5 PS, 3 PP, 1 EOW building and 6 buildings of office block/barracks/MT Block) had been completed. 
The expenditure on this account was Rs.94.00 crore out of an allocation of Rs.121.00 crore under both 
Plan and Non-Plan. Remaining 3 projects for construction of 104 staff quarters, 3 PS and 1 Office 
building have been completed by 30.06.2010. 
2.21.4  Target for completion of 23 staff quarters has been set in Action Plan 2010-11 of the Ministry 
in addition to targets for completion for clearance formalities and floating of tender for other projects. 
The physical and financial progress of these projects, are closely monitored through a Project 
Monitoring Committee set up in the Ministry under Ad ditional Secretary (UT). 7 meetings have been 
held so far on 23.10.2009, 06.11.2009, 24.11.2009, 23.12.2009, 26.02.2010, 07.05.2010 and 
23.06.2010. Delhi Police had also taken up similar action by holding monitoring meetings with all 
land-owning/civic agencies and executing agencies. 
Recommendation 
2.21.5  The Committee feels that for achieving 40 per cent satisfaction level, present allocations both 
Plan and Non~Plan - are not sufficient. Government should therefore assess the total requirement of 
funds. Allocations should be increased to enable  Delhi Police to achieve desired satisfaction within 
the next five years.    (Para 7.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 

2.21.6  The observation of the Committee has been noted. The actual requirement of funds of Delhi 
Police is assessed each year at the finalization of th e RE of the current year  and the next year BE. 
DP’s projections based on the stages of each project and new projects to be taken up are examined and 
proposed to the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. 
Recommendation 
2.21.7  The Committee does not understand why Delhi Police makes such a target which cannot be 
achieved. During tenth plan 40% satisfaction le vel was proposed and only 22.91% was achieved. 
Again 40% is being proposed for Eleventh Plan. This is not a right approach. Delhi Police should try 
to keep realistic targets only.    
Action Taken 
2.21.8  Target was to achieve higher satisfaction level in Tenth Five Year Plan period as well as 
Eleventh Five Year Plan period but due to a sign ificant increase in sanctioned strength of Delhi Police 
personnel from 64,645 in March 2007 to 83,740 the satisfaction level of housing could not increase as 
targeted. In addition, there are other factors also as mentioned below due to which the targeted 
housing satisfaction level has not been achieved :–– 
(i) Delay in allotment of land by land owning agencies.  
(ii) Delay in clearance of building plans by  local bodies like DDA, MCD, NDMC, Delhi 
Fire Service & DUAC etc. in time. 
(iii) Non completion of constructions by the executing agencies in time in certain cases. 
(iv) Non allotment of ready built flats by DDA. 
2.21.9  Delhi Police, however, has been advised to set the physical targets realistically raking into 
account the above factors. 
Recommendation 
2.21.10  The Committee desires that the pitfalls of the Tenth Plan have to be avoided and the physical 
targets fixed for the Eleventh Five-Year Plan should be achieved. Clearance of proposals and 
clearance for lands may be taken up at the highest level so that these areas do not act as impediments 
for the achievement of targets.   
Action Taken 
2.21.11  The matter was continuously pursued with land owning agencies for allotment of land for 
construction of Residential Buildings and purchase of ready built flats. So as to achieve the physical 
targets fixed for Eleventh Five Year Plan period, the MHA has constituted a Project Monitoring 
Committee (PMC) under the Chairpersonship of AS(UT). The PMC has fixed targets with regard to 
obtaining mandatory clearances from civic bodies, finalization of tender documents by the Executing 
Agencies and completion of the projects under Plan Head as well as Non Plan Head (PMS) during 
Current Financial Year 2010-11 in consultation with all the concerned agencies in its monthly 
meeting. Wherever necessary, the issues requiring attentio n are also taken up at the level of HS/HM. 
Delhi Police is also holding fortnightly meetings with Executing Agencies and civic bodies to 
review/monitor the progress of Delhi Police projects included in Action Plan 2010-11. 
Recommendation 

2.21.12   All the projects, which are under way in both Plan and Non-Plan Schemes, may be 
completed as per the targets and there should not be any cost and time over-runs. (Para 7.7.10 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.21.13   An Annual Action Plan-2010-11 covering projects of Plan Head and Non Plan Head (PMS) 
has been drawn in consultation with the executi ng agencies and the civic bodies wherein a time 
schedule has been fixed with regard to obtaining mandatory clearances from civic bodies, finalization 
of tender documents by executing Agencies and completion of projects during 2010-11. The progress 
of each project is closely monitored through the Project Monitoring Committee set up in MHA under 
the Chairpersonship of AS(UT). It has been impressed upon all concerned to achieve the given targets 
to avoid cost and time over runs. 
Recommendation 
2.21.14  The Committee was given to understand that one of the reasons for the shortfall in the 
housing project was non-completion of construction by PWD in time. The Committee takes strong 
exception to this. If PWD does not improve its perf ormance, Delhi Police may go in for construction 
by other public sector undertakings.   
Action Taken 
2.21.15  Delhi Police after seeking prior approval of MHA, has handed over the construction work of 
27 Projects to PSUs (22 Projects to M/s RITES and 05 Projects to M/s HPL). The time frame has been 
fixed for completion of each project. In case of delay at any stage, a suitable penalty clause has also 
been included in the agreement so signed with the concerned PSUs. The progress of existing projects 
being executed by PWD are closely monitored through the PMC set up in MHA under AS(UT). The 
PMC meetings are attended by repr esentatives of PWD. In addition to regular meetings of PMC, a 
separate meeting was held with Secretary, PWD, GNCTD on 06.11.2009 to discuss exclusively the 
projects being implemented by PWD. 
2.22 HOUSING SCHEME FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES 
Recommendation 
2.22.1  The Committee taking note of the findings of the BPR&D study feels that the Scheme is 
beneficial and recommends that it should be continued. (Para 7.17.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.22.2   A Plan Scheme of construction of residential buildings for the CPMFs is already under 
implementation under which houses are constr ucted by CPWD, NBCC and other Public Works 
Organizations. This existing scheme of Residential Buildings (Plan) is continuing. 
Recommendation 
2.22.3   The CPFs are facing the problem of land acquisition for construction of houses. The 
responsibility of acquiring land lies with the State Governments and a lot of time is taken for 
completing the acquisition process. This area needs to be addressed. The Committee desires that the 
Home Secretary may address the Chief Secretaries of all the State Governments about the necessity of 
early clearances for the land acquisition. 

(Para 7.17.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.22.4   Land acquisition for CPMF as per their Key Location Plan are being pursued aggressively on 
case-to-case basis. This issue is addressed at appropriate level with the State Government as and when 
there is problem in acquiring lands. 
Recommendation 
2.22.5  The construction of houses for CPFs also suffers due to problems of capacity utilization of the 
implementing agencies. The Committee therefore suggests that besides CPWD, more and more public 
sector agencies may be considered for executing the projects. (Para 7.17.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.22.6  Works are being assigned to Public Works Organizations other than CPWD in consultation 
with Ministry of Urban Development and at number of places the works has been given to the 
agencies like National Building Construction Corporation and other Public Works Organizations. 
Recommendation 
2.22.7  A well approach coordinated is needed amongst various agencies so that the regulatory and 
logistic requirements are met well before the projects are given a go-ahead and that the projects do 
not get stuck at the implementation stage due to procedural hurdles. Clearances from local bodies 
through an institutionalized mechanism, with all-round support from the clearance agencies should be 
done on fast track basis. 
(Para 7.17.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.22.8 To address this issue. Works Review Meeting at regular intervals are held along with the Nodal 
Officers of the CPMFs so that proj ects do not get stuck of the implementation stage. The problems 
faced by CPMFs for clearance from lo cal bodies are also discussed and in case of any difficulties, the 
issues are addressed at the appropriate level with the agencies/officials concerned in States. There are 
certain construction / land acquisition related issues  which are also incorporated in the Action Plan 
formulated by Ministry of Home Affairs and are re viewed periodically by the Divisional Heads and 
also at highest level. The items/issues which are in Action Plan are taken up with the concerned 
agencies/ officials regularly so as to meet the deadlines/ timelines fixed for such items. Hence, the 
requisite mechanism is already available in the Mini stry to ensure the disposal of proposals on fast 
track basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
3.1 MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE FORCE (MPF) 
3.1.1 The Committee is unhappy to note that there is no Management Information System (MIS) for 
proper monitoring and concurrent evaluation of the Scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces. Now 
that the CMC has offered to develop the software on the lines of MISs done for the other centrally 
sponsored programmes of the Government of India, the Ministry should take immediate steps to firm 
up the project so that a scientific monitoring mechanism of the scheme is in place at the earliest. 
(Para 3.1.11 of 144th Report) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 The CMC Ltd. was selected for the job to develop a Management Information System (MIS) 
for monitoring implementation of MPF Scheme. It has submitted a technical proposal to Ministry of 
Home Affairs in which it has projected a high cost for developing the software. Further, it has sought 
12 months time from the date of entrustment of the job to complete the project. Hence, the Ministry is 
exploring an alternative to develop a less costly similar to the requirement of the PM Division and 
user friendly MIS software like the one developed by Department of Land Resources and in lesser 
time. 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.3 The Committee expresses its disappointment over the inordinate delay in finalizing the 
software. It is unfortunate that the Ministry is  still exploring the alternative to develop a less-
costly MIS software. The Committe e calls upon the Ministry to ta ke immediate decision in the 
matter. The Committee however would like to discuss with the officers of the Ministry later. 
3.2 MODERNIZATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION 
Recommendation 
3.2.1 T he Committee in its One Hundred and Forty Second Report on Implementation of Central 
Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration, made a detailed study of the same and made 
several recommendations for prison infrastructure and correctional administration. The Ministry of 
Home Affairs in its Action Taken Notes stated that the Committee’s recommendations, had been 
forwarded to the State/UT Governments for due compliance and the experience gained during the first 
phase of the implementation of the scheme would be duly utilized in its second phase. The Committee 
found the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry evasive and incomplete and asked the Ministry to furnish 
concrete Action Taken Notes on its recommendations after due consultation with the States/UT 
Governments. While proper Action Taken Notes of the Ministry are still awaited, the Committee is 
surprised to note that the Government has decided to defer the second phase of the scheme while the 
jails in the country, needs immediate modernizat ion. However, the Committee would make detailed 
recommendations on the subject in its Action Taken Report (ATR) after receiving proper Action Taken 
Notes from the Ministry of Home Affairs in the matter. In the meanwhile, the Committee would like the 
Government to reconsider the decision to defer the second phase of the scheme. 

(Para 3.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 On the recommendations of the Committee, an Action Taken Note was sent to Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat on 22.07.2009. Since most of the recommendations were related to the States/UTs, 
respective Governments were requested for taking necessary action and furnishing compliance report 
on the recommendations. On the basis of compliance report received from some of the States/UTs, an 
additional ATR has been sent on 19.04.2010 to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat. The remaining State/UT 
Governments have been asked to furnish the compliance report. 
3.2.3 On the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on modernization of 
prisons and also in view of the demands of State Governments, a proposal for second phase of the 
scheme of modernization of prisons was prepared by  the Ministry of Home Affairs. The proposal was 
placed before the Committee of Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) in Ministry of Finance. It was, however, 
decided that the phase-II of the scheme be deferre d for the time being owing to heavy commitment of 
Government of India on other important sectors. 
3.2.4 The matter was reconsidered in this Ministry  and it has been decided to close the scheme. 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.5 The Committee is constrained to note that the important scheme for modernizing prisons 
in the country is not being given the importance it deserves. It is unfortunate that Government 
has decided to close the scheme. From the point of view of improving the facilities in the prisons, 
it is necessary to have such a scheme as States  will not be implementing such a scheme on their 
own. The Committee desires that Government may reconsider its decision and inform it of its 
decision. 
3.3 BUREAU OF POLICE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (BPR&D) 
Recommendation 
3.3.1 BPR&D is the premier police research organization which has the pivotal responsibility of 
monitoring the training needs and quality of training in States. However, the Committee expresses its 
displeasure over the fact that out of Rs. 20 crore allocation, only Rs. 2.25 crore could be spent during 
the year 2009-10. Though the Ministry has tried to explain the reasons the Committee is not convinced 
with those explanations. The Committee theref ore strongly recommends that the “Training 
Intervention” scheme be implemented without further procrastination. The Committee also 
recommends that the projects relating to BP R&D headquarters, Central Detective Training Schools 
at Gandhinagar and Lucknow and Central Academy for Police Training (CAPT), Bhopal should be 
completed as per the current targets. Being the premier police research organization, BPR&D needs 
more staff. The additional posts recently sanctioned should be filled up without delay. 
(Para 3.13. 7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 Scheme-I:
 Training Intervention 
(i) The workbook/Educati ve material has been developed under ‘Training Intervention’ and 
will be published during the current financial year 2010-11. 

(ii) The experts/agencies ar e being Identified to assign the consultancy work. The 
Expression of Interest for various sub-schemes under ‘Training Intervention’ is being 
drafted. It is expected that budget provision made for the year 2010-11, will be utilized 
fully. 
3.3.3 Scheme-II: Constructions of building of BPR&D HQ. 
 The acquisition of land from DDA was initially  completed during June, 2009. Before the 
process for construction of building through National Building Construction Company (NBCC) began 
the land allotted to BPR&D at Mahipalpur had be readjusted due to its northern connectivity - under 
pass from Airport Authority. The DDA vide their letter dated 23.10.2009 had readjusted land for 
BPR&D to take possession of the land after its demarcation. Subsequently, in a meeting held during 
December, 2009, the proposed underpass from Airport Authority in the readjusted land of BPR&D 
has been dropped. 
 The land measuring 3.063 hectare has been restored to BPR&D in March, 2010. However, the 
MHA has now decided to share the land with the NCRB. 
 The MoU has been signed between BPR&D and NCBB on 6th May, 2010. 
3.3.4 Scheme-III: Central Academy for Police Training (CAPT), Bhopal: 
 The CPWD, Bhopal has already invited pre-qua lification bids for architectural work of the 
proposed construction of building in the first week of May, 2010 and under scrutiny by them. 
 Chief Engineer, CPWD, Bhopal has again been requested on 31.03.2010 to expedite the ‘time 
line action plan’. He has promised to send the same shortly. 
3.3.5 Scheme-IV:
 Research Projects: 
Rs. 10 Crore has been sanctioned for Research and Development Projects under Eleventh Five Year 
Plan Schemes. Out of Rs.1,26,83,742, an amount of Rs.93.23 lakh, was utilized during the year 2010-
11. For utilizing remaining funds, seven subjects identified by the MHA and 37 proposals received so 
far. The proposals are being processed for taking the approval of Sub-Group (Finance) on Standing 
Committee on Police Research. 
The MHA has cleared the reconstitution of Sub- Group (Finance) on Standing Committee on Police 
Research only in the month of April, 2010. The matter is being taken up with the Sub-Group for 
approval. 
The MHA has sanctioned 101 new posts for strengthening of Technology Development Division and 
setting up of National Police Mission Divisions in BPR&D. 
Most of the new posts sanctioned to BPR&D in 2009 and 2010 do not have Recruitment Rules or 
having different scale of pay from the posts alread y existing in BPR&D. Ther efore, action is being 
taken up to: 
(i) To frame the recruitment rules for the new sanctioned posts; and 
(ii) To upgrade the scale of pay of the old similar posts to having parity in the same 
organization. 
Further Recommendation 

3.3.6 The Committee is constrained to note that the construction of building of BPR&D is 
taking unduly a long time due to various reasons. The land was given to BPR&D only in 
March,2010. The construction may be taken up and completed immediately. There should not 
be any further delay in the process. The Committee may be informed of the status of the Central 
Academy for Police Training, Bhopal. The Minist ry may take immediate steps to finalise the 
recruitment rules because filling up of the posts is very essent ial for taking up the research 
projects in BPR&D.  
3.4 ALLOCATION OF BADP AND HADP 
Recommendation 
3.4.1 The Committee is of the view that Government should finally arrive at a decision without 
further delay, with regard to the allocation of BADP and HADP which has remained unresolved 
between Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of DoNER, for better implementation of the schemes. 
(Para 3.15.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 The work relating to the Border Area Development Programme (BADP) has been shown  
under two Ministries viz. Department of Border Management in Ministry of Home Affairs (excluding 
North Eastern States) & Ministry of DoNER (BADP in North-Eastern Region). 
3.4.3 The Planning Commission desired that the work relating to BADP should be handled by the 
MHA in respect of all the border States including NE States, in view of its reach to borders and 
presence of its manpower (BGFs) and capacity to supervise the works in border areas. 
3.4.4 It was felt that the implementation of BADP by two different Ministries may not be desirable 
for its effective implementation. From practical and administrative point of view also, it would be 
desirable that one Ministry/Department handles BADP . Multiplicity of agencies in handling BADP 
would adversely affect the implementation of the programme. 
3.4.5 Keeping in view the above, Cabinet Secret ariat was requested to amend the Allocation of 
Business Rules in this regard, who in turn advised that MHA may send a proposal after obtaining the 
approval of the Minister in-charge of Ministry of DoNER and Ministry of Defence. While Ministry of 
Defence has given its consent, Ministry of DoNER has to take a final view on it. The matter is still 
under discussion with Ministry of DoNER. 
3.4.6 Home Secretary has written a letter to Cabi net Secretary in this regard requesting him to 
convene a meeting between Home Secretary and Secretary, M/o DoNER so that the matter is resolved 
at the earliest. 
Further Recommendation 
3.4.7 The Committee is not happy with the way the d ecision is being delayed. This delay will 
only hamper the better implementation of the critical programmes. The Committee desires that 
a quick decision may be taken in the matter. 
3.5 NAXALISM 
Recommendation 

3.5.1 Lack of healthcare in the naxal-affected areas is another basic issue that leads to 
dissatisfaction among the people. Special packages are required to be formulated for 
providing healthcare for the people in the affected areas, both under the existing schemes as 
well as new schemes. New primary health centres  and sub-centres need to be opened and it 
should be made compulsory for the new doctors to serve in those areas by giving some 
incentives to them. Similarly, in some selected places, bigger hospitals are also required to be 
opened with all the facilities, including major specialities. Special efforts are needed to be 
made for health care of women and children. The Government should also explore 
strengthening ‘Anganwadis’ in all those areas with special packages.  
(Para 4.10.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.5.2 The Government has identified 34 Left Wing Ex tremist affected districts in eight States for 
focused attention. 
3.5.3 To address the issue of lack of healthcare in the naxal affected areas that leads to 
dissatisfaction among the people, many interventions have been initiated under the National Rural 
Health Mission in the financial year 2010-11. 
3.5.4 Lack of Human Resources being an important issue special packages have been formulated for 
providing healthcare to the people in the affected areas by addressing the issue in varied ways. 
Monetary Incentives for Difficult Areas are being given to specialists, contractual and regular Medical 
officers, Staff Nurses and ANMs. 
3.5.5 Apart from salary incentive s, performance incentives and Awards have been introduced in 
some of the States. Non monetary incentives such as preferential postings for MOs have also been 
devised by several States to address the HR issue. 
3.5.6 Mandatory Postings & PG Linkages for MOs su ch as Preference for PG for 5 years service in 
tribal/difficult area are in place to address the shortage of doctors in difficult areas. 
3.5.7 It is an important mandate of NRHM to ensure availability of health infrastructure like PHCs 
and Sub centres to provide services in the back ward High Focus LWE districts. The States were 
persuaded to substantially increase fund allocation to the high focus districts. This has been ensured in 
PIP of 2010-11 resulting in an increase of allocati on in the LWE district from Rs.271.85 crore to 
Rs.554.61 crore. In 2010-11 (an increase of almost 100% over last year’s allocation). Decentralized 
planning being the cornerstone of NRHM, district s have been allocated these funds as per their 
requirements for improving healthcare services, most important of them being infrastructure 
strengthening. 
3.5.8 Planning Commission is also regularly monitoring the progress under various parameters in the 
LWE districts. 
3.5.9 In the 35 (34 focus district and West Medi nipur district) Naxal affected Districts, a total 
number of 347 ICDS Projects and 66610 Anganwadi Centres have been sanctioned by the 
Government of India. Of these, a total of 62807 AWCs are fully operational. Currently, a total of 
4143854 children, in the age group of 6 months to 6 years, are receiving Supplementary Nutrition 

under this Programme. A total of 968465 P&L Mothers are also currently availing services under the 
lCDS Programme in these Districts. 
3.5.10  More recently, the Government of India have enhanced the financial norms for Supplementary 
Nutrition and also revised the Feeding & Nutritional norms of SNP. Rates have been revised to Rs. 4/-
, Rs.6/- and Rs.5/- per beneficiary, per day, fo r children (6 months to 6 years) and P&L Women 
respectively. Under the revised Feeding & Nutritional norms, children coming to AWC, are now 
provided a Hot Cooked Meal in addition to morning snack. 
Further Recommendation 
3.5.11  The Committee is unhappy to note that the Government has not indicated anything 
relating to opening of bigger hospitals in some selected places of LWE areas. The Government 
may give special consideration for this. 
Recommendation 
3.5.12  The Committee feels that the incidents of jail break and attack on police establishments are 
direct challenges to the authority of the State and if the jails and other law enforcement mechanisms 
are prone to naxalite attack, then nothing can be treated as secure and safe. The Committee 
recommends that the Central Government, in close and active coordination with naxal-affected State 
Governments should review and strengthen the security of sensitive jails, especially where naxalites 
or activists are lodged, to preven t recurrence of such incidents in future. The Committee understands 
that the incidents of attacks and jail breaks re flect the inadequacies of intelligence agencies. 
Therefore, intelligence network in the naxal-affected areas should therefore be strengthened.        (Para 4.10.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.5.13  “Prisons” is a State subject under List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and 
Prison Administration is the responsibility of the State Governments. However, in order to avoid the 
incident of jail break and to strengthen security arrangements in jail, various advisories have been 
issued to all States/UTs. 
Further Recommendation 
3.5.14  The reply of the Government is casual a nd the recommendations of the Committee have 
been taken lightly. The Central Government should  review the security a rrangements in all the 
jails situated in LWE districts and ensure that the State Governments make necessary security 
arrangements therein. The Committee reiterates its recommendation for in creasing intelligence 
network in the naxal-affected areas. 
3.6 MEDICAL FACILITY FOR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EXPLOYEES AND OTHER 
MIDDLE 
 CLASS PEOPLE  
Recommendation 
3.6.1 In this context, the Committee would like to highlight another area affecting day to day lives of 
Islanders. In case of serious medical emergency for which a person has to be urgently evacuated to 
the nearby city in the mainland for treatment, there appears to be no arrangements for air ambulance 
or dedicated helicopter service. The Committee is of the view that this is a critical area which the 

Ministry of Home Affairs needs to urgently look into so that the facility of air ambulance is put in 
place and allocate fund to UT Administration for procurement of an air ambulance or dedicated 
helicopter. (Para 5.3.3 ibid)  
Action Taken 
3.6.2 Serious patients of far flung islands are evacuated by Helicopter to Port Blair on the basis of 
the recommendations sent by the respective Medica l officers. Patients in critical conditions are 
airlifted by defence helicopter/ courier flights and/or our Helicopter depending upon their condition 
and parameters. A&N Administration has 3 helicopters at present. Helicopters are not suitable for 
evacuation from Islands to mainland because of long distance involved. 
3.6.3 In view of the large financial implications , feasibility and viability of introduction of air 
ambulance is to be studied by A&N Administration. Meanwhile airlines are being requested to spare 6 
(six) seats at concessional rates for patients. Also  Indian Air Force has be en requested to support 
emergency air evacuation of serious patients to mainland, which they have agreed subject to 
availability. 
Further Recommendation 
3.6.4 In view of the scant medical facility available in the islands and a large number of people 
living there, emergency air lifting of  patients in critical condition is necessary. If the helicopters 
are not suitable for evacuation to mainland, Government should take a decision on introducing 
air ambulance. Air ambulance needs to be considered from the point of view  of the residents of 
the islands rather than on commercial basis. Ho wever, once the super-specialty facilities are 
available in the islands, withdrawal of air ambulance can be considered. 
3.7 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendation 
3.7.1 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
There are many crocodile infested rivers, canal, and creeks which people have to cross to go to their 
villages. These villages viz. Ramnagar, Sitanagar Radhanagar, Nischintpur, Kalighat are 40-50 years 
old. Funds should be provided for construction of bridges in these areas. [Para 5.5. 1 (xvii) ibid]  
Action Taken 
3.7.2 Roads & Bridges sector in rural areas have been devolved to Panchayati Raj Institutions. The 
following bridges were included in the Annual Plan 2009-10 : 
Sitanagar :
 
1.  C/o Steel bridge of 20 mtrs length on Khosla Tigga Nallah. 
2.  C/o RCC bridge at Sita Nagar ward No.7 
Ramnagar : 
1.  C/o bridge near K K Baidy’s house (span 20.0 mtrs at ward No.06) 
2.  C/o RCC bridge near Shri A Sammender’s house for a length of 30.0 mtrs. 

Kalighat :   Renovation of existing timber bridges into RCC bridges in between Kalighat and 
Nischintapur had been entrusted to ALHW as deposit work by the Zilla Parishad. This was held up 
due to non-availability of forest land and of approach road. Due to slow progress, Zilla. Parishad, 
North & Middle Andaman has taken back Rs.1.26 crore from AHW and diverted the money for rural 
roads. It is for PRIs/Zilla Parishad to decide about priority for such works. 
Further Recommendation 
3.7.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry. The Ministry should 
have indicated the status of the proposals as  in 2010. The Committee desires that an early 
decision may be taken to complete the bridges at the earliest. 
Recommendation 
3.7.4 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
There are many old villages viz. Soal Bay, Flat  Bay, Kalsi, Shyam Kunj, etc. which have no road 
connectivity. Rural roads in these villages should be constructed for providing road connectivity. 
[Para 5.5. 1 (xix) ibid] 
Action Taken 
3.7.5 UT Administration has given following status report : 
Flat Bay Village : Forest Clearance has to be obtained by Zilla Parishad. 
Kalsi Village : C/o Rural Road for a length of 600 mtrs is in progress and balance road has to be taken 
up after the clearance for use of forest land. Projec t is being implemented by Zilla Parishad, North & 
Middle Andaman. 
Shyam Kund : Work not yet taken up by Zilla Parish ad due to fund constraint. 
Shoal Bay :  As per demands of villagers of Shoal Bay in Gram Sabha meeting, EIA study for work 
has been taken up by APWD. 
Detailed network plan of Rural Roads, Block-wise, District-wise and for the entire UT is under 
preparation for seeking funds under PMGSY. 
Further Recommendation 
3.7.6  The Committee is not satisfied with the slow  pace of the work and desires that action 
may be taken for early completion of road construc tion in all the villages . As already stated in 
the Action Taken Note, the funds under PMGSY may be sought after preparing the necessary 
network plan. 
3.8 URBAN WATER SUPPLY SCHEME 
Recommendation 
3.8.1 The Committee desires that the scheme proposed by Silvasa Municipal Council may be cleared 
at the earliest by the Ministry of Urban Devel opment. The Committee hopes that ‘The Integrated 

Water Management Plan’ for the whole of the Union Territory would soon be put in place as a long 
term solution for the depleting water resources. (Para 5.10.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.8.2 The Augmentation of the Urban Water Supply Scheme for Silvassa was approved under the 
UIDSSMT in March 2007 with a Central Financial Assistance of Rs.14.92 crore. However due to non-
release of adequate funds, the implementation of the project got delayed. As on date, adequate funds 
have been released and the proposal for obtaining Expenditute Sanction was forwarded to the Ministry 
of Urban Development vide letter dated 25.01.2010. However the Ministry of Urban Development is 
yet to conduct the Standing Finance Committee meeting and approve the Expenditure Sanction for the 
project. A clarification on the S.F.C. issue was also sent to the Ministry of Urban Development, GOI 
vide letter dated 28.04.2010. The Administrator, DD & DNH has also sent a D.O. letter dated 
05.05.2010 to expedite the expenditure sanction of the project. 
3.8.3 This issue was discussed with Joint Secretary (UD) and Director (UD) on 10th June 2010. UT 
Administration has complied with the comments of the CPHEEO and has communicated the same to 
them vide letter dated 11.06.2010. 
3.8.4 Thus the proposal for conducting SFC Meeting is pending in the Ministry of Urban 
Development, GOL. Once the SFC meeting is conducted and expenditure sanction is accorded by the 
Ministry of Urban Development, GOI, further necessary action will be taken by the Silvassa 
Municipal Council in a time bound manner. 
3.8.5 So far as the Integrated Water Management Plan is concerned, the status is as follows:
 
¾ The consultants have already completed the surveys and investigations and have also 
collected all the required data from various sources. The Consultants have analyzed the 
data and have figured out the present need and the future demand. A preliminary design 
has also been worked out and the final project report has been submitted. 
¾ The consultant submitted the project report to the Silvassa Industries Association and the 
same has been scrutinized by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Planning and Development 
Authority. A proposal to will now be sent by UT Administration to the MHA, Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for allocating adequate budget for 
implementing the project. 
3.8.6 This project was also discussed in the Working Group Meeting of the Planning Commission 
held on 8th June, 2010 and the Planning Commission has tentatively allotted an amount of Rs.2.00 
crore in the 2010-11 Budget. 
Further Recommendation 
3.8.7 The Committee feels that the proposal for augmentation of water supply scheme for 
Silvassa, though approved in 2007 , is yet to see the light of the day. It is taking an unduly long 
time. The Committee desires that an early decision may be taken to complete the projects. 
3.9 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIDNS 
Recommendation 

3.9.1 Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: One 
of the main reasons affecting the economic development of D&D is the existing Coastal 
Regulation Zone Notification, 1991, which is very restrictive in nature. As 57% of land is 
covered under Coastal Regulation Zone, this notification has affected the livelihood of the 
fishermen communities including construction of their dwelling units apart from affecting the 
development of coastal tourism. The Committee understands that the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests is in the process of amending the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991 and 
trying to make a region specific notification on the lines of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
Committee Report. Necessary steps are required to be taken for removing the restrictions in 
the existing Coastal Regulation Zone for the promotion of tourism sector.  
[Para 5.16.1 (ii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
3.9.2 The Government of India in the year 1991 issued a notification under the Environment 
Protection Act, 1986 declaring Coastal Regulation  Zone in the coastal areas. Accordingly the 
Administration of Daman & Diu had notified the Coastal Zone Management Plans in the year 1996 
for Daman & Diu giving the details of boundaries of applicability of the CRZ in the Districts of 
Daman & Diu. The development activities are regulat ed in these CRZ areas as per the norms set out 
by the notification of CRZ issued in 1991, its su bsequent amendments and also as per the Coastal 
Zone Management Plan of Daman & Diu. 
3.9.3 The issue regarding change in Coastal Re gulation Zone of the extended part of the 
municipality in Moti Daman was discussed in the 14th Meeting of Daman, Diu Coastal Zone 
Management Authority held on 21.11.2005 and it was decided that a proposal for change of CRZ 
zonation from CRZ III to CRZ II for the area from south of Damanganga Ri ver upto Dholar Char 
Rasta will be submitted to National Coastal Zone Management Authority (NCZMA). Accordingly, the 
said proposal was submitted to NCZMA and the NCZMA approved the said proposal subject to 
furnishing of documentary proof indicating the map of development of the area. The map of the area 
as provided by the Daman Municipal Council has since been submitted to NCZMA. The final 
approval of NCZMA in this regard is awaited. 
3.9.4 The matter regarding the change of Coastal Regulation Zone in Diu District was discussed in 
the 13th Meeting of DDCZMA held on 24.08.2005 and it was decided that the Coastal Zone 
Management Plan of Diu District be amended so that the areas in Diu town within Diu Municipal 
Limit are classified as CRZ II. Accordingly th e proposal for amendment of the Coastal Zone 
Management Plan of Diu district was submitted to NCZMA and the NCZMA had asked for certain 
clarifications/information on the issue and the same has also been submitted to NCZMA. The final 
approval of the NCZMA in this regard is awaited. 
3.9.5 The Ministry of Environment and Forest which is the competent authority to carry out analysis 
of the CRZ Regulation is in the process of revising the CRZ Notification of the 1991 in line with the 
recommendation of the expert committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S. 
Swaminathan. 

Further Recommendation 
3.9.6 The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that though coastal regulation zone in Diu 
District was discussed in the meeting of DDC ZMA on 24.08.2005, the final approval for 
NCZMA is still awaited. Such unnecessary delays do not augur well for the development of the 
country. The Committee desires that all steps may be-taken for an early approval of the change 
of coastal regulation zone in Diu District. 
Recommendation 
3.9.7 Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
The UT Administration had proposed construction of New bridges between ..Nani Daman and Moti 
Daman and between Diu and mainland Gujarat. A few of the projects have been technically approved 
by the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways in June 2009 but the same have not seen 
the light of the day. Their financial approval is pending in the MHA. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs should expedite the a pproval so that the long pending demands of both 
Daman and Diu are taken care of at the earliest. [Para 5.16. 1 (iii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
3.9.8 The status of various proposed bridges in Daman & Diu is as follows: 
(1)   Aari Causeway:
 
N a m e  o f  W o r k  : Construction of Bridge with approaches across Damanganga River connecting 
Kachigam on Nani Daman side and Zari on Moti Daman in U.T. of Daman. 
- Estimated Cost of Project Rs.22.43 crore 
3.9.9 The above work was entrusted to the Chief Engineer (R&B) National Highway, Govt. of 
Gujarat. The Chief Engineer (R&B ) National Highway had appointed M/s. Saladia Associate (SAI 
Engineers Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad) who had prepared the complete project indicating three alternative 
possible sites for construction of Bridge. The M.O.S.R.T & H, New Delhi has approved the final 
alignment and accordingly the U.T. Administration of Daman & Diu has requested the Govt. of 
Gujarat to prepare the detailed Plans, Estimate and Drawings and to submit the same for obtaining 
necessary Technical approval from the Ministry of Shipping, Road Tran sport & Highways, New 
Delhi. The Govt. of Gujarat has submitted the detail Plan & Estimate costing Rs.l3.48 Crore which 
was submitted by U.T. Administration in April, 2008 to the Chief Engineer, MOSRT&H, New Delhi 
for obtaining Technical Sanction and Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction from the 
competent authority. 
3.9.10  The MOSRT &H approved preliminary project report with certain observations and requested 
UT Administration to submit detailed project report to the Ministry after compliance of the 
observations. The Govt. of Gujarat prepared a Revised Project Report after complying with the 
observations of Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways and the same was submitted by the 
UT Administration to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways  vide  letter dated 
10.08.2009. 

3.9.11  The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, Govt. of India, vide letter dated 21st 
May, 2010 raised some observations on the Detailed Project Report. The same were forwarded by UT 
Administration to Roads & Buildings Department Govt. of Gujarat vide letter dated 14.06.2010 for 
compliance .The Roads & Buildings Department, Govt. of Gujarat has once again been requested by 
UT Administration vide  letter dated 30.06.2010 for expediting the compliance of the observations 
raised by the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, Govt. of India. 
(2)   Patalia Bridge: 
Name of Work : Construction of Bridge with approaches across River Kolak connecting Daman to 
Udwada in U.T. of Daman. 
- Estimated Cost of Project Rs.6.61 crore 
3.9.12  The above work was entrusted as a deposit work of this U.T. Administration to the C.P.W.D. 
The Superintending Engineer (CPWD), Gandhinagar had appointed M/s STUP Consultant, 
Ahmedabad as a consultant for the project. The complete project report was prepared by M/s STUP 
Consultant and was submitted to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. The Ministry 
of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways had accorded Technical approval of the project. The above 
work was approved under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Inter State Connectivity. The Executive 
Engineer, C.P.W.D., Vadodara had tendered the work and tenders were submitted to M.O.S.R.T & H 
for its approval but due to delay in approval of the same from the M.O.S.R.T & H the lowest tenderer 
has refused to undertake the work of construction of the said Bridge at his quoted rate. 
3.9.13  Now the Chief Engineer, WZ-I, CPWD Mumbai has submitted a fresh preliminary estimate 
costing Rs.7.36 crore for the said work which was forwarded by the U.T. Administration vide letter 
dated 24.04.2008 to the Chief Engineer, MOSRT&H, New Delhi for obtaining Administrative 
Approval and Expenditure Sanction. UT Administration has submitted the revised cost estimate 
amounting to Rs.661.37 lakh to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways for approval vide 
letter dated 08.03.2010. 
(3)   Construction of bridge from Jampore, Moti Daman to Kalai village in Guiarat State Across Kalai 
River 
3.9.14  The proposed bridge will be across Kalai River connecting Jampore Village in Daman District 
and Kalai Village in Gujarat. The Kalai river is passing between the Southern end of Daman District 
and Gujarat State. 
3.9.15  A proposal for the said bridge has been forwarded to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & 
Highways, New Delhi for according, in principle, approval vide letter dated 15.04.2010. Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi vide letter dated 26.04.2010 has requested the UT 
Administration to submit the proposal in prescribed format. Proposal will accordingly be submitted by 
the UT Administration to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. 
(4)  Construction of bridge from Kadaiya Nani Daman to Kolak village in Guiarat State Across Kolak 
River 
3.9.16  The proposed Bridge across Kolak River will connect Kadaiya Village in Daman District and 
Kolak Village in Gujarat State. The Kolak river is passing between the Northern end of Daman 
District and Gujarat State. 

3.9.17  The proposal for construction of the said bridge has been forwarded by UT Administration to 
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi for according in principle approval 
vide letter dated 15.04.2010 under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of CRF(Inter State Connectivity). 
The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi vide letter dated 26.04.2010 
requested the UT Administration to submit the proposal in the prescribed format. Proposal will 
accordingly be submitted by the UT Administration to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & 
Highways. 
(5)  Construction of bridge from Mati Daman Light House to Nani Daman Jetty across Damanganga 
River 
3.9.18  The proposed bridge from Moti Daman Light House to Nani Daman Jetty across Damanganga 
River will connect Moti Daman and Nani Daman town area. The Beaches ne ar Light House at Moti 
Daman and Jetty at Nani Daman are major Tourist attractions. 
3.9.19  The proposal was forwarded by UT Administration to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport 
& Highways, New Delhi for according its “in principle” approval vide letter dated 15.04.2010 under 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of CRF. The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, 
New Delhi vide letter dated 26.04.2010 requested the UT Administration to submit the proposal in the 
prescribed format. Proposal will accordingly be subm itted by the UT Administration to Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. 
(6)  Construction of bridge from Magarwada Moti Daman to Kachigam. Nani Daman across 
Damanganga River 
3.9.20  There is a proposal to construct brid ge from Magarwada Moti Daman to Kachigam, Nani 
Daman across Damanganga River. 
3.9.21  The proposal for construction of the said  bridge proposal has been forwarded by UT 
Administration to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi for according, “in 
principle” approval vide letter dated 15.04.2010 under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of CRF. The 
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi vide letter dated 26.04.2010 has 
requested the UT Administration to submit the proposal in the prescribed format. Accordingly UT 
Administration will submit the proposal to Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways in the 
prescribed format. 
(7)  Diu Vanakbara- Kotda bridge: 
N a m e  o f  W o r k  : Construction of Vanakbara - Kotda bridge  with approaches across creek between 
Vanakbara in Diu District and Village Kotda of Junagada District. 
- Estimated Cost of Project Rs.63.75 crore 
3.9.22  The above work was approv ed by the Govt. of India and was entrusted to the National 
Highway Division, Rajkot P.W.D. Govt. of Gujarat. The National Highway Division, Rajkot had 
appointed M/s. Construma Consultancy Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai as a consultant for the project. The Govt. 
of Gujarat had requested U.T. Administration for depositing Rs.34.00 lakh towards consultancy 
charges for preparation of the complete project repor t. The said amount of Rs.34.00 lakh has already 
been deposited by UT Administration with the Govt. of Gujarat for preparing the detailed project 
report. The consultant has submitted four alternative alignments for the said Bridge. The final 

proposal has been submitted to MOSRT&H, New Delhi for according its approval vide letter dated 
03.03.2010. 
3.9.23  MOSRT&H, vide letter dated 15.06.2010 informed UT Administration that the above 
proposal is not included in the Inter State Connectivity Scheme. Further, Chief Engineer PWD, 
Daman has been requested to prepare the Estimate of above said work as per that Ministry’s circular 
No. NH-II011/1/2009-P&M (Pt.), dated 23.03.2010. Accordingly, the UT Administration has 
requested the Government of Gujarat vide letter dated 30.06.2010 for submission of the proposal as 
per the above referred letter of Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. 
3.9.24  From the details as given above, it is evid ent that no proposal of the UT Administration is 
pending in Ministry of Home Affairs. All the abovementioned proposals of the UT Administration 
have been/to be examined/approved by Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways being the 
subject matter Ministry.  
Further Recommendation 
3.9.25  The Committee feels that all the proposals indicated in the action taken note are at initial 
stages. The Committee desires that an early ac tion may be taken for getting the proposals 
approved so that the bridges proposed may be taken up without further delay. 
Recommendation 
3.9.26  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
The Committee has been apprised that the discharge of effluents (mostly untreated) from the chemical 
units in the GIDC Estate of Vapi into Daman Ganga River leads to contamination of the river and the 
polluted water flows through Daman emitting a lot of foul smell. Most of the potable water in Daman, 
which is ground water, gets contaminated due to seepage of the polluted water. Coastal marine life 
and tourist spots are adversely affected. The Committee feels that the problem needs to addressed 
urgently which if allowed to continue may lead to drop in revenue earning as the tourists have already 
started moving away from the coastal areas of D&D. [Para 5.16.1 (v) ibid] 
Action Taken 
3.9.27  The issue of pollution of Damanganga River due to discharge of effluents from industries in 
Vapi and CETP, Vapi was taken up by UT Administration in a meeting convened by Chairman, 
CPCB on 18.08.2009. 
3.9.28  Following decisions were taken in the meeting: 
(1) The two distilleries in Daman will either install zero discharge system (R.O + 
incineration of R.O. reject) by February, 2010 and in case the distilleries opt for a marine 
outfall for disposal of treated effluent into sea, the marine outfall for disposal of treated 
effluent will be commissioned within 4 months after receiving the report from NIO. 
(2) The treated effluents of CETP, Vapi and Gujarat Heavy Chemicals Ltd., (Textile 
Division) shall be disposed off into sea through closed pipeline which shall be 
commissioned latest by June 2010. 

3.9.29  Accordingly the twin distilleries were issued necessary direction by the PCC. The distilleries 
have opted for marine outfall and have given work order for conducting EIA study to determine the 
marine out fall point to the National Institute of Oceanography. The NIO had informed that the report 
will be submitted in the March end or first half of April, 2010. 
3.9.30  The industry vide letter dated 19.04.2010 has informed that NIO has suggested the point of 
discharge of treated effluent. The NIO has not yet submitted its final EIA report for which reminder 
has been issued to NIO by PCC on 25.05.2010. 
Further Recommendation 
3.9.31  The Committee expresses serious concern over the delay in regard to determining the 
marine out-fall point. The Committee desires that  the NIO should submit its report at the 
earliest if not submitted already. If the report is already submitted, necessary action may be 
taken thereon. 
Recommendation 
3.9.32  Besides the specific recommendations made in the previous paras, the Committee desires that 
the Government should also address the following problems of the UT of Daman & Diu: 
The Committee notes that both Daman and Diu depend on the Gujarat Government for water supply, 
which at present is not sufficient. Therefore, the Committee recommends that additional allocation 
from Madhuban Dam for Daman and Narmada Canal for Diu has to be considered at the earliest. 
[Para 5.16.1 (vi) ibid] 
Action Taken 
Water Supply in Daman District 
3.9.33   Daman District is situated at west coast of Arabian Sea and the ground water of this area is 
affected by salinity. The Damanganga river passing through this territory is also affected by the 
salinity and chemical pollution due the industrializati on of Vapi Industrial Area. There is no source of 
potable drinking water in Daman District. 
3.9.34  As per the agreement between the state of Gujarat and the U.T. of Daman & Diu, Daman is 
allocated, 23.50 MLD raw water, for drinking purpose  but the Daman District is receiving only 16.5 
MLD at present. 
3.9.35  The water is transported through the open canal of Damanganga Irrigation Project. Raw water 
for drinking purpose is received in water reservoirs located at Dabhel Treatment Plant and Magarwada 
Treatment Plant. It has been observed during the preceding years that due to frequent breaches in the 
canal, water does not reach the reservoirs in time, and as a result, the entire population of Daman 
District faces acute shortage of drinking wate r. Moreover, these canals are passing through the 
industrial zones of Vapi and Silva ssa. Factory workers of these indust ries clean up all kinds of bags 
and drums used for storing various chemicals in the water of the said open canal thereby 
contaminating the raw water. 
3.9.36  Further due to rapid increase in industrialization and the population, drinking water available 
at present is not sufficient. 

3.9.37  To overcome all these difficulties, the U.T. Administration has proposed drinking water 
supply scheme for Rural Areas of Daman by laying water supply pipeline from Madhuban Dam left 
canal to Dabhel Tank, Dunetha Tank and Bhim Talav at Mangarwada, Daman. The detailed project 
report amounting to Rs. 45.27 crore has been submitted to Ministry of Rural Development, GIO vide  
Letter dated 12.03.2010 for approval. 
3.9.38  As per letter dated 19.05.2010 received from the Ministry of Rural Development (DDWS), 
Govt. of India, a meeting of the UT Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee was held on 28.05.2010 in 
which the project for (1) Laying Water Supply pipelines from Madhuban Dam left bank canal to 
Dabhel Tank, Dunetha Tank and Bhim Talav at Magarwada, Daman at estimated cost of Rs.45.27 
crore and (2) Construction of 20 MLD Water Treatment Plant at Dunetha, Nani Daman at estimated 
cost of Rs.14.83 crore were approved in principl e by the Committee. In the next meeting of the 
Committee the approval of these water supply Projec ts/Schemes of Daman District will be taken up. 
Thereafter the detailed proposals will be submitted to the Department of Rural Drinking Water 
Supply, Ministry of Rural Development, GoI for conducting SFC meeting and granting administrative 
and expenditure sanction for the said projects. 
WATER SUPPLY IN DIU DISTRICT 
3.9.39  The Diu District is partly spread over an island with total geographical area of 39.5 Sq.km. 
and partly over the main land patches, adjacent to the border of the Gujarat. The sub strata of this land, 
is porous which receives an averag e annual rainfall of 24 inches per annum. With these geographical 
conditions, there is no source of fresh water bodies in the District, except few ground water wells in 
some areas with inadequate yield from July to December and thereafter, these wells either do not yield 
the water or the yield gets ingressed with salty water making it unfit for human consumption. The Diu 
District comes under the category of area with no source of water.  
3.9.40  Diu District is receiving raw water from Raval Dam, which is 45.00 km. away from Diu 
District through pipeline from Raval Dam to Diu Di strict under the resolu tion with the Irrigation 
Department, Government of Gujarat to avail 4.5 MLD water as U.T. share. But due to scarcity of 
water in Saurashtra Region of Gujarat State, Diu District receives only 2.5 MLD, average water, 
against its allocated share of 4.5 MLD. 
3.9.41  In order to overcome the scarcity of water in Diu District, the U.T. Administration approached 
the Government of Gujarat which is planning to lay a pipeline and bring the water to nearby area i.e. 
Una District (Gujarat State) which is 20 km. aw ay from Diu from Sardar Sa rovar Canal Project. The 
U.T. Administration requested Government of Gujarat as well as G.W.I.L. to spare about 22 MLD 
water for Diu District. It was agreed to by them to spare the said quantity of water in a phased manner. 
3.9.42  The Detailed Project Report costing Rs.31.65 crore has been submitted to the Ministry of 
Rural Development, GOI, vide letter dated 10.02.20 10 for according administrative and expenditure 
sanction for the said project. 
3.9.43  The meeting of the UT Level Sanctioning Committee was convened on 10.05.2010 and the 
said Project was approved by the Sanctioning Committee. Thereafter, Department of Drinking Water 
Supply, Ministry of Rural Development, GOI, has been requested by UT Administration for 

conducting the SFC meeting and according the administrative and expenditure sanction for the said 
project. 
Further Recommendation 
3.9.44  The Committee is constrained to note that in spite of the serious wa ter problem in both 
the districts of Daman & Diu, the efforts to provide water are still at an early stage. The 
Committee desires that the UT may submit the de tailed proposal for water supply scheme for 
rural areas of Daman at the earliest. Similarly, for the proposal of water supply in Diu District, 
the Ministry of Rural Development may give ad ministrative and expendi ture sanction for the 
project, if not given already. 
3.10 CENSUS 2011 AND NATIONAL POPULATION REGISTER 
Recommendation 
3.10.1  The Committee also took note of the statement made by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the 
creation of National Population Register would be a comprehensive identity database in the country 
for better targeting of the benefits and serv ices under the Government schemes/programmes, 
improving planning and strengthening security of the coun try. However, the Committee is of the 
considered view that the ‘Nationality As Declared’ clause in the NPR Household Schedule has the 
potential to-confer de facto Indian Citizenship to illegal migrants, despite the disclaimer attached to 
the clause. The Committee is of the opinion that the Government should not act in haste. There is a 
need to have a rethinking on the NPR exercise. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
the ‘Nationality’ clause should be removed as it has the portend in the long run which may pose a 
threat to the security and integrity of the coun try. Therefore, it may be  worthwhile considering 
suspension of the NPR exercise for the time being. The Committee further recommends that the work 
relating to NPR preparation should be de-linked from the Census operations. 
 (Para 6.9.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.10.2  A Group of Ministers (GoM) was constituted in 2000 to review the National Security System 
in the aftermath of the Kargil War. The GoM recommended that there should be compulsory 
registration of citizens and non-citizens living in India, which will facilitate preparation of a National 
Register of India Citizens (NRIC). Following this, the Citizenship Act, 1955 was amended (notified 
on 07.01.2004) by inserting Section 14 A which provided that ‘the Central Government may 
compulsorily register every citize n of India and issue national identity card to him’. The Registrar 
General, India was designated at the National Registration Authority Registrar General of Citizen 
Registration under the Act. The complete procedure for implementing the scheme has been laid down 
in the Citizenship (Registration and Issue of National Identity Cards) Rules, 2003. 
3.10.3  In order to understand the complexities invol ved and to test check feasibility of the processes, 
choice of technology and the methodology laid-down in the Citizenship Rules, 2003, a pilot project 
was undertaken in selected areas (mainly in border) in 12 States and 1 Union Territory (UT), 
encompassing a population of 30.96 lakh. The pilot project was completed on 31.03.2009. 
3.10.4  Based on the experience of the pilot project, a proposal for the national roll-out was presented 
to the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in October,  2006. The CoS considered the proposal and noted 

that determination of citizenship was an involved and complicated matter. It, therefore, recommended 
the creation of a NPR by collecting the details required along with the Census 2011. The NPR was to 
be a register of residents and not citizens. 
3.10.5   An Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM), constituted in 2007 among other decisions, 
endorsed the view to create the NPR and to collec t the required data for this purpose along with 
photographs and fingerprints of all usual residents along with the Census of India, 2011. It was noted 
by the EGoM that the NPR, so created, would become the mother database. Consequent to this, the 
Office of RGI initiated the process of creation of NPR. Therefore, the deci sion to create the NPR has 
been taken after due deliberations and thoughts. 
3.10.6  Rule 2(1) of the Citizenship Rules 2003 defines the Population Register as “the register 
containing details of persons usually residing in a village or rural area or town or ward and demarcated 
area (demarcated by the Registras General of Citizen Registration) within a ward, in a town or urban 
area.” 
Rule 2(k) of the Citizenship Rules, 2003 defines the National Register of the Indian Citizens (NRIC) 
as “the register containing details of Indian citizens living in India and outside India.” 
3.10.7  The NRIC could be derived from the NPR as a sub set after ascertaining the citizenship status 
of each individual, as and when required. 
Thus, NPR = NRIC + NRR 
Therefore, the two Registers are different in definitions and content. 
3.10.8  The creation of National Population Regist er (NPR) along with Census 2011 will not provide 
any opportunity to illegal migrants to claim legal citizenship in the country. It has been clarified on 
several occasions that inclusion in NPR will not  confer any right to citizenship. A number of 
precautions have been taken to authenticate the entries in NPR like inviting claims and objections 
from the general public and of the list by the Gram Sabha / Ward Committee etc. The District / Town 
officials can also suo moto  take cognizance of doubtful cases of usual residents. The State/UT 
Governments are being consulted to further plug any loopholes in the authentication process. Also, the 
NPR schedule, in which information is collected, has a specific disclaimer to this effect. It is also 
proposed to print a similar disclaimer on the proposed Resident Identity Card also. 
3.10.9 NPR is a register of usual residents and NOT a register of citizens. The National Register of 
Indian Citizens (NRIC) will be a subset of NPR a nd will be carved out from NPR at a later stage. The 
determination of citizenship status is a complex issue and should be tackled in a phased manner. Once 
the NPR database containing the identity of all usual residents along with biometrics is created, the 
determination of citizenship can be taken up at a later date. NPR is the first building block towards the 
creation of NRIC. Moreover, the creation of NPR with reference to a particular date, the identification 
of persons from other countries could be regulated. 
Therefore, creation of NPR is a very crucial measure for regulating illegal migrants in the country. 
Further Recommendation 
3.10.10  The Committee is not convinced by the repl y of the Ministry. The Ministry has not 
clarified as to why the ‘nationality’ clause  cannot be removed from the NPR Household 

Schedule. The Committee reiterates its recommendat ion that the ‘Nationality’ clause may be 
removed from the Schedule. 
3.11 HOUSING SCHEME FOR DELHI POLICE 
Recommendation 
3.11.1  The Committee is constrained to note that there is undue delay in allocating land for housing 
projects by the DDA. Being a Government organization, DDA should not function on purely 
commercial lines like private builders. The Comm ittee recommends that DDA should make more 
concerted efforts to acquire land exclusively for pol ice housing of Delhi Police so that the pressing 
need of the police personnel could be met. Keeping in mind the sensitive law and order situation in 
Delhi, proper functioning of Police Stations and keeping the morale of the police force high are of 
utmost importance. Therefore. making land available for Police Stations and Housing Projects 
requires immediate attention of the authorities. The Committee therefore urges upon the DDA, MCD 
and other agencies to make land available for Housing projects and Police Stations in Delhi with 
least delay. (Para 7.7.1 ibid)  
Action Taken 
3.11.2  Several proposals for allotment of land for Delhi Police are pending with the land owning 
agencies i.e. DDA, GNCTD, L&DO, MCD, etc. The recommendations/observations of the Committee 
have been communicated to the land owning agencies for their action. 
Further Recommendation 
3.11.3  The Committee is constrained to note that the efforts made in co ordinating with the 
land-owning agencies are not yielding any resul ts. The matter should be taken up at the 
Minister’s level, if the efforts are not yielding  any results. The Committee recommends that all-
out efforts may be made for allotment of the land. The Committ ee also desires to discuss the 
matter with the officers later. 
Recommendation 
3.11.4  To achieve 40% satisfaction level, Delhi Police needs a total of about 28,000 houses against 
about 15,000 houses available with it, thus, leaving a gap of about 13,000 quarters. The Committee is 
concerned that by 2012-13 only about 7,000 flats are likely to be added, including the projects under 
PPP model. This is grossly inad equate. Considering the rate at which the quarters are being 
constructed and that additional land is not available with Delhi Police, the target can only be 
achieved in a reasonable period by outright purchase of ready built flats from DDA. The Committee is 
of the view that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the matter of ready built flats for Delhi 
Police with DDA and the DDA on its part should also make provision for 500-550 flats every year for 
Delhi Police. (Para 7.7.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
3.11.5  The matter was taken up with the DDA for out  right purchase of built-up flats by Delhi Police 
from DDA. DDA, however, intimated that the direct al lotment of flats to Delhi Police is not possible 
as DDA flats are meant for its registrants and they have to clear the back log of its registrants. 

Further Recommendation 
3.11.6  The Committee does not accept the contention of DDA. Now, the DDA is allotting houses 
for new registrants. In such a case, DDA can allot some of the houses to Delhi Police. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that DDA may allot some flats every year 
to Delhi Police personnel. The MHA may ta ke it up with the Ministry of Urban 
Development/DDA. 
Recommendation 
3.11. 7  The Committee is of the view that police build ings should be declared as operational 
buildings as has been done in the case of Railways and P & T so that construction could start 
straightaway. The Committee is also of the view that the average time taken for declaring buildings as 
operational should also be brought down so as to expedite the process. (Para 7.7.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.11.8  Matter regarding declaration of all Delhi Police projects as “operational buildings” was taken 
up with MoUD so that there is no requirement of clearance of building plans from local bodies. But 
MoUD have not agreed to this as they do not consider the Delhi Police projects as essential to the life 
of the community and that if the exemption is given to the office and residential buildings of the Delhi 
Police then similar demands may also come from various other Government agencies as well. 
Further Recommendation 
3.11.9  The Committee does not accept the comments of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
Reiterating its earlier recommendation, the Co mmittee desires that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs may again take it up with the Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
4.1 MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE FORCE (MPF) 
Recommendation 
4.1.1 The Committee hopes that the report on impact assessment of the Scheme might have been 
submitted by now, as intended by the Ministry. If so, the Ministry should prepare action plan on the 
findings. 
(Para 3.1.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.1.2 The said report has already been received from the BPR&D and is presently under 
examination. After due examination with all concerned, the process of formulating a new or modified 
MPF Scheme for another 5-10 years would be initiated. 
4.2 NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA) 
Recommendation 
4.2.1 The Committee appreciates the constitution of the National Investigation Agency (NIA) and 
hopes that necessary steps would be taken for making available the required infrastructure so that it 
can discharge its mandate efficiently. The Committee recommends that the vacant posts in NIA should 
be filled up at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that permanent office accommodation 
should be provided to NIA within the shortest possible time. (Para 3.12.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.2.2 Initially, 218 posts of various levels were created in NIA. One-time method of recruitment for 
filling up of the Group ‘A’ & ‘B’ posts was got approved from the Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC). The Recruitment Rules for Group ‘C’ posts in NIA were framed and notified on 12.11.2009. 
4.2.3 Out of these 218 posts, 81 posts have been filled up on deputation basis and 36 persons were 
working on attachment basis from various Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs). The process of 
filling up of the remaining posts is an on-going pr ocess and necessary efforts are being made to fill up 
the remaining posts in NIA. 
4.2.4 Recently in June, 2010, 110 posts for opening a branch office of NIA at Hyderabad 
(Cyberabad), Andhra Pradesh and 59 posts to handle the cases of Fake Indian Currency Notes 
(FICNs) and terror funding activities have been created in NIA. 
4.2.5 The Cabinet Committee on Accommodation in its meeting held on 11th June, 2010, vide Case 
No.30/CCA/2010, Item 13, has approved the proposal of this Ministry for location of the National 
Investigation Agency’s Headquarters at New Delhi, allotment of General Pool Office Accommodation 
(GPOA) for the National Investigation Agency  and General Pool Residential Accommodation 
(GPRA) for its employees in New Delhi. Necessary orders, in this regard, are being issued by the 
Directorate of Estates, Ministry of Urban Develo pment. On receipt of the said orders from the 
Directorate of Estates, Ministry of Urban Development, the necessary steps to provide a permanent 

office accommodation to NIA would be taken up in consultation with the Directorate of Estates, 
Ministry of Urban Development. 
Further Recommendation 
4.2.6 The Committee reiterates its recommendation a nd desires that all pending issues and 
ongoing measures should be completed within the shortest possible time. 
4.3 NAXALISM 
Recommendation 
4.3.1 The Committee views with concern that the yout h, both educated and uneducated, in the LWE-
affected areas do not get sufficient employment opportunities and they fall prey in the hands of the 
extremists. It is, therefore, necessary that urgent efforts are made to improve the skills of the youth so 
that they may take up activities for gainful employment in various sectors, including self-employment. 
Similarly, the Government should by to improve the employment opportunities for the youth in the 
affected areas. The Committee agrees with the view of the Expert Group of the Planning Commission 
that the extremists, by and large, take up issues, which are basically related to poverty, deprivation 
and alienation of the poor and the landless.   
Action Taken 
4.3.2 Directorate General of Employment & Training (DGE&T) under Ministry of Labour & 
Employment has formulated a scheme “Skill Development Plan for youth of 34 districts affected by 
Left Wing Extremism (LWE)” at an estimated cost  of Rs. 4133.52 crore. Under the scheme 228 
Industrial Training Institutes (IITs) and 927 Skill De velopment Centres (SDCs) are proposed to be set 
up. As a short term measure 5000 youth are proposed to be trained in existing training infrastructure in 
Government as well as private institutes. Planning Commission has accorded “in-principle” approval 
for the scheme. 
Further Recommendation 
4.3.3 The Committee recommends that special attentio n may be given to the scheme of “Skill 
Development Plan for youth of 34  districts affected by Left Wing  Extremism (L WE)” which is 
at the ‘in-principle’ approval stage only. The Committee desires that progress monitoring may 
be taken up at the highest level in the Ministry keeping in the mind the severity of the naxalite 
problem. 
4.4 UNION TERRITORIES WITH LEGISLATURE 
Recommendation 
4.4.1 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that the amount of pension paid under 
the various social welfare schemes in the UTs is not uniform. The amount is also grossly inadequate 
keeping in view the cost of living. The Committe e, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Government may enhance the amount of pension under the welfare schemes at par with that of the 
NCT of Delhi, uniformly in all the UTs.   
Action Taken 

4.4.2 The recommendations of the Committee for enhancement of amount of pension under various 
social welfare schemes, at par with the NCT of Delhi uniformly in all the UTs, has been considered in 
MHA. Details of various Social Welfare Schemes as a pplicable in all the UTs have been called for. A 
policy decision in the matter will be taken after taking all the relevant factors into consideration. 
Further Recommendation 
4.4.3 The Committee desires to be informed of the decision taken by the Government on 
enhancement of pension under various social welfare schemes, at par with the NCT of Delhi. 
Recommendation 
4.4.4 The Committee is of the opinion that rural roads are of immense importance for the 
development of villages particularly in the remote areas of A & N Islands. Now that the revised 
estimates have been prepared, efforts should be made to compensate for the lost time, by making 
appropriate, allocations. 
(Para 5.2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.4.5 Four works of Andaman Public Works Department (APWD) and eleven works of Zilla 
Parishad wbre sanctioned during 2001 for an amount of Rs.I0 crore and Rs.18.91 crore, respectively, 
under PMGSY. Three works of APWD have since been completed and revised sanction for the 
remaining one work has been issued by the UT Administration; for which fund is available with 
APWD. Due to time overrun, all the works of ZilIa Parishad need revised sanction and three works are 
nearing completion. However, out of Rs.18.91 crore sanction, only Rs.I0 crore was released to Zilla 
Parishad as Grant-in-Aid. The balance amount of Rs. 8.91 crore is to be released by Govt. of India 
(M/o Rural Development). Revised Estimate for five works of Zilla Parishad are under process for 
sanction and Revised Estimate for balance works are awaited by the UT Administration. The matter is 
being taken up by the UT Administration with Ministry of Rural Development for allotment of 
balance fund of Rs.8.91 crore. 
4.5 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendations 
4.5.1 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
(i) Enhancement of Students Stipend from Rs.300 per month to Rs.1000 per month keeping 
in view that the last revision was made in the year 2002; 
(ii) Enhancement of College Students Stipend from Rs.650 per month to Rs.1000 per month 
keeping in view that the last revision was made in year 2002; 
(iii) Students staying in hostels in the mainland colleges are getting full reimbursement of 
amount as stipend. However, students who are unable to get hostel accommodation have 
and to reside in private accommodations, are getting Rs.300 per month only. Such 
students should also be paid the amount equal to the stipend being given to the students 
staying in hostels. 
[Para 5.5.1 (i)(ii)(iii) ibid] 

Action Taken 
4.5.2 (i) UT Administration has constituted a Committee to examine this issue. The Committee 
has 
  submitted its recommendations and a decision will be taken shortly. 
 (ii) UT Administration has constituted a Committee to examine this issue. The Committee 
has 
  submitted its recommendations and a decision will be taken shortly.  
 (iii) UT Administration has constituted a Committee to examine this issue. The Committee 
has 
  submitted its recommendations and a decision will be taken shortly. 
Further Recommendation 
4.5.3 The Committee may be informed of the d ecisions taken on the recommendations made 
by it, at the earliest. 
Recommendation 
4.5.4 The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
Chatham Saw Mill which was established during British period is in dire need of modernization. 
Modernization of this Mill is included in the Plan every year but nothing is being done. Similarly, 
Betapur Saw Mill in middle Andaman also needs modernization. [Para 5.5.1 (xxii) ibid] 
Action Taken 
4.5.5 Status report furnished by the UT Administration is given below: 
Chatham Saw Mill : Opep tenders for procurement of 60 vertical band headrig machine have been 
invited. Procurement of planing machine is under process. 
Betapur Saw Mill : Tender document for Modernization of the Betapur Mill in Public Private 
Partnership mode on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis is under preparation. 
Further Recommendation 
4.5.6  Status of modernization of the Saw Mills may be intimated to the Committee. 
Recommendation 
4.5.7  The Committee is of the view that besides the specific recommendations made above, the 
Government should also consider the following suggestions: 
Workers and helpers in Day Care Centres are getting honorarium of Rs.1500-2000 per month since 
the year 2003. The honorarium should be increased immediately. [Para 5.5.1 (xxvii ) ibid] 
Action Taken 
4.5.8 Enhancement of honorarium to workers and helpers in Day Care Centres is being examined by 
the UT Administration. 
Further Recommendation 

4.5.9 The Committee desires that an early decision  may be taken for th e enhancement of the 
honorarium to workers and helpers in Day-Care Centres. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  ––  AT  A  
GLANCE 
Modernisation of State Police Forces (MPF) 
  The Committee may be informed of the deci sions taken in the last Conference of Chief 
Ministers on Internal Security. (para 1.1.3) 
  The Committee appreciates the fact that the Audit Reports a re sent by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs to respective States with the request to furnish ATRs. But the Committee is 
disturbed to note the inconsistencies and deficiencies that are there in the common issues 
identified by the Ministry in the ATRs. The Mi nistry should make it compulsory for all the 
States to take corrective measu res on all these deficiencies, a nd if necessary, at the Minister’s 
level the issues may be taken up with the Chief Ministers. (para 1.1.7) 
NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
  The Committee desires that the guidelines on the subjects, which are at the stages of 
conceptualization and formulation, may be given final shape at the earliest and an early solution 
may be found to the problem of  land availability since requisi te fund had been made in the 
Budget. 
(para 1.3.11) 
HOME GUARDS 
  The Committee welcomes the proposal and recommends that a decision in the matter of 
increasing duty/training allowance may be taken at the earliest. (para 1.4.5) 
FIRE SERVICES 
  The Committee feels that role of the Cent ral Government does not end up with providing 
monetary assistance and grant-in-ai d on the plea that the Fire S ervices is a State subject. The 
Apex Council needs to be strengthened to make its presence felt. Though the 
code/Rules/Manuals/Regulations exist on paper, their actual enforcement and transparency in 
giving fire safety clearance in construction of structures , are lacking. The Committee takes note 
of reported fire and safety clearance given to so me guest houses in Gurgaon before completion 
of construction activities. Such irregularities need to be curbed with firm hands. The Committee 
also desires that the upgradation of National Fi re Service College, Nag pur be taken up in time 
bond manner. (para 1.,5.10) 
NAXALISM 
  The Government may also take action on op ening technical and engineering institutions in 
the LWE areas as recommended earlier. (para 1.6.15) 
  It appears to the Committee that the progress in setting up of Gram Nayayalyas is not 
satisfactory. The Committee desires that Union G overnment should take a proactive lead and 
persuade State Governments to set up more and more such Nyayalayas. The Committee also 
desires to be informed of the action taken on the recommendation of the Thirteenth Finance 
Commission for improvement in justice delivery. (para 1.6.31) 
 

MEDICAL FACILITY FOR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND OTHER 
MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE 
  The Committee desires that the decision on  the proposed establishment of a medical 
college on PPP model for Andaman and Nicobar Islands, may be taken expeditiously. (para 1.7.6) 
  The Committee calls upon the Ministry to let it  know the status in respect of the following 
items: 
(a) Increasing the frequency of flights to Port  Blair and the need for airlines to operate 
on the Port Blair Sector in accordance with the Route Disposal Guidelines of GoI. 
(b) Subsidy on airfare and other concession s for specialized categories from mainland 
to islands. 
(c) Acquisition of twenty  five numbers vessels. (para 1.7.14) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
  The Committee desires that an early deci sion may be taken on amending the MoU. 
(para 1.8.5) 
  The Committee urges upon the Ministry of Home  Affairs to advice the UT Admin. to take 
expeditious decisions on proposed enhancem ent of permanent disability allowance and 
unemployment allowance and extending the benefits upto 48 years of age. (para 1.8.8) 
  The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete measures taken to control 
erosion. The Committee may also be informed of the status of implementation of settlement Plan 
and allotment of alternative land to farmers. (para 1.8.15) 
  The Committee may be informed of the status of the proposal. (para 1.8.18) 
  The Committee desires that an early action  may be taken after the recommendations of 
the Central-empowered Committee have been received and it be informed of the action taken. 
(para 1.8.22) 
DEMAND No. 96 - DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI 
  Status of survey work for compilation of da ta of per capita income in D&NH, may be sent 
to the Committee   (para 1.9.8) 
PAY OF HOME GUARDS IN DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI VIS-A-VIS OTHER UTS 
  The Committee desires that an early deci sion may be taken on the proposal for 
enhancement of allowances of Home Guards in the D&NH. (para 1.10.3) 
AVAILABILITY OF DRINKING WATER 
  Steps may be taken for early completion of the projects so that the people may not face 
drinking water problem, especially during summer. (para 1.11.3) 
DEMAND No. 97-DAMAN AND DID 

PROBLEM OF FISHERMEN 
  The Committee desires that the matter may be  pursued vigorously with the Government 
of Pakistan for early release of fishermen languishing in Pakistani jails. (para 1.13.3) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
  The Committee desires that efforts be made  to restore the allocation reduced by the 
Ministry of Power with effect from 23 April and 6 May, 2010. The shortfall may be met from 
other sources until power supply starts from the power plants as mentioned in para 1.14.7 supra. 
(para 1.14.10) 
  The Committee desires that the construction of 60-bed hospital should start immediately, 
if not already commenced and may be completed as per target. (para 1.14.16) 
HOUSING SCHEME FOR DELHI POLICE 
  The Committee hopes that the physical targets h ave been met by the end of 2010-11. If not, 
steps may be taken for completion of the physical targets without further delay. 
(para 1.16.4) 
  The Committee may be informed of the status of the projects. (para 1.16.8) 
HOUSING SCHEME FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES 
  The Committee desires that the all formalit ies concerning RFQs for first and second lots 
may be completed at the earliest. Efforts may also be made to  take up construction of the 
remaining proposed flats. The Committee appr eciates the concept of  composite hospital. 
Vigorous efforts may be made to open the hospitals expeditiously. (para 1.17.5) 
  The Committee recommends that the matter ma y be regularly pursued  with the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds. (para 1.17.10) 
  The Committee recommends that the matter ma y be regularly pursued  with the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds. (para 1.17.13) 
  The Committee desires that the matter may be further pursued with the Ministry of 
Urban Development. If needed, the matter may be  taken at the Minister of Home Affairs with 
the Minister of Urban Development. (para 1.17.16) 
DEMAND NOS 95, 96, 97, 98 AND 99 - UNION TERRITORIES (WITH LEGISLATURE) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
  The Committee desires that an early decision  may be taken in regard to enhancement of 
pension under various schemes. (para 2.15.14) 
  The Anganwadi workers and Anganwadi help ers are the backbone of Integrated Child 
Development Services Scheme. An increase in the remuneration of Anganwadi workers from  
Rs. 1,500 per month to Rs. 3,000 per month and for Anganwadi helpers from Rs. 750 per month 
to Rs. 1,500 per month was announced by the Un ion Finance Minister in his Budget (2011-12) 
speech with the likelihood of  improving lives of around 22 lakh Anganwadi workers and 
helpers. The Committee is of the view that th e UT Administration also should enhance 

honorarium of Anganwadi workers  and helpers, as has been pr omised in the Union Budget 
(2011-12). (para 2.15.20) 
  The Committee desires to be apprised of th e reasons for not agreeing to the proposal by 
Integrated Finance Division (IFD) of the Minist ry. The Committee may be informed of the final 
decision of IFD and the present status thereof. (para 2.15.26) 
MODERNISATION OF STATE POLICE FORCE (MPF) 
  The Committee expresses its disappointment over the inordinate delay in finalizing the 
software. It is unfortunate that the Ministry is  still exploring the alternative to develop a less-
costly MIS software. The Committe e calls upon the Ministry to ta ke immediate decision in the 
matter. The Committee however would like to discuss with the officers of the Ministry later.(para 3.1.3) 
MODERNIZATION OF PRISON ADMINISTRATION 
  The Committee is constrained to note that the important scheme for modernizing prisons 
in the country is not being given the importance it deserves. It is unfortunate that Government 
has decided to close the scheme. From the point of view of improving the facilities in the prisons, 
it is necessary to have such a scheme as States  will not be implementing such a scheme on their 
own. The Committee desires that Government may reconsider its decision and inform it of its 
decision 
(para 3.2.5) 
BUREAU OF POLICE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT (BPR&D) 
  The Committee is constrained to note that  the construction of building of BPR&D is 
taking unduly a long time due to various reasons. The land wa s given to BPR&D only in March, 
2010. The construction may be taken up and comp leted immediately. The re should not be any 
further delay in the process. The Committee may be informed of the status of the Central 
Academy for Police Training, Bhopal. The Minist ry may take immediate steps to finalise the 
recruitment rules because filling up of the posts is very essent ial for taking up the research 
projects in BPR&D. 
(para 3.3.6) 
ALLOCATION OF BADP AND HADP 
  The Committee is not happy wi th the way the decision is being delayed. This delay will 
only hamper the better implementation of the critical programmes. The Committee desires that 
a quick decision may be taken in the matter. (para 3.4.7) 
NAXALISM 
  The Committee is unhappy to note that the Government has no t indicated anything 
relating to opening of bigger hospitals in some selected places of LWE areas. The Government 
may give special consideration for this. (para 3.5.11) 
  The reply of the Government is casual and the recommendations of the Committee have 
been taken lightly. The Central Government should  review the security a rrangements in all the 
jails situated in LWE districts and ensure that the State Governments make necessary security 

arrangements therein. The Committee reiterates its recommendation for in creasing intelligence 
network in the naxal-affected areas. (para 3.5.14) 
MEDICAL FACILITY FOR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND OTHER 
MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE 
  In view of the scant medica l facility available in the isla nds and a large number of people 
living there, emergency air lifting of  patients in critical condition is necessary. If the helicopters 
are not suitable for evacuation to mainland, Government should take a decision on introducing 
air ambulance. Air ambulance needs to be considered from the point of view  of the residents of 
the islands rather than on commercial basis. Ho wever, once the super-sp eciality facilities are 
available in the islands, withdrawal of air ambulance can be considered. (para 3.6.4) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
  The Committee is not satisfied with the reply  given by the Ministry. The Ministry should 
have indicated the status of the proposals as  in 2010. The Committee desires that an early 
decision may be taken to complete the bridges at the earliest. (para 3.7.3) 
  The Committee is not satisfied with the slow pace of the work and desires that action may 
be taken for early completion of road construction  in all the villages. As  already stated in the 
Action Taken Note, the funds under PMGSY may be sought after preparing the necessary 
network plan. 
(para 3.7.6) 
URBAN WATER SUPPLY SCHEME 
  The Committee feels that the proposal fo r augmentation of water supply scheme for 
Silvassa, though approved in 2007 , is yet to see the light of the day. It is taking an unduly long 
time. The Committee desires that an early decision may be taken to complete the projects. (para 3.8.7) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Further Recommendation 
  The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that though coastal regulation zone in Diu 
District was discussed in the meeting of DDC ZMA on 24.08.2005, the final approval for 
NCZMA is still awaited. Such unnecessary delays do not augur well for the development of the 
country. The Committee desires that all steps may be  taken for an early approval of the change 
of coastal regulation zone in Diu District. (para 3.9.6) 
  The Committee feels that all the proposals indicated in the action taken note are at initial 
stages. The Committee desires that an early ac tion may be taken for getting the proposals 
approved so that the bridges proposed may be taken up without further delay. (para 3.9.25) 
  The Committee expresses serious concern ov er the delay in regard to determining the 
marine out-fall point. The Committee desires that  the NIO should submit its report at the 
earliest if not submitted already. If the report is already submitted, necessary action may be 
taken thereon. 
(para 3.9.31) 

  The Committee is constrained to note that in spite of the serious water problem in both the 
districts of Daman and Diu, th e efforts to provide water are still at an early stage. The 
Committee desires that the UT may submit the de tailed proposal for water supply scheme for 
rural areas of Daman at the earliest. Similarly, for the proposal of water supply in Diu District, 
the Ministry of Rural Development may give administrative and expe nditure section for the 
project, if not given already.    
CENSUS 2011 AND NATIONAL POPULATION REGISTER 
  The Committee is not convinced by the rep ly of the Ministry. The Ministry has not 
clarified as to why the ‘nationality’ clause  cannot be removed from the NPR Household 
Schedule. The Committee reiterates its recommendat ion that the ‘Nationality’ clause may be 
removed from the Schedule. 
(para 3.10.10) 
HOUSING SCHEME FOR DELHI POLICE 
  The Committee is constrained to note that th e efforts made in coor dinating with the land-
owning agencies are not yielding any results. Th e matter should be taken up at the Minister’s 
level, if the efforts are not yielding any resul ts. The Committee recommends that all-out efforts 
may be made for allotment of the land. The Committee also desi res to discuss the matter with 
the officers later.    (para 3.11.3) 
  The Committee does not accept the contention  of DDA. Now, the DDA is allotting houses 
for new registrants. In such a case, DDA can allot some of the houses to Delhi Police. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that DDA may allot some flats every year 
to Delhi Police personnel. The MHA may ta ke it up with the Ministry of Urban 
Development/DDA. (para 3.11.6) 
  The Committee does not accept the comments of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
Reiterating its earlier recommendation, the Co mmittee desires that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs may again take it up with the Ministry of Urban Development.  (para 3.11.9) 
NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
Further Recommendation 
  The Committee reiterates its recommendation and desires that all pending issues and 
ongoing measures should be completed within the shortest possible time. (para 4.2.6) 
NAXALISM 
  The Committee recommends that special attent ion may be given to th e scheme of  “Skill 
Development Plan for youth of 34 districts affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE)” which is at 
the ‘in-principle’ approval stage only. The Commi ttee desires that progre ss monitoring may be 
taken up at the highest level in the Ministry k eeping in the mind the se verity of the naxalite 
problem. 
(para 4.3.3) 
UNION TERRITORIES WITH LEGISLATURE 

  The Committee desires to be informed of the decision taken by the Government on 
enhancement of pension under various social welfare schemes, at par with the NCT of Delhi.(para 4.4.3) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
  The Committee may be informed of the deci sions taken on the r ecommendations made by 
it, at the earliest.    (para 4.5.3) 
  Status of modernization of the Saw Mills may be intimated to the Committee. 
(para 4.5.6) 
  The Committee desires that an early decisi on may be taken for th e enhancement of the 
honorarium to Workers and Helpers in Day-Care Centres. (para 4.5.9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XVII  
SEVENTEENTH  MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, 15th April, 2010 in Committee Room-A, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2.  Shri Rishang Keishing 
 3.  Shri Javed Akhtar 
 4.  Shri  D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 5. Shri L. K. Advani 
 6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 7. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 10. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
 11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 12.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3.  The Chairman then informed the Members that the meeting has been scheduled to consider and 
adopt the draft 149th & 150th Reports on: 
(i) The Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the 145th Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of DoNER; and 
(ii) The Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the 144th Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Draft 149th Report 

4.  The Committee then first took up for consideration the draft 149th Report on the Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 145th Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of DoNER. The Members discussed in detail the draft report. 
After some discussion, the Committee adopted the same with some changes. The Chairman and 
Members of the Committee then felt that the Committee should discuss the issues of 
underdevelopment in the NE Region with the concer ned. Ministries later. The Committee agreed to 
the proposal. 
Draft 150th Report 
5.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consid eration the draft 150th Report on the Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 144th Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee discussed in detail the draft 
report and adopted the same with some changes. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M. 
 
 