64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 27TH   JULY, 2000)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 27TH JULY, 2000)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 2000/ASADHA 1922, (SAKA)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                     
2.        REPORT                                                                                                                                                   
          OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  - AT A GLANCE
          RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE        
         ANNEXURE THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
         APPENDICES                                                                    
          (i)APPENDIX – A LIST OF ORGANISATIONS/INDIVIDUALS WHO SUBMITTED MEMORANDA 
          (ii)APPENDIX – B LIST OF VARIOUS CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE, PROFESSIONAL BODIES AND
OTHER
              ORGANISATIONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE  
          (iii)APPENDIX – C CLAUSE-WISE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS  
               CHAMBERS/INSTITUTIONS/PROFESSIONALS ALONG WITH COMMENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF
COMPANY               
               AFFAIRS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
 
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
  2.    Shri Hiphei       
§
3.    Shri Surender Kumar  Singh    
  4.    Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
  5.    Dr. L. M. Singhvi        
  6.    Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai     
 7.     Shri K. M. Saifullah     
  8.    Shri C. M. Ibrahim
  9.    Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
 10.   Shri C. P. Thirunavukkarasu    
11.    Shri Drupad Borgohain 
12.
       Shri Kuldip Nayyar  
13.        Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta     
14.        Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
15.       Shri Jayant Bhattacharya
           LOK SABHA
 16.     Shri Manabendra Shah          
 17.     Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
 18.     Shri Vinay Katiyar
 19      Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi    
 20.     Shri Anadi Sahu         
 21.      Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
 22.     Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
23.      Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt        
24.      Smt. Jayashree Banerjee        
25.      Shri Rajen Gohain      
26.      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
27.      Shri Rajkumar Wangcha    
28.      Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
29.      Shrimati Nisha Chaudhary     
30.      Shri Jitendra Prasada  
31.      Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel         
32       Shri M. O. H. Farook
33.      Shri Samar Choudhury          
34.      Shri Subodh Roy       
35.        Dr. S. Venugopalachari
_____________________________________________________________________
36     Shri Beni Prasad Verma
37    Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
38    Shri Arun Kumar
39    Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
40    Shri P. H. Pandian         
41    Shri Shriniwas Patil       
42    Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh   
43    Dr. Jayanta Rongpi       
44    Shri S. K. Bwiswmuthiary
45    Shri Vijay  Goel
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
_________________________________________________________________
R E P O R T
           I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Sixty-fourth Report of the Committee,
relating to the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999¨
.
2.        In pursuance of the Rules relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha  referred©
 the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999,  as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on  23
December, 1999 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination  and report.
3.0      The Statement of  Objects and Reasons of the Bill states that the Government introduced a comprehensive
Companies Bill, 1997 in Rajya Sabha on 14 August, 1997 and the same was  referred to Standing Committee of
Parliament for examination and report thereon.  As the process of  examination was not yet over and Government
considered it desirable that some more important changes in the Companies  Act, 1956 were brought about in order to
provide immediately certain measures for good corporate governance and for protection of investors,   the present Bill
was introduced.
3.1      This Bill mainly seeks to ensure better corporate governance, transparency in working of companies and also

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
ensure more effective enforcement by enhancing the penalty/punishment for contravention so as to ensure better
compliance of the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.
4.0      The present Committee in its first meeting held on 18 January, 2000, reviewed the status of the Bills/subjects
pending consideration of the Committee and noted that  a new Bill, namely, the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill,
1999, had been referred to it for examination and report.
4.1      The Committee, in its meeting held on 7 February, 2000, decided that it may  take up the Companies (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1999, for examination along with the Companies Bill, 1997, referred to it earlier, after the Budget
Session, as it would take considerable time to dispose them of.
5.        After the Budget Session was over, the Committee again  reviewed the position of the Bills pending before it, at
its meeting held on 17 May, 2000, and decided to give top priority to pending legislation and dispose them of in the
order of priority assigned by it. The Committee decided to take up the two Bills relating to the Company Law first
followed by other Bills, in the four rounds of sittings – 29, 30 & 31 May and 1 & 2 June,  in the first round; 12, 13 & 14
June  in the second round; 26, 27, 28, 29 & 30 June  in the third round;  and 10, 11, 12, 13 & 14 July, 2000 in the fourth
round. 
6.0      In its meeting held on 30May, 2000, the Committee heard the Secretary of the Department of Company Affairs
on the salient features of the two Bills, namely, the Companies Bill, 1997 and the Companies (Second Amendment)
Bill, 1999. 
6.1      The Secretary, Department of Company Affairs made a detailed presentation on the two Bills in the said meeting
of the Committee.  Following are the salient points of his presentation :-
º          As on 1
st January 2000 a total number of 5,32,580 companies were at work and their estimated paid up capital
was Rs. 2,72,865 crores. 
__________________________________________________________________________
2
 
º          India was in the forefront of Company Law.  The first Companies Act was enacted in 1913.  Certain amendments
were passed in 1936 and 1951.  The present Act was enacted  in 1956 as a result of Industrial Policy Resolution and
federalisation of corporate laws in different States, pursuant  to the integration of princely states in the Union of India.
º          The 1956 Act has been amended 17 times, in the years  1960, 1962, 1963, 1964 (twice), 1965, 1966 (twice),
1967, 1969, 1971, 1974, 1977, 1985, 1988, 1996 and 1999. 
º          There is an imperative need to further amend the Companies Act 1956 pursuant to the New Economic Policy
announced in 1991, rapid economic developments taking place globally, liberalisation of economies, access to world
market, WTO etc.
º          Further amendments to the law are necessary to facilitate healthy growth of Indian Corporate Sector under
liberalised and highly competitive environment.  Greater flexibility, transparency, disclosure, efficient enforcement,
tougher penalties, better investors’ protection are the felt needs of the time.
º          The requirements of liberalisation,  deregulation, simplification, changing economic scenario and international
corporate market make it necessary to amend the Company Law, lest our country would be lagging behind in terms of
growth, flexibility and international competitiveness in the globalised world. 
º          U.K., USA, Australia, Canada, EU etc. had already updated their Company Law. 
º          A Working Group was appointed by the Government on 5 August, 1996 which had  members  who were experts
in the fields of  law, economics and company affairs.  The Group  went into the entire gamut of the corporate laws and
submitted a comprehensive report in February 1997.  The said report was placed on the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament.  The comprehensive Companies Bill, 1997 is in essence the reflection of the consensus  in the report of the
Working Group. 
º          While drafting the Bill, the Department of Company Affairs took the help of the Reports  of  various 
Committees  which  went  into  the  concept  of  good   corporate governance, namely, the Cadbury Committee, the
Greenbury Committee, the Blue Ribbon Committee, the Organisation of Economic Cooperation  Development Code on
Corporate Governance (OECD) , besides the report of CII on Desirable Corporate Governance – A Code and Kumar
Mangalam Birla Committee on Corporate Governance.  The underlying themes of all these Reports are  transparency,
openness, disclosure, accountability etc.   The main principle that pervades corporate governance is the control of the
business by shareholders, reliable public reporting, avoidance of exclusive powers at the top, balanced board
composition, strong board of directors, strong audit process, assessment of risk and involvement of all  the shareholders
etc. 

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
º          After the introduction of the comprehensive Companies Bill, 1997, certain provisions of the said Bill were
incorporated in the Companies Amendment Act, 1999 which came into force w.e.f. 1.4.1999, first through an ordinance
and thereafter the ordinance was replaced by the Act of Parliament. 
3
º          Following are the salient features of the Companies Amendment Act, 1999 :-
           •          To allow companies to buy-back their shares;
           •          Provide for nomination facility to investors;
           •          Setting up of Investor Education and Protection Fund.
•          To allow companies to issue sweat equity in lieu of intellectual property to employees and directors;
•          Permit inter-corporate investment without prior approval of Central Government;
•          Constitution of National Advisory Committee on Accounting Standards.
º          After having implemented some of the features of the 1997 Bill in the First Amendment Act of 1999, some other
important features of the said Bill  have been included in the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999. 
º          Early passage of the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999 is necessary for the following reasons :-
Provide Investor friendly environment and attract investment in Indian Capital Market.
It will prepare ground for Indian companies to excel in a globally competitive market.
Create wealth for the shareholder and the Nation.
Promote good corporate governance.
7.        The Secretary, Department of Company Affairs then made an audio-visual presentation on the salient features of
the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999.  The  following are the highlights from his presentation : -
To provide transparency and good corporate governance;
Investors Protection;
Stringent penalties;
Repeal of redundant provisions;
Investors Protection Measures
Dividend including Interim Dividend to be paid within 30 days.
Effective curb on changing registered office frequently.
Offer of securities to more than 50 persons in financial year to be treated as public offer.
Small shareholders right to be represented on the board.
Corporate Governance
Minimum paid-up capital Rs. 1 lac for private companies, Rs. 5 lacs for public limited companies to prevent misuse of
facility of limited liability companies.
Capital market related provisions to be administered by Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
Director’s report to include a Director’s Responsibility Statement.
4
Public listed companies with paid-up capital of Rs.5 crores to set up Audit Committee.
Companies with paid-up capital of Rs. 10 lakhs or more to obtain a Secretarial Compliance Certificate .
Introduction of Postal Ballot for certain important matters which are crucial to good corporate governance.
 Appointment of Auditors in the Government Companies directly by Comptroller and Auditor General of India and
fixation of their remuneration by the shareholders in the Annual General Meeting.
Directors to be disqualified to be appointed as Directors in other public companies in case of non-filing of Annual
Returns and Annual Accounts for a continuous period of 3 years and non-payment of deposits etc. on maturity.
A person can not be Director in more than 15 companies .
Security holder of a company not to be appointed as Auditor of that company.
Stringent Penalties
Certain offences relating to deposits made cognizable.
Fines and Penalties enhanced by 10 times.
Repeal of Redundant provisions
Managing Agents, Secretaries and Treasures.
Deemed public companies.
Public Trustee.
8.        Having regard to the special importance of the two Bills, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions in
the form of memoranda from the individuals/organisations /institutions etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bills.
Accordingly, advertisements were published through DAVP in all the major national dailies and vernacular newspapers

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
all over the country. The Doordarshan’s national network had repeatedly telecast the contents of the press release in
prime time slots inviting suggestions from individuals/institutions/organisations on the provisions of the two Bills. 
9.        The Committee also invited suggestion/views of the major Chambers of Commerce and Industries, professional
bodies, such as, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII); Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
(ASSOCHAM); Punjab, Haryana and Delhi (PHD) Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Institute of  Company Secretaries of India (ICSI), Institute of Cost and
Works Accountants of India (ICWAI), Institute of  Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), Securities & Exchange
Board of India (SEBI), Industrial Credit & Investment Corporation of India Limited (ICICI), Bombay Chamber of
Commerce & Industry (BCCI), Steel  Authority of India Limited (SAIL), the Council of EU Chamber of  Commerce in
India and the Associated Cement Companies Limited (ACC)  on the amendments sought to be effected in the
Companies Act through these Bill.
10.      In all 56 memoranda containing comments and suggestions on the provisions of these two Bills were received by
the Committee from various organisations, associations and individuals etc. (see list of organisations/individuals etc. at
Appendix – A).
5
11.0     The Committee heard the views of various Chambers of Commerce, professional bodies and other organisations
(vide list at Appendix ‘B’) in its sitting spread over four days i.e. on 1,2,13 & 14 June, 2000 as per schedule given
below :-
Date of  Meeting                            Names of  Organisations heard
1.        1-6-2000                              CII, PHD Chamber of Commerce &                                                                  
Industries and ICSI
2.        2-6-2000                              ICWAI, ASSOCHAM  and  ICAI
3.        13-6-2000                            SEBI and  ICICI
4.        14-6-2000                            FICCI
11.1     A summary of  the suggestions/views received from different organisations and the comments of the Department
of Company Affairs thereon have been placed at Appendix ‘C’.
11.2     In course of evidence of the aforesaid organisations, a large number of suggestions/amendments were placed
before the Committee for its consideration. However, the major thrust of the suggestions/amendments may be
categorised into following five areas:-
Change of Registered Office of a Company – The proposed Section 17A which requires permission from  the
Regional Director even for shifting the Registered Office from one place to another will cause difficulties to the
Companies.It should be clarified that the provision of this clause should apply only in the case of change of Registered
Office of a Company from the jurisdiction of  one ROC to another ROC in the same State.
Postal Ballot -  It was contended that this system would be expensive, time consuming and un-implementable.
Offences  with regard to small depositors proposed to be made cognisable – This provision was rather drastic and
needed deletion.  Only Managing Director, Whole Time Director and promoters should be held responsible.  Only such
offences as are committed knowingly, willfully or with fraudulent intention should be severely punished.
Audit Committee – It was contended that since the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors was a creation thereof,
it would not be proper  to make its recommendations binding on its creator i.e. the Board of Directors.
Representation of small shareholders on the Board of Directors -     The provision for appointment of Directors on
the Board of Directors to represent the small investors may jeopardise  the homogeneity and integrated character of the
Board of Directors.
12.      The Committee would like to place on record its appreciation of the Secretary, Department of Company Affairs
and his team of officers for rendering valuable assistance to it from time to time in the course of consideration of the
Bills. The Committee would also like to thank the officers of the Department of Legal Affairs and the Legislative
Department for the assistance provided to it during the consideration of the Bills. The Committee also wishes to express
its sincere thanks to all the organisations/ persons who either appeared before it and/ or sent their valuable
suggestions/views on the provisions of these two Bills.  A special word of thanks is due to ICAI who helped the
Secretariat in compiling summaries of suggestions received from different quarters on the Bills.
6
13.      The Committee considered various papers and memoranda placed before it, the views expressed by the witnesses
on the Bills and the Government’s comments thereon.
14.      At its sitting held on the  27 June, 2000 the Committee considered the Bill clause-by-clause.
The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on  11 July, 2000.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
16.      The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in the Bill are given below :-
CLAUSE 2
16.1     Clause 2(14A) provides for  the definition of  dividend viz. ‘(14A) “dividend” includes any interim dividend’.
SUGGESTIONS
Dividend amount should be transferred to a separate Bank account within 5 days from the date of Annual General
Meeting.  This amount  cannot be utilised for any other purpose.
It should be clarified whether interim dividend has to be declared in Annual General Meeting.
Payment of interim dividend should be in compliance of sections 205, 205A, 205D, 206, 206A and 207. No interim
dividend should  be paid in cash.  The dividend should be paid by cheque/dividend warrant.
Remittance of dividend even electronically is not possible unless stock exchange agree for notice of 15 days for book
closure etc.
Time limit of 90 days be prescribed for payment of interim dividend.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
This suggestion may be accepted.
An explanation below 2(14A) may be added to clarify that Company’s Board of Directors may declare interim dividend
and provisions of section 205, 205A, 205C, 206, 206A and 207 shall apply to any interim dividend. The dividend should
be paid only by cheque/dividend warrant so that disbursement of dividend can be verified.
The suggestion may be accepted. SEBI will be requested to make a suitable amendment in clause 16 of the Listing
Agreement or reduce the period of notice of Book Closure from 42 days to 15 days.
In view of the above the proposal to increase time limit to 90 days may not be accepted.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.2     The Committee recommends that suitable amendments may be made/ action may be taken to give effect
to the suggestions accepted by the Government.
7
16.3     The Committee notes that there is no provision to take care of the interest which might accrue on the
dividend amount to be transferred to a separate Bank Account. The Committee recommends that a provision
may be made that whatever interest accrues on that account, it should go to the Investors’ Protection Fund.
16.4     A point was raised that before a shareholder could deposit the dividend warrant in the Bank, he has to
sign at the back of the same. Some dividend warrants contain a column on the reverse namely ‘shareholders
signature’. It was felt that this system of putting signature on the reverse on the dividend warrant should be
discontinued while depositing the same in the Bank Account. The Committee while agreeing with the same,
recommends that a guideline may be issued to that effect.
16.5     Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 3
16.6     Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the Act so as to provide for a minimum paid-up capital of one
lakh rupees for private company and a minimum paid-up capital of five lakhs rupees for public company or such higher
paid-up capital as may be prescribed and also to provide that no private company shall invite or accept deposits from
persons other than its members, directors or their relatives.
SUGGESTIONS
The word “paid up capital” appearing in sub-clause (a)(iii)(A) be substituted by “paid up equity capital”.
This provision should not be applicable to Companies registered under section 25 of the Act.
No  minimum prescription of  capital for private Companies is required.
This amendment should be made applicable to those companies that will be incorporated after the enactment of the Bill,
1999 and not to existing companies.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           The Companies licensed under Section 25 of the Companies Act 1956 are proposed to be exempted from the
requirements of having minimum paid-up capital by adding a suitable provision to this effect in Section 3.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
           16.7     The Committee recommends that clause 3 may be suitably amended so as to incorporate the
suggestion as agreed to by the Government.
The clause is adopted as amended.
CLAUSE 7
16.9     Clause 7 provides for insertion of a new Section 17A in the Principal Act which relates to the change of
Registered Office within a State which reads as under :-

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
“17A. No company shall change the place of its registered office from one place to another within a State unless it is
confirmed by the Regional Director.” 
8
SUGGESTIONS
Proposed section 17A should be deleted as this clause requires permission from Regional Director even for shifting
Registered Office from one address to another address.
Some time office is changed in same building or vicinity, which will require permission of Regional Director, which is
against the intention.  Approval of Regional Director be required only for shifting of Registered Office from jurisdiction
of one Registrar of Companies to another Registrar in same State.
A time period has to be fixed within  which the Regional Director will confirm the change of Registered Office.  Upon
lapse of specified time period, it will be deemed that Regional Director has consented to such change.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           The intention behind Section 17A is that a company which shifts Registered Office from jurisdiction of one
Registrar of Companies to another Registrar of Companies within a State only will be required to obtain approval of the
Regional Director.  The suggestion to delete 17A is not accepted.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.10   The Committee recommends that it may be clarified in the rules that the provision of new section 17A
shall apply only in case of change of registered office of a company from the jurisdiction of one Registrar of
Companies (ROC) to another ROC in the same state.
16.11   In order to ensure that a company does not unnecessary suffer and the Regional Directors remain alert, it
may be prescribed in the rules that after an application has been filed in the office of Regional Director, it has to
confirm the same within a stipulated period of 30 days, and upon lapse of the specified period it will be deemed
that Regional Director has consented to such change.
16.12   Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 12
16.13   Clause 12 seeks to insert sub-section (11) so as to provide that the provisions of Section 43A of the Act will not
be applicable after enactment of the Bill.
SUGGESTIONS
 (i)       Modus operandi and time frame for changing the status of existing deemed public companies has not been
indicated.
 (ii)      Provisions be made that existing deemed public companies be reverted  to private companies status
unconditionally.
9
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           Entire Section 43A may not be deleted.  The provision of Section 43(A)(4) may be retained so that deemed
public companies may submit the Certificate of Incorporation to Registrar of Companies for correction by adding the
word ‘Private’ before the word ‘Limited’ in the name as indicated in the Certificate of Incorporation.  The Registrar will
do so forthwith.  No fee need be paid for this change as it is a statutory requirement on amendment of the Companies
Act, 1956.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.14   The Committee recommends that Clause 12 may be amended as agreed to by the Government.
16.15   As regards granting of approval forthwith by the ROC for changing a deemed public company to private
company, it may be prescribed in the rules that the said approval will be accorded within four weeks time.
16.16   Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 16
16.17   Clause 16 provides for insertion of a new Section 55A in the Principal Act namely-
“55A.  The provisions contained in Sections 55 to 58, 59 to 81, 108, 109,110, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121,
122, 205, 205A, 206, 206A, 207, 209 and 211 shall, -
in case of listed public companies
in case of those public companies which purport to be   listed,
be administered by the Securities and Exchange Board of India; and
in any other case, be administered by the Central Government.”.
SUGGESTIONS
The term ‘public companies which purport to be listed’ may be clarified.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
If administrative powers shifted to SEBI then some of the sections relating to capital market will not exist  so that
certain documents required to be filed with Registrar of Companies (ROC) will not be filed by the company.  Hence,
Department may not be able to function properly.
Administrative powers over sections 209 and 211 should remain with the Central Government
It was not clear whether various forms required to be filed under chapters relating to the   Capital Market with SEBI.
The power to frame rules, amend relevant schedules and prescribe regulations in respect of sections which are to be
administered by SEBI may be conferred on SEBI by amending Section 642 of the Act.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
Section 55A needs substantial amendments to clarify the doubts expressed and issues raised by Securities & Exchange
Board of India.  The power to administer Company Law is
10
conferred upon Department  of Company Affairs by Allocation of Business Rules.  Intention of 55A is not to create a
separate Companies Act exclusively applicable to Public Listed Companies.  The function of Registering Prospectus
(Section 60), Statement in lieu of Prospectus (Section 70), Return of allotment (Section 75) will continue to be with the
Registrar of Companies.
           Powers to hear petitions regarding issue of shares at a discount (Section 79),  redemption of irredeemable
preference share (Section 80A), extension of time for issue of shares/debentures certificates (Section 113) will require to
be retained with the Company Law Board as SEBI  is not a quasi-judicial body.
           Powers to decide applications submitted to the Central Government.  Further issue of shares on conversion of
loan/debenture into equity [Section 81(3) & (4) ], depreciation methods (Section 205) and power to make rule and
prescribe schedule will remain with Central Government.  Thus the above aspect needs to be incorporated by suitable
amendment in Section 55A of the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.18   The Committee recommends that Clause 16 may be amended suitably as indicated by the Department of
Company Affairs.
16.19   The clause is adopted as amended.
CLAUSE 19
16.20   Clause 19  provides for insertion of new Sections 58AA and 58AAA in the Principal Act  which inter alia
 provides for  ‘Company Law Board (CLB) to pass orders within 30 days of receipt of intimation of default of payment
from small depositors’, and  ‘offences with respect to small depositors are proposed to be made cognizable’,
respectively. 
SUGGESTION
The word ‘deposited’ should be substituted for the word ‘invested’.
Only such offences as are committed knowingly and willfully or with fraudulent  intention should be severely punished.
This is rather drastic and needs to be deleted. Only Managing Director, Whole Time Director and promoters should be
held responsible.
Instead  of information  for individual default, company may send periodical statement of default.
No company shall at any time accept further deposit  from  small depositors….. Apart from the present definition of 
small depositor amendment  to  include  successor and therefore legal representative and nominee.
Requirement to disclose default  in  future advertisement inviting deposits, be for a period 3 years from the date of
default.
Section 58AA(7) may be deleted.
The word ‘invested’ be replaced by ‘deposited’.
Depositors would get the right to vote in Annual General Meeting when the company commits  defaults in repayment of
deposits.
11
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           The words ‘invested’ appearing in Explanation below  sub-clause (11) of Sec.58AA may be substituted  by the
word ‘deposited’.  Suggestion to modify Sec.58AAA and make offence cognizable in respect of only Whole
Time/Managing Director is not acceptable.  Disclosing of defaults in Advertisement  and Application Form inviting
Deposits  shall be  required for all times, as it is in  investors interest to know  the fact of  the default in printed words
and not by word of mouth.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.21   The Committee recommends that  Clause 19 may be amended  in such manner so that the  suggestion as

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
agreed to by the Government is incorporated.
16.22   Discussion took place in the Committee with regard to the aspect of cognisable   offences as prescribed in
the clause. The Secretary, Department of Company Affairs inter alia informed the Committee that the provision
of this clause is based on the 143rd Report of the Law Commission, the Working Group Report and the views of
the depositors. He further clarified that these provisions are meant to safeguard the interest of the small
depositors and also to  induce fear in the minds of some part-time directors who do not take interest in the affairs
of the company.  Through this clause the collective responsibility concept has been sought to be incorporated. 
16.23   During the course of discussion it was inter alia suggested that since the power may be misused, a
provision should be made that prosecution would be launched with the prior permission of the competent
authority.  This suggestion was agreed to by the Secretary,  Department of Company Affairs. 
16.24   The Committee, accordingly, recommends that explicit provision may be made in the rules/guidelines that
prosecution in the case of cognisable offences would be taken up only after prior sanction of the competent
authority.
Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 75
16.26   Clause 75 seeks to insert new Section 192A in the Act providing for  Companies to pass certain resolutions by
Postal Ballots as prescribed  by the Union Government.
SUGGESTIONS
The language of this sub-clause suggests as if all the shareholders have to vote only by Postal Ballot.
Value of share should be given weightage for purpose of poll.
This system is expensive and time consuming.  Instead role of proxies could be strengthened.  Practical   difficulties 
should also be taken  into account while framing rules.
The topics which   are to be covered by postal ballot should be given in the Act itself.  A few objections  have been
raised such as cost of ballot paper, practical difficulties etc.
In Section  192A(4) the word ‘requisite’ may be inserted before the words “majority  of shareholders”.  The date on
which resolution will be deemed to have been passed, specified.
12
Electronic mode be permitted for issue of notices and response for Postal Ballots.  Procedure    proposed by Kumar
Manglam  Birla Committee be adopted.
The amendment be modified to add
After “thirty days”  or “further period”  as may be specified in the notice.
Sub-section (4) be modified.
(viii)    Amendment be made in sub-clause(5) for examination of rejected ballot papers,  by an independent person to be
appointed by Board of Director.  The word ‘shareholders’ be substituted with the word ‘Members’. Postal Ballots will
be  verified by scrutinizers appointed by Chairman    of the meeting as prescribed in Section 184 of the Act.
GOVERNMENT’S  VIEWS
           Postal Ballot includes  Electronic Voting.  Experience  of several decades have shown that most of the
shareholders who resides in far flung areas are unable to attend Annual or Extraordinary General Meetings.  By Postal
Ballot  shareholders can take part in decision  making of the company.  The concept of Postal Ballot was also
recommended  by Working Group set up by Government to propose a new Bill to re-enact  Companies  Act, 1956 and
also by Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee on Corporate Governance.  The provisions of Postal Ballot will be
prescribed  only on issues  where  participation of   every shareholder  is essential e.g.  investment proposals,
appointment  of Directors etc.  as proposed in the report of Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee.  The procedure for 
postal  ballot as  prescribed by Government will provide for appointment of  scrutinisers, electronic  voting and other
safeguards against destruction of   postal  ballot received from shareholders of  the company.  The word ‘requisite’ may
be added before the words  ‘ majority  of shareholders’ in sub-clause (4) of Section  192A.
COMMITTEE’S  RECOMMENDATION
16.27   The Committee recommends that  Clause 75 may be amended  in such manner that  suggestions as agreed
to by the Government are incorporated therein and rules should be framed subsequently to take care of the
accepted suggestions. 
16.28   The Committee also re        commends with regard to the items on which Postal Ballot is proposed to be
prescribed and the same may be included in the new Section 192A itself.
Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
CLAUSE 122
16.30   Clause 122 provides that  small shareholders can elect at least one  Director in each Board of Directors of
Companies with a paid up capital of Rs. 5 crores or more and having 1000 or more small shareholders.
SUGGESTIONS
The requirement of at least one Director for small shareholder should  be deleted.
Small shareholders should be defined as one who along with his relatives hold nominal value of shares of Rs. 20,000/-
or less.
Record Date for ascertaining 1000 or small shareholders be indicated in Section.
13
Whether all holdings have to be aggregated to ascertain whether a person is a small shareholder?
This requirement should be confined to only listed public companies. Public financial institutions and scheduled  banks
should be excluded.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           The suggestion to omit the provision for representation of small shareholders by electing at least one among them
on Board of Directors cannot be accepted because small shareholders do not have a voice to represent on Board of
Directors as on date. The election will take place in the manner as may be prescribed. It is proposed to include an
explanation that for the purpose of ascertaining 1000 number of shareholders and Rs. 5 crores or more paid up share
capital, the basis shall be the date of issue of notice.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.31   The Committee recommends that Clause 122 may be amended suitably so as to incorporate the suggestion
as agreed to by the Government.
The clause is adopted, as amended.
CLAUSE 134
16.33   Clause 134 provides that every public company having paid up capital of not less than Rs. 5 crores shall have an
Audit Committee.
SUGGESTIONS
Sub-clause (8) should be amended so that Board is not bound by the recommendations of Audit committee for sufficient
reasons to be disclosed.
It may be provided that if the Board does not accept the recommendations of the Audit Committee, it should record its
reasons for not accepting the same.
Government should have  powers to prescribe the functions of the Audit Committee through rules framed in this regard.
Audit Committee should also have discussions with Cost Auditors, Internal Audit apart from Auditors and also review
cost statements and cost audit report periodically.
Only listed companies should have Audit Committee.
Audit Committee to review compliance of Companies Act, other Corporate Laws and Fiscal Laws.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           The supremacy of the views of Audit Committee of Board  of Directors in financial matters is recognised by the
corporate laws and also by recommendations of various committees on excellence in corporate governance. The
measure has to be given a fair trial and should not be brushed aside. The suggestion to dilute the recommendations of
Audit Committee by full Board of Directors is not accepted.
           We may point out that RBI has proposed in the  Investors’ Protection Act that NBFCs  with assets base of 50
crores should appoint an Audit Committee.
14
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.34   The Committee is not fully convinced with the rationale  provided by the Government in regard to  the
supremacy of Audit Committee.  The Committee is of the view that if the Board of Directors does not agree with
the views of the Audit Committee, it will have to give reasons for not accepting it and the shareholders should
know it.   Accordingly, sub-clause (8) of  new Section 292A may be suitably re-drafted.  Thereupon, the
representatives of the Department of Company Affairs read out the amended sub-clause as follows :-
“Recommendations of the Audit Committee on any matter relating to financial management, including audit
report, shall be binding on the Board. However, if the Board of Directors does not agree, the reasons for
disagreement in writing will be intimated to the shareholders, to be reported in Annual General Meeting, and the
view of the shareholders shall be final.”
16.35   The Committee then suggested that instead of  the word “however”,  the words “Provided that” may be

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
substituted.
16.36   The Clause is adopted, as amended.
CLAUSE 165
16.37   Clause 165 seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (1) of Section 383A to provide for Secretarial Compliance
Certificate from a Secretary in whole-time practice and to enhance the fine specified in sub-section (1A) from fifty
rupees to five hundred rupees.
SUGGESTIONS
The Compliance Certificate be attached to Directors’ Report in addition to the same being filed with the Registrar.
Instead of Compliance Certificate the clause may provide for Compliance Report to give it a wide scope.
Proviso to sub-section (1A) be deleted to avoid its misuse.
The requirement for companies between paid up capital from Rs. 10 lakhs to below Rs. 50 lakhs was in order.
The monetary limit should be increased to Rs. 25 lakhs for Secretarial Compliance Report.
Chartered Accountants may also be allowed to undertake the certification task as proposed.
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
           A practicing Company Secretary is specially trained in corporate laws and his practical training includes study of
compliance of corporate laws by studying records in the Office of Registrar of Companies. The requirement of carrying
on check of compliance of Companies Act, 1956 by a qualified Company Secretary in whole time practice alone, and
not by a Chartered Accountant, is fully justified.
The  suggestion that in addition to filing ‘Secretarial Compliance Report’ it should also be attached to the Directors’
Report, may be accepted and suitable amendments will be made in this regard.
15
Suggestion to increase the limits of paid up Capital for this purpose from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 25 Lakhs or Rs. 50 lakhs is
not acceptable as most of the small companies are found to be violating even the basic provision of filing Annual
Accounts and Annual Returns.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.38   The Committee notes the comments of the Government. The Committee recommends that provision may
be made that in addition to filing “Secretarial Compliance Report” it should also be attached to the Directors’
Report.  The Committee also recommends that consequential changes may be made in  Section 217 of the
Principal Act.
Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 214
16.40   Clause 214 provides for offences against the Act to be cognizable also on complaint by SEBI in addition to the
Registrar, shareholder or Government.
SUGGESTIONS
           If it is intended that the SEBI’s authority be limited only to contravention in relation to the specified sections,
then suitable qualifying words need to be inserted.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
It is proposed to add a proviso to the effect that SEBI shall be eligible to file prosecutions only in respect of offences
relating to sections specified in Section 55A.
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION
16.41   The Committee recommends that the Clause  may be amended suitably so as to incorporate the
suggestions as agreed to by the Government.
16.42   Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
17.      Clauses 4 to 6, 8 to 11, 13 to 15, 17, 18, 20 to 74, 76 to 121, 123 to 133, 135 to 164, 166 to 213, 215 to 224
were adopted without any change.
18.      Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or
drafting nature, namely, “1999” and “Fiftieth” to be substituted by “2000” and “Fifty-first”, respectively.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
19.0     The Committee notes that the nomenclature of the Companies Act  was framed almost a century ago.  In
the present day corporate parlance, corporate governance is being talked about.  In this context, the Committee
feels that the Government may deliberate on the need for changing the nomenclature of the Companies Act to
“Corporate Governance Act” because the whole purpose of the amendments sought to be made through the two
Bills  and those already enforced  by the Companies Amendment Act, 1999, is to ensure that there is 
transparency, efficiency, competitiveness  and effectiveness which are the hallmarks of good corporate

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
governance.  The Committee, thus, feels that it would be timely and appropriate if the
16
essence of corporate governance could be reflected in the nomenclature of the Companies Act itself.
19.1     Accordingly, the Committee calls upon  the Department of Company Affairs to take  appropriate follow
up action in the matter.
19.2     Secondly, in the context of giving representation to the small investors in the Board of Directors, the
Committee is of the view that  since a large number of women professionals are entering the arena of corporate
management, giving them adequate representation on the Board of Directors of Companies should be considered
by the Government.
20.0     While clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill was taken up, a point was raised that the “Notes on
Clauses” appended to the Bill were  insufficient, incomplete and examples of  paraphrasing without being able to
convey the purport of the amendments and the rationale behind them.  Such deficient notes were of hardly any
help to the Members while considering the Bills either in Parliament or in Committees.  It was further pointed
out that “Notes on Clauses”  were  being prepared almost in a routine and ritualistic  manner.
20.1     After some discussion, the Committee directed the representatives of the Department of Company Affairs
and the Legislative Department to take note of the objections raised and take corrective steps in future.
20.2     The Committee hopes that in future the “Notes on Clauses”    appended to the Bills  would be meaningful
and helpful to the Members.
21.
             Subject to recommendations in paragraph 16.1 to 16.41, 19.0 to 19.2 and 20.0 to 20.2  supra the
Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the amendments suggested by it.
 NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                                             PRANAB MUKHERJEE
11 July, 2000                                                                                                                                     CHAIRMAN
                                                             
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
Clause 2
g       The Committee recommends that suitable amendments may be made/ action may be taken to give effect to
the suggestions accepted by the Government.
g       The Committee notes that there is no provision to take care of the interest which might accrue on the
dividend amount to be transferred to a separate Bank Account. The Committee recommends that a provision
may be made that whatever interest accrues on that account, it should go to the Investors’ Protection Fund.
g       A point was raised that before a shareholder could deposit the dividend warrant in the Bank, he has to
sign at the back of the same. Some dividend warrants contain a column on the reverse namely ‘shareholders
signature’. It was felt that this system of putting signature on the reverse on the dividend warrant should be
discontinued while depositing the same in the Bank Account. The Committee while agreeing with the same,
recommends that a guideline may be issued to that effect.
g       Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
(Para 16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4 & 16.5)
Clause 3
g       The Committee recommends that clause 3 may be suitably amended so as to incorporate the suggestion as
agreed to by the Government.
           g       The clause is adopted as amended.
 (Para 16.6, 16.7 & 16.8)
Clause 7
g       The Committee recommends that it may be clarified in the rules that the provision of new section 17A
shall apply only in case of change of registered office of a company from the jurisdiction of one Registrar of
Companies (ROC) to another ROC in the same state.
g       In order to ensure that a company does not unnecessary suffer and the Regional Directors remain alert, it
may be prescribed in the rules that after an application has been filed in the office of Regional Director, it has to
confirm the same within a stipulated period of 30 days, and upon lapse of the specified period it will be deemed
that Regional Director has consented to such change.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
g       Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 (Para 16.9, 16.10, 16.11 & 16.12)
Clause 12
g       The Committee recommends that Clause 12 may be amended as agreed to by the Government.
g       As regards granting of approval forthwith by the ROC for changing a deemed public company to private
company, it may be prescribed in the rules that the said approval will be accorded within four weeks time.
g       Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 (Para 16.13, 16.14, 16.15 & 16.16)
17
18
Clause 16
g       The Committee recommends that Clause 16 may be amended suitably as indicated by t       he Department
of Company Affairs.
g       The clause is adopted as amended.
(Para 16.17, 16.18  & 16.19)
Clause 19
g       The Committee recommends that  Clause 19 may be amended  in such manner so that the  suggestion as
agreed to by the Government is incorporated.
g       Discussion took place in the Committee with regard to the aspect of cognisable   offences as prescribed in
the clause. The Secretary, Department of Company Affairs inter alia informed the Committee that the provision
of this clause is based on the 143
rd Report of the Law Commission, the Working Group Report and the views of
the depositors. He further clarified that these provisions are meant to safeguard the interest of the small
depositors and also to  induce fear in the minds of some part-time directors who do not take interest in the affairs
of the company.  Through this clause the collective responsibility concept has been sought to be incorporated. 
g       During the course of discussion it was inter alia suggested that since the power may be misused, a provision
should be made that prosecution would be launched   with the prior permission of the competent  authority.  This
suggestion was agreed to by the Secretary,  Department of Company Affairs. 
g       The Committee, accordingly,  recommends that explicit provision may be made in the rules/guidelines that
prosecution in the case of  cognisable  offences would be taken up only after prior sanction of the competent
authority.
g       Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 (Para 16.20, 16.21, 16.22, 16.23, 16.24 & 16.25)
Clause 75
g       The Committee recommends that  Clause 75 may be amended  in such manner that  suggestions as agreed
to by the Government are incorporated therein and rules should be framed subsequently to take care of the
accepted suggestions. 
g       The Committee also re        commends with regard to the items on which Postal Ballot is proposed to be
prescribed the same may be included in the new Section 192A itself.
g       Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 (Para 16.26, 16.27, 16.28  & 16.29)
Clause 122
g       The Committee recommends that Clause 122 may be amended suitably so as to incorporate the suggestion
as agreed to by the Government.
g       The clause is adopted, as amended.
 (Para 16.30, 16.31 & 16.32)
sClause 134
g       The Committee is not fully convinced with the rationale  provided by the Government in regard to  the
supremacy of Audit Committee.  The Committee is of the view that if the Board of Directors does not agree with
the views of the
19

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Audit Committee, it will have to give reasons for not accepting it and the shareholders should know it.  
Accordingly, sub-clause (8) of  new Section 292A may be suitably re-drafted. 
Thereupon, the representatives of the Department of Company Affairs read out the amended sub-clause as
follows :-
“Recommendations of the Audit Committee on any matter relating to financial management, including audit
report, shall be binding on the Board. However, if the Board of Directors does not agree, the reasons for
disagreement in writing will be intimated to the shareholders, to be reported in Annual General Meeting, and the
view of the shareholders shall be final.”
g       The Committee then suggested that instead of  the word “however”,  the words “Provided that” may be
substituted.
g       The Clause was adopted,  as amended.
 (Para 16.33, 16.34, 16.35  & 16.36)
Clause 165
g       The Committee notes the comments of the Government. The Committee recommends that provision may
be made that in addition to filing “Secretarial Compliance Report” it should also be attached to the Directors’
Report.  The Committee also recommends that consequential changes may be made in  Section 217 of the
Principal Act.
g       Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
 (Para 16.37, 16.38 & 16.39)
Clause 214
g       The Committee recommends that the Clause  may be amended suitably so as to incorporate the
suggestions as agreed to by the Government.
g       Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
(Para 16.40 , 16.41 & 16.42)
Remaining Clauses
Clauses 4 to 6, 8 to 11, 13 to 15, 17, 18, 20 to 74, 76 to 121, 123 to 133, 135 to 164, 166 to 213, 215 to 224 were
adopted without any change.
(Para 17)
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
g       Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or
drafting nature, namely, “1999” and “Fiftieth” to be substituted by “2000” and “Fifty-first”, respectively.
(Para 18)
General observations
g       The Committee notes that the nomenclature of the Companies Act  was framed almost a century ago.  In
the present day corporate parlance, corporate governance is being talked about.  In this context, the Committee
feels that the Government may deliberate on the need for changing the nomenclature of the
20
Companies Act to “Corporate Governance Act” because the whole purpose of the amendments sought to be
made through the two Bills  and those already enforced  by the Companies Amendment Act, 1999, is to ensure
that there is  transparency, efficiency, competitiveness  and effectiveness which are the hallmarks of good
corporate governance.  The Committee, thus, feels that it would be timely and appropriate if the essence of
corporate governance could be reflected in the nomenclature of the Companies Act itself.
g       Accordingly, the Committee calls upon  the Department of Company Affairs to take  appropriate follow
up action in the matter.
g       Secondly, in the context of giving representation to the small investors in the Board of Directors, the
Committee is of the view that  since a large number of women professionals are entering the arena of corporate
management, giving them adequate representation on the Board of Directors of Companies should be considered
by the Government.
g       While clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill was taken up, a point was raised that the “Notes on
Clauses” appended to the Bill were  insufficient, incomplete and examples of  paraphrasing without being able to
convey the purport of the amendments and the rationale behind them.  Such deficient notes were of hardly any

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
help to the Members while considering the Bills either in Parliament or in Committees.  It was further pointed
out that “Notes on Clauses”  were  being prepared almost in a routine and ritualistic  manner.
g       After some discussion, the Committee directed the representatives of the Department of Company Affairs
and the Legislative Department to take note of the objections raised and take corrective steps in future.
g       The Committee hopes that in future the “Notes on Clauses”    appended to the Bills  would be meaningful
and helpful to the Members.
g       Subject to recommendations in paragraph 16.1 to 16.41, 19.0 to 19.2 and 20.0 to 20.2  supra the Committee
recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the amendments suggested by it.
(Para 19.0, 19.1, 19.2, 20.0, 20.1, 20.2 & 21)
__________________________________________________________________________
MINUTES
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday,  30 May 2000,  in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground  Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
Shri Drupad Borgohain
Shri Kuldip Nayyar
Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
Shri Manabendra Shah          
Shri Vinay Katiyar                
Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi    
Shri Anadi Sahu         
Shri Ram Nagina Mishra       
Shrimati Jayashreee Banerjee
Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
Shri Jitendra Prasada
Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel
Shri M.O.H. Farook
Shri Samar Choudhury
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Shri Arun Kumar
Shri P.H. Pandian
Dr. Raguvansh Prasad Singh
Shri Vijay Goel
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  LAW,JUSTICE AND      COMPANY AFFAIRS
(Department of Company Affairs)
Dr. P.L. Sanjeev Reddy, Secretary
Shri A. Ramaswamy, Joint Secretary
Shri J.P. Prabhu, Joint Secretary

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Shri S.B. Mathur, Director
Shri R. Vasudevan, Director
Shri S.K. Sharma, Assistant Director
2.        The Chairman in his opening observations pointed out that the Companies Bill 1997 was first referred to the
Committee on Finance but due to transfer of Department of Company Affairs to Ministry of Law Justice & Company
Affairs, the Bill was sent to Committee on Home Affairs.  In the meantime, the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill
1999 had also been referred to it. This Bill  incorporated some of the features of the Bill of 1997. The Second
Amendment  Bill sought to delete 84 clauses of the Companies Act, 1956 and 138 clauses of the Bill were for
enhancement of punishment. The Chairman apprised the Committee that the Government was interested in the passage
of the Second Amendment Bill first due to the urgency of bringing into force the provisions of the Bill.  However, the
Committee decided to  take up both the Bills together.
3.        Thereafter, the  Chairman asked Secretary, Department of Company Affairs to make a detailed presentation on
the two Bills. The Secretary in his detailed presentation pointed out that the 1956 Act had been amended seventeen
times. The need for the  amendment in the recent past and the present one was  felt due to the passage of the  New
Economic Policy announced in 1991; rapid economic developments taking place globally; liberalization of economies;
access to world market and WTO etc. The Secretary stated that the first amendment after introduction of the Companies
Bill, 1997 came into force with effect from 1st April 1999. While explaining the  main objectives of the latest Bill, the
Secretary stated that the Bill sought to provide transparency and good corporate governance; investors’ protection;
stringent penalties and repeal of redundant provisions. The Secretary also stated that as on 1
st January 2000, 5,32,580
companies were at work with estimated paid-up capital of Rs. 2,72,865 crores. The investors protection measure
included dividend including interim dividend to be paid within 30 days; effective curb on changing registered office
frequently; offer of securities to more than 50 persons in a financial year to be treated as public offer; and small
shareholders’ right to be represented on the Board. About the corporate governance the Secretary pointed out that the
proposal for minimum paid-up capital of Rs. 1 lac for private companies to prevent misuse of facility of limited liability
companies; capital market related provisions to be administered by Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI);
Director’s report to include a Director’s responsibility statement;  public listed companies with paid-up capital of Rs. 5
crores to set up Audit Committee ; Companies with paid-up capital of Rs. 10 lacs or more to obtain a Secretarial
Compliance Certificate;  introduction of Postal Ballot for certain important matters which are crucial to good corporate
governance; appointment of Auditors in the Government Companies directly by Comptroller and Auditor General of
India and fixation of their remuneration by the shareholders in the Annual General Meeting ;  Directors to be
disqualified to be appointed  as Directors in other public companies in case of non-filing of Annual Returns and Annual
Accounts for a continuous period of 3 years and non-payment of deposits etc. on maturity; a person cannot be Director
in more than 15 companies and security holder of a company not to be appointed as Auditor of that company.
25
After the Secretary’s presentation, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some points relating to the
provisions of the Bill.
4.1      The Secretary replied to some of the points and for rest of them he promised to send written responses.
5.        *                               *                                         *
6.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee, then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 31 May, 2000.
__________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 1 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘E’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
Dr. L.M. Singhvi
Shri K.M. Saifullah

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Shri Kuldip Nayyar
Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari                       
Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi    
Shri Anadi Sahu
Maj.Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri        
Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Shri N. Janardhana Reddy     
Shri M.O.H. Farook
Shri Samar Choudhury
Shri Subodh Roy
Shri Shriniwas Patil
Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Shri Vijay Goel
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CONFEDERATION  OF INDIAN     INDUSTRIES (CII):
Shri Vijay Kapur, Chairman, Communication Committee
Shri Biswajit Bhattacharyya.
Shri U.K. Chowdhary
Shri Abhijit Mukhopadhyay
REPRESENTATIVES OF  THE PHD CHAMBERS OF  COMMERCE:
Shri K.S. Mehta, President
Shri S. Kapoor,
Shri Vinod Kumar  Chandiok
REPRESENTATIVES OF   INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA (ICSI)
Shri J. Sridhar, President
Shri R. Krishnan, Founder President
Shri Virender Ganda, Former President
Shri Harish K. Vaid, Council Member
Shri Pavan Kumar Vijay, Council Member
Dr. S.P. Narang, Secretary
Shri A.R. Gangopadhyay
Shri V.K. Aggarwal, Senior Director of Studies and Research
THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999 & COMPANIES BILL, 1997
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of  CII  to the meeting and requested the leader of their
delegation to make a presentation on the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999  and  Companies Bill, 1997.
3.0      The Chairman,Communication Committee CII, accordingly made a presentation on the provisions of  the Bills. 
He emphasised that provisions for more effective administration of the companies were welcome but this should not
lead to a fear psychosis where the Directors and Officers were put to unnecessary fear of prosecution. He suggested that
small offences should not be tried by criminal courts and separate Company Law Tribunals should be set up to look into
such offences.
3.1      Another representative  of CII  highlighted the pros and cons of issues like definition of dividend  and interim
dividend, deemed companies and private companies, shifting of registered office of the company from one place to
other, the transfer of some of the provisions of the Companies Act from the existing Department  of Company Affairs to
SEBI, protection of small depositors, postal ballot, appointment of directors to represent the interests of small investors,
and Audit Committee.
3.2      Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised certain issues and queries for

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
comments/clarifications from CII.  The queries included fear psychosis, shifting of registered office, false companies,
interim dividend, postal ballot system and interests of  small depositors and changes made by industrialised countries in
their corporate laws after the formation of WTO.  The Chairman directed the representatives of CII to send their written
comments  to the queries raised by him and the Members.
4.0      The Chairman while welcoming the President, PHD Chambers of Commerce  and his colleagues, made general
observations on the Bills and requested the President, PHD Chambers of Commerce to make his representation.
4.1      The President, PHD Chambers of Commerce , submitted the views of their Chamber on various aspects of the
Companies Bills and put forth their suggestions.  He also took up the issues of penalties, holding and subsidiary
companies, merger of partnership firms with
28
companies directly, buy-back shares by private limited companies, audit quality, Board of Directors etc.
4.2.     Another representative  of  PHD Chamber of Commerce presented his views on time limit for payment of interim
dividend, change of registered office of a company and qualification and disqualification of auditors.
4.3.     Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee sought certain clarifications and comments regarding
clauses which were  proposed to be deleted, working directors and non-executive directors, shifting of the registered
office, equity  accounting and consolidation of accounts and accounting standards.
5.0      The Chairman, while welcoming the President of the Institute of Company Secretaries  of India and his
colleagues, gave a brief outline of the background of  the Companies  Bills and requested the representatives  of ICSI to
take the floor.
5.1      The Founder President, Institute of Company Secretaries of India, apprised the Committee about brief history of
the Institute and submitted his views about certain clauses of the Bills.  He suggested that every Director’s Report
should contain a Directors Responsibility Statement and Boards Report should also include a status report on statutory
compliance to be given by a Company Secretary in whole time practice. Also, a Company Secretary should be the
Secretary of the Audit Committee and Compliance Certificate of the Company Secretary should form part of the
Directors Report.  He also submitted his views about defaulting companies, shifting of registered office, postal ballot,
number of directorship and inspection of companies .
5.2      Thereafter,  brief observations  were made by the President, ICSI.
5.3      Thereafter, Chairman and  Members of the Committee inter alia sought   comments on the clauses dealing with
cognizable  offences and the clauses proposed to be deleted.  The Chairman asked the President of the Institute  to send 
written responses along with  hard copies of  their computer  presentation.
6.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.        The Committee then adjourned at 5.42 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday,  2 June  2000.
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 P.M. on Friday, 2 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘53’, First  Floor, Parliament, New
Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.        Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
3.        Shri Kuldip Nayyar
4.        Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
5.        Shri Manabendra Shah
6.        Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
7.        Shri Anadi Sahu
8.        Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
9.        Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
10.      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
11.      Shri M.O.H.Farook
12.      Shri Subodh Roy
13.      Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
SECRETARIAT

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
           Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
           Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA (ICWAI)
Shri V.B. Behede, President
Shri Dhananjay V. Joshi, Member
Dr. D. Jagannathan,  Director (Tech.)
REPRESENTATIVES OF ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS  OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES (ASSOCHAM)
Shri L.V. Iyer, Co-Chairman, Company Affairs Committee
Shri P.R. Ramesh, Partner, Billimoria & Company
Shri Abhijit  Mukhopadhyay, Director, Ranbaxy
Shri Namo Narain, Company Secretary
Shri Delep Goswami, Consultant
Shri Jayant Bhuyan, Secretary-General
Shri T.G. Keswani, Secretary
29
30
REPRESENTATIVES OF INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED  ACCOUNTS OF INDIA (ICAI)
Shri  G. Sitharaman, President
Shri K.P. Khandelwal, Chairman, Corporate Laws Committee
Shri Vinod Jain, Member, Central Council
Shri Ashok Haldia, Secretary, Corporate Laws Committee
COMPANIES BILL, 1997 AND THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
2.        At the outset the Chairman welcomed the President of the ICWAI and his team of officials and requested  them 
to make a presentation   on the various  provisions of the Companies Bill, 1997 and the Companies (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1999.
3.0      The President of ICWAI made a detailed presentation/suggestions on the various provisions of the  Bills,
particularly  with regard  to the maintenance  of  Cost Record and Cost Audit.  He pointed  out that  the Bills had
already  identified  that  there should be  maintenance  of cost records in respect of manufacturing  companies,
companies  engaged in production  process or minor activities .  This should also  cover activities  like power,
infrastructure, service sector and software services for the purpose  of maintenance of cost records.  The representative
of ICWAI also stressed the need for appointing  a whole  time  Cost Accountant in a company/public  company
reaching  a turnover of Rs.20 crores  in a financial  year. He also  suggested  that in the case of evaluation  of raw
materials, spares,  tools,  etc. at the end of the financial year,  should be certified by a  Cost Accountant.
3.1      The representative of ICWAI pointed out  that the delegation  of powers to SEBI  in respect of Sections 209 and
211 would not be appropriate.  He  stressed  the need for inclusion  of Cost  Auditors,  along with  Financial  Auditors, 
in the Audit Committee under Section 292 (a) .  The National Accounting  Standards Advisory  Committee may also be
re-named as National Accounting   Standard Board and may comprise  both financial as well as cost accountants. He
also suggested for appointment of a whole  time Accounts  Officer to be known as Chief  Accounts Officer in every
public company  on reaching a turnover of Rs. 20  crores in any financial year.
4.0      The Committee thereafter heard the views of the Associated  Chambers of Commerce and Industries
(ASSOCHAM) on the various provisions  of the Bills.  The representatives of ASSOCHAM   expressed  their
reservation  on the provisions of  the 1999 Bill regarding the change of registered office of a company in the same state. 
They were of the opinion that in an era of de-control, any sort of control like permission for shifting of the  registered
office of a company within the State, may result in something which was not intended.  Therefore, they felt that shifting 
of the registered office within a State should not call for any approval whatsoever.
4.1      While welcoming the idea of having  a postal ballot system,  ASSOCHAM   opined that mandating postal ballot
through registered post was a very expensive proposition and the most effective way of conducting postal ballot was
through ordinary post and the  addressee should  pay the postal charges so that there was no wastage of money. 
4.2      While discussing the responsibility of Board of Directors.  The representatives of  ASSOCHAM were of the view
that a director, should not be automatically roped in the ambit
31
of officer  in default.   He further expressed his view that the Auditors should also not be brought  within  the scope of
officer in default because Auditors were not involved in the day-to-day management of the company.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
4.3      Regarding the recommendations of  Audit Committee, ASSOCHAM  was of the view that the Board of Directors
should not be controlled by an Audit Committee which in result would become a super Board. Therefore, it was  felt
that  the recommendations of the Audit Committee should not be mandatory and whenever a recommendation of the
Audit Committee was not accepted by the Board, such differences must find a place in the Director’s Responsibility
Statement.
4.4      Regarding making the offence of non-payment of deposit as a cognisable offence, ASSOCHAM was of the view
that the Company Law Board  had been sufficiently empowered to take care of the interests of depositors and there was
also the Reserve Bank of India which administered the NBFCs and therefore, in a liberalised  and globalised economy,
there was no justification for passing on to Directors,  the prospect of a congnigable offence. 
5.0      The Committee, then heard  the views of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI).  At first they
made  an audio-visual  presentation  wherein they outlined the background of ICAI and thereafter proceeded  with their 
suggestions  on the various provisions  of the Bills as under:-
AUDIT CEILING
Suggestions
Present position of 10 big + 10 small audit justified  - requires  no change.
Definition of big can go up from 25 lakhs to 50 lakhs.
Even large Private Company with 1,000 crores turnover would still be a private company.
Private & Public company cannot be criteria-size has to be criteria
Ceiling is justified to ensure quality.
Concentration of group audit with one firm may affect independence
AUDITORS’ INDEPENDENCE
Suggestions
Not in interest of shareholders nor for better corporate  governance.
Rotation do not improve independence
Rotation of auditors result in higher cost.
No such practice elsewhere
Joint Auditors  - One to be appointed by the Company and the other by Central Government from ICAI panel.
AUDIT QUALIFICATION
Suggestions
This amendment may be dropped
Qualifications, Disclaimer & Adverse Opinion to be highlighted by underline, thick type or italics
32
AUDIT COMMITTEE
Suggestions
A maximum limit of capital may be suggested say 2%
Holding 100, 200, 500 shares in a company do not  affect independence
Grace period for Disinvestment should be  extended  to  “three years” instead of “one year”
CHANGE OF REGISTERED OFFICE
Suggestions
           ·         Change of registered office to become effective only on proper filing
           ·         With registrar and      
           ·         With SEBI for listed company
5.1      The Chairman and the Members sought clarifications from the ICAI on some of the points which emerged during
the presentation on the Bills,  some of which were  replied and for rest of them they were asked to send  the same in
writing. 
6.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.        The Committee then adjourned at 5.55 P.M.
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday,  13 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground   Floor, Parliament
House Annexe,  New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
3.        Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
4.        Shri Drupad Borgohain
5.        Shri Kuldip Nayyar
LOK SABHA
6.        Shri Manabendra Shah
7.        Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
8.        Shri Vinay Katiyar
9.        Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
10.      Shri Anadi Sahu
11.      Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
12.      Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
13.      Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
14.      Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
15.      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
16.      Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
17.      Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel
18.      Shri M.O.H.Farook
19.      Shri Samar Choudhury
20.      Dr. S. Venugopalachari
21.      Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVE OF  SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA ( SEBI)
Shri D.R. Mehta, Chairman
Shri L.K. Singhvi, Sr.Executive Director
Ms. D.N. Raval, Executive Director
Ms. Anita Kapur, Regional Officer
33
34
REPRESENTATIVE OF  INDUSTRIAL CREDIT & INVESTMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
(ICICI)
Shri S.H. Bhojani, Deputy Managing Director
Shri Pramod Rao, Vice-President
2.        The Chairman informed the Committee about the communication received from the Ministry of Home Affairs
conveying that the Jammu & Kashmir Government had suggested the rescheduling of the proposed study visit of the
Committee to that State, to the first week of July, 2000 due to commencement of the Summer Session of Legislative
Assembly and observance of certain holidays
3.        The Committee after some deliberations decided to visit J&K from 6 to 9 July, 2000.  The Committee, for that
purpose authorised its Chairman to constitute a Study Group.
4.0      The Chairman further informed the Committee that a detailed reply on the counterfeit five hundred rupees note,
handed over by a Member of the Committee to him, had been received from the Ministry of Finance, which would be
circulated to the Members by the Secretariat soon.
4.1      *                                         *                                         *
5.        *                                         *                                         *
5.1      *                                         *                                         *
COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999 AND COMPANIES  BILL, 1997
6.        The Chairman then welcomed the Chairman and officers from Securities Exchange Board of India to the
meeting  and referred to certain issues related to the Bills, namely, effectiveness and efficacy of postal ballot system,
responsibility of functional directors, protection of small investors’ interest etc.  He then requested the Chairman, SEBI
to  express the view points of his organisation on the legislations.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
7.0      The Chairman, SEBI made an audio-visual presentation on the salient features of the Bills and SEBI’s
suggestions/views on the various provisions thereof.
The Chairman, SEBI further stated that one of the major problems which the corporate  administration of the  country 
was facing, was the multiplicity of regulations and regulators .  He, therefore, submitted that so far as the capital market
was concerned, a single regulatory authority should be entrusted with the powers to superintend and prosecute 
defaulting companies and their Directors, but in the present  system, even after the enactment of the  Bills in their
present form,  SEBI had been given powers to inspect   and for punishment  it was  with the Department of Company 
Affairs.  He emphasized that SEBI should be a single legal authority for all purposes with regard to corporate affairs, as
was being followed  in England , Japan, South Korea, Pakistan and to some extent, the Scandinavian countries,
Australia, and some other countries.  The SEBI representatives also referred to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of
the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999 which says that the SEBI be entrusted with powers with regard to all
matters relating to public issues and transfers, including power to prosecute defaulting companies and their directors,
but in actuality the SEBI had been given only the powers to prosecute but not the superintendence or administration.
_________________________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matters.
35
7.2      The Chairman, SEBI then stated that the amounts  prescribed as penalties for the defaulting companies was very
meagre.   He, therefore, submitted that it should be enhanced  to such an extent that it acted as a kind of a deterrent.  He
further added that the right of prosecution was with the SEBI, but the right of compounding of offences was with the
Department  of Company Affairs.   He was of the opinion that for governance of companies, stock markets, protecting
the interests of the investors, etc. all such powers should be given to SEBI.
7.3      The Chairman and Members thereafter put forward certain queries, some of which were replied to and for the
rest, SEBI was asked to send written responses.
8.        The Chairman  welcomed Deputy Managing Director and the other officer from Industrial Credit & Investment 
Corporation of India to the meeting.
9.        The Deputy Managing Director of the ICICI made an audio-visual presentation on the salient features of the Bills
and their  suggestions/views on the various provisions thereof. 
9.1      Thereafter, the Dy. M.D. of ICICI stated  that the liquidation of a company took a very long time  - from the time
the winding up order was passed till the date the final winding up certificate  served, the time taken was more than 15
years .  The liquidator used to inform the High Court  whether he had discharged his duties as a liquidator or not.  In the
meantime, there were problems like recovery of dues, sale of assets , making recovery as fast as possible, in order to
recover public money.  The machinery available with every High  Court  liquidator’s office was grossly inadequate. He,
therefore, suggested that it would be better if  a  liquidator  like  a intermediary,  and registered with the SEBI  and 
fulfilled  some prescribed minimum criteria, was allowed to act as an official liquidator, then he would be in a position
to reduce that time lag. 
9.2      The Chairman and Members then raised some points relating to the suggestions of the ICICI on the provisions of
the Bills.  The Chairman asked the representative of ICICI to send a detailed note and written responses on the queries
raised by Members.
10.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 PM to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 14 June, 2000.
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD  MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 14 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘A’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.        Dr. L.M. Singhvi
3.        Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
4.        Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
5.        Shri Drupad Borgohain
6.        Shri Kuldip Nayyar
LOK SABHA
6.        Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
7.        Shri Vinay Katiyar
8.        Shri Anadi Sahu
9.        Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
10.      Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
11.      Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
12.      Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
13.      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
14.      Shri Jitendra Prasada 
15.      Shri M.O.H.Farook
16.      Shri Samar Choudhury
17.      Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
18.      Shri Arun Kumar
19.      Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
20.      Shri P.H. Pandian
21.      Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
22.      Shri Vijay Goel
SECRETARIAT
           Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
           Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
36
37
REPRESENTATIVES OF   FICCI
           Shri R.S. Lodha, Chairman, Taxation  and Corporate Laws Committee
           Shri Yogendra  K. Modi, Chairman, Banking and Finance  Committee
           Shri R.N. Bansal
           Shri P.M. Narielvala
           Shri Shardul S. Shroff, Senior Partner, Amarchand  Mangaldas Suresh A. Shroff and Company
           Shri Y.P. Srivastava
           Shri Vinod Gupta
           Shri Pramod Jindal
 
2.0      *                               *                               *        
COMPANIES BILL, 1997 & COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999.
2.1      Thereafter,  the Chairman welcomed the delegation of FICCI to the meeting.  He briefly outlined the historical
evolution and the background to the enactment of the Companies Act. He then explained the objectives  and some of
the  salient  features  of the proposed amendments sought to be made through the   two    Bills    and   wanted     to  
know    the  views   of    FICCI     thereon, especially on the role and responsibilities  of the nominee  Directors, utility
of postal ballot from cost-benefit point of view and penal  provisions of the Bills.
3.        The  representatives of FICCI made their presentations,  the salient  points of which  were as  below:-
Postal ballot needs to be supplemented - by simultaneous electronic voting, video conferencing, chat shows for quick 
decision  making,  thereby fostering participatory democracy in  corporate sector;
(ii)       Distinction   has to be maintained between  Companies soliciting  deposits & accepting  deposits; disclosure 
norms to be upgraded  to world standard and provision of stringent  punishment  for wrong disclosures  and
requirement  of need  for ‘Deposit Insurance Scheme’ to protect small investors;
Representation of small shareholders on the Companies Board of Directors was against  corporate culture  and
detrimental to its cohesiveness and decision  making  process;
Emphasis on appointment of independent  Directors  in  the Board  to infuse professional input to the Board for securing
interest of small shareholders; and
Opposition to rotation of auditors.
4.0      Members put queries  arising out of the presentation.
4.1      The Chairman sought  written responses  from  FICCI to the queries.
5.        *                               *                               *
6.0      *                               *                               *

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
___________________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matters.
38
6.1.     *                               *                               *        
7.        *                               *                               *
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9.        The Committee adjourned at 1.40 P.M.  to meet again at  11 A.M.   on Tuesday, 27 June, 2000.
XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 27 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘A’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Hiphei
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam      
Dr. L.M. Singhvi
Shri C.M. Ibrahim
6.        Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
7.        Shri Kuldip Nayyar
Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
10.      Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
11.      Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
12.      Shri Anadi Sahu
13.      Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
14.      Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
15.      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
16.      Shri Jitendra Prasada 
17.      Shri M.O.H. Farook
18.      Shri Subodh Roy
19.      Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
20.      Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
21.      Shri P.H. Pandian
22.      Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
23.      Shri Vijay Goel
 
SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
           Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
39
40
REPRESENTATIVES  OF DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
           Dr. P.L. Sanjeev  Reddy, Secretary
           Shri  A. Ramaswamy, Jt. Secretary
           Shri S.B. Mathur,  Director
REPRESENTATIVE  OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
           Dr. K.D. Singh, Jt. Secretary & Legal Advisor
REPRESENTATIVES OF LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
           Dr. S.C. Jain,  Secretary
           Shri V.K. Bhasin, Jt. Secretary & Legislative Counsel
 
2.        *                               *                               *
3.        The Committee, thereafter, decided to take up  clause-by-clause  consideration of the Companies (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1999 first and thereafter  the Companies Bill, 1997.
THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
4.        The Committee, accordingly, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Companies (Second Amendment)
Bill, 1999.
Clause 2
5.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  2 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals :
Dividend amount should be transferred to a separate Bank account within 5 days from the date of Annual General
Meeting.  This amount  cannot be utilised for any other purpose.
It should be clarified whether interim dividend has to be declared in Annual General Meeting.
 (iii)     Payment of interim dividend should be in compliance of sections 205, 205A, 205D, 206, 206A and 207. No
interim dividend should  be paid in cash.  The dividend should be paid by cheque/dividend warrant.
Remittance of dividend even electronically is not possible unless stock exchange agree for notice of 15 days for book
closure etc.
Time limit of 90 days be prescribed for payment of interim dividend.
5.1      The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under:
(i)        This suggestion may be accepted.
An explanation below 2(14A) may be added to clarify that Company’s Board of Directors may declare interim dividend
and provisions of section 205, 205A, 205C, 206, 206A and 207 shall apply to any interim dividend. The dividend should
be paid only by cheque/dividend warrant so that disbursement of dividend can be verified.
___________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
41
The suggestion may be accepted. SEBI will be requested to make a suitable amendment in clause 16 of the Listing
Agreement or reduce the period of notice of Book Closure from 42 days to 15 days.
In view of the above the proposal to increase time limit to 90 days may not be accepted.
5.2.0              The Committee recommended that suitable amendments might  be made/ action may be taken to give
effect to the suggestions accepted by the Government.
5.2.1    The Committee noted that there was  no provision to take care of the interest which might accrue on the dividend
amount to be transferred to a separate Bank Account. The Committee recommended  that a provision might  be made
that whatever interest accrued onthat account, it should go to the Investors’ Protection Fund.
5.2.2    A point was raised that before a shareholder could deposit the dividend warrant in the Bank, he had to sign at the
back of the same. Some dividend warrants contained  a column on the reverse namely ‘shareholders signature’. It was
felt that this system of putting signature on the reverse on the dividend warrant should be discontinued while depositing
the same in the Bank Account. The Committee while agreeing with the same, recommended  that a guideline might  be
issued to that effect.
5.3      Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 3
6.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  3 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals:
The word “paid up capital” appearing in sub-clause (a)(iii)(A) be substituted by “paid up equity capital”.
This provision should not be applicable to Companies registered under section 25 of the Act.
No  minimum prescription of  capital for private Companies is required.
This amendment should be made applicable to those companies that will be incorporated after the enactment of the Bill,
1999 and not to existing companies.
6.1      The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under:
The Companies licensed under Section 25 of the Companies Act 1956 are proposed to be exempted from the
requirements of having minimum paid-up capital by adding a suitable provision to this effect in Section 3.
6.2.0    The Committee recommended that clause 3 might be suitably amended so as to incorporate the suggestion as

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
agreed to by the Government.
6.2.1    The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 7
7.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  7 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals:
Proposed section 17A should be deleted as this clause requires permission from Regional Director even for shifting
Registered Office from one address to another address.
42
Some time office is changed in same building or vicinity, which will require permission of Regional Director, which is
against the intention.  Approval of Regional Director be required only for shifting of Registered Office from jurisdiction
of one Registrar of Companies to another Registrar in same State.
(iii)      A time period has to be fixed within  which the Regional Director will confirm the change of Registered Office. 
Upon lapse of specified time period, it will be deemed that Regional Director has consented to such change
7.1      The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under:
The intention behind Section 17A is that a company which shifts Registered Office from jurisdiction of one Registrar of
Companies to another Registrar of Companies within a State only will be required to obtain approval of the Regional
Director.  The suggestion to delete Clause  7 is not accepted.
7.2.0    The Committee recommended  that it might be clarified in the rules that the provision of new section 17A
would   apply only in case of change of registered office of a company from the jurisdiction of one Registrar of
Companies (ROC) to another ROC in the same state.
7.2.1    In order to ensure that a company did not unnecessarily suffer and the Regional Directors remained alert, it may
be prescribed in the rules that after an application had been filed in the office of Regional Director, it had to confirm the
same within a stipulated period of 30 days, and upon lapse of the specified period it would  be deemed that the Regional
Director had consented to such change.
7.2.2    Subject to the above, the clause was adopted
Clause 12
8.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  12 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals:
(i)        Modus operandi and time frame for changing the status of existing deemed public companies has not been
indicated.
Provisions be made that existing deemed public companies be reverted  to private companies status unconditionally.
8.1.     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under:
Entire Section 43A may not be deleted.  The provision of Section 43(A)(4) may be retained so that deemed public
companies may submit the Certificate of Incorporation to Registrar of Companies for correction by adding the word
‘Private’ before the word ‘Limited’ in the name as indicated in the Certificate of Incorporation.  The Registrar will do so
forthwith.  No fee need be paid for this change as it is a statutory requirement on amendment of the Companies Act,
1956.
43
8.2.0    The Committee recommended  that Clause 12 may be amended as agreed to by the Government.
8.2.1    As regards granting of approval forthwith by the ROC for changing a deemed public company to private
company, it may be prescribed in the rules that the said approval would be accorded within four weeks’ time.
8.2.2    Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 16
9.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  16 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals:
The term `public companies which purport to be listed’ may be clarified.
If administrative powers shifted to SEBI then some of the Sections relating to capital market will not exist so that
certain documents required to be filed with Registrar of Companies (ROC) will not be filed by the Company.  Hence,
Department may not be able to function properly.
Administrative powers over sections 209 and 211 should remain with the Central Government.
It was not clear whether various forms required to be filed under chapters relating to the Capital Market with SEBI.
The power to frame rules, amend relevant schedules and prescribe regulations in respect of sections which are to be
administered by SEBI may be conferred on SEBI 
By amending Section 642 of the Act.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
9.1      The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under:
Section 55A needs substantial amendments to clarify the doubts expressed and issues raised by Securities & Exchange
Board of India.  The power to administer Company Law is conferred upon Department  of Company Affairs by
Allocation of Business Rules.  Intention of 55A is not to create a separate Companies Act exclusively applicable to
Public Listed Companies.  The function of Registering Prospectus (Section 60), Statement in lieu of Prospectus (Section
70), Return of allotment (Section 75) will continue to be with the Registrar of Companies.
Powers to hear petitions regarding issue of shares at a discount (Section 79),  redemption of irredeemable preference
share (Section 80A), extension of time for issue of shares/debentures certificates (Section 113) will require to be
retained with the Company Law Board as SEBI  is not a quasi-judicial body.
Powers to decide applications submitted to the Central Government.  Further issue of shares on conversion of
loan/debenture into equity [Section 81(3) & (4) ], depreciation methods (Section 205) and power to make rule and
prescribe schedule will remain with Central Government.  Thus the above aspect needs to be incorporated by suitable
amendment in Section 55A of the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999.
44
9.2.0    The Committee recommended that Clause 16 may  be amended suitably as indicated by the Department of
Company Affairs.
9.2.1    The clause was adopted as amended.
Clause 19
10.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  19 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals
(i)        The word ‘deposited’ should be substituted for the word ‘invested’.
(ii)       Only such offences as are committed knowingly and willfully or with fraudulent  intention should be severely
punished.
This is rather drastic and needs to be deleted. Only Managing Director, Whole Time Director and promoters should be
held responsible
Instead  of information  for individual default, company may send periodical statement of default.
No company shall at any time accept further deposit  from  small depositors….. Apart from the present definition of 
small depositor amendment  to  include  successor and therefore legal representative and nominee.
Requirement to disclose default  in  future advertisement inviting deposits, be for a period 3 years from the date of
default.
Section 58AA(7) may be deleted.
The word ‘invested’ be replaced by ‘deposited’.
Depositors would get the right to vote in Annual General Meeting when the company commits  defaults in repayment of
deposits.
10.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
The words ‘invested’ appearing in Explanation below  sub-clause (11) of Sec.58AA may be substituted  by the word
‘deposited’.  Suggestion to modify Sec.58AAA and make offence cognizable in respect of only Whole Time/Managing
Director is not acceptable.  Disclosing of defaults in Advertisement  and Application Form inviting Deposits  shall be 
required for all times, as it is in  investors interest to know  the fact of  the default in printed words and not by word of
mouth.
10.2.0  The Committee recommended  that  Clause 19 may  be amended  in such manner so that the  suggestion as
agreed to by the Government was  incorporated.
10.2.1  Discussion took place in the Committee with regard to the aspect of cognisable   offences as prescribed in the
clause. The Secretary, Department of Company Affairs inter alia informed the Committee that the provision of this
clause was  based on the 143
rd Report of the Law Commission, the Working Group Report and the views of the
depositors. He further clarified that these provisions were meant to safeguard the interest of the small depositors and
also to  induce fear in the minds of some part-time directors who did not take interest in the affairs of the company. 
Through this clause the collective responsibility concept had been sought to be incorporated.
10.2.3  During the course of discussion it was inter alia suggested that since the power may be misused, a provision
should be made that prosecution would be launched with the prior permission of the competent authority.  This
suggestion was agreed to by the Secretary,  Department of Company Affairs. 
45
10.2.4  The Committee, accordingly, recommended  that explicit provision may  be made in the rules/guidelines that

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
prosecution in the case of cognisable offences would be taken up only after prior sanction of the competent authority.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 75
11.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  75 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals
The language of this sub-clause suggests as if all the shareholders have to vote only by Postal Ballot.
Value of share should be given weightage for purpose of poll.
This system is expensive and time consuming.  Instead role of proxies could be strengthened.  Practical   difficulties 
should also be taken  into account while framing rules.
 The topics which   are to be covered by postal ballot should be given in the Act itself.  A few objections  have been
raised such as cost of ballot paper, practical difficulties etc.
In Section  192A(4) the word ‘requisite’ may be inserted before the words “majority  of shareholders”.  The date on
which resolution will be deemed to have been passed, specified.
Electronic mode be permitted for issue of notices and response for Postal Ballots.  Procedure    proposed by Kumar
Manglam  Birla Committee adopted.
The amendment be modified to add
After “thirty days”  or “further period”  as may be specified in the
notice.
      Sub-section (4) be modified.
(viii)    Amendment be made in sub-clause(5) for examination of rejected ballot papers,  by an independent person to be
appointed by Board of Director.  The word ‘shareholders’ be substituted with the word ‘Members’. Postal Ballots will
be  verified by scrutinizers appointed by Chairman    of the meeting as prescribed in Sec. 184 of the Act.
11.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
Postal Ballot includes  Electronic Voting.  Experience  of several decades have shown that most of the shareholders who
resides in far flung areas are unable to attend Annual or Extraordinary General Meetings.  By Postal Ballot  shareholders
can take part in decision  making of the company.  The concept of Postal Ballot was also recommended  by Working
Group set up by Government to propose a new Bill to re-enact  Companies  Act, 1956 and also by Kumar Mangalam
Birla Committee on Corporate Governance.  The provisions of Postal Ballot will be prescribed  only on issues  where 
participation of   every shareholder  is essential e.g.  investment proposals, appointment  of Directors etc.  as proposed in
the report of Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee.  The procedure for  postal  ballot as  prescribed by Government will
provide for appointment of  scrutinisers, electronic  voting and other safeguards against destruction of   postal  ballot
received from shareholders of 
46
the company.  The word ‘requisite’ may be added before the words  ‘ majority  of shareholders’ in sub-clause (4) of
Section  192A.
11.2.0  The Committee recommended that  Clause 75 may  be amended  in such manner that  suggestions as agreed to
by the Government were incorporated therein and rules should be framed subsequently to take care of the accepted
suggestions. 
11.2.1  The Committee also recommended  with regard to the items on which Postal Ballot may  proposed to be
prescribed, the same may  be included in the new Section 192A itself.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 122
12.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  122 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals
(i)        The requirement of at least one Director for small shareholder should  be deleted.
Small shareholders should be defined as one who along with his relatives hold nominal value of shares of Rs. 20,000/-
or less.
Record Date for ascertaining 1000 or more small shareholders be indicated in Section.
Whether all holdings have to be aggregated to ascertain whether a person is a small shareholder?
 This requirement should be confined to only listed public companies. Public financial institutions and scheduled  banks
should be excluded.
12.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
The suggestion to omit the provision for representation of small shareholders by electing at least one among them on
Board of Directors cannot be accepted because small shareholders do not have a voice to represent on Board of

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Directors as on date. The election will take place in the manner as may be prescribed. It is proposed to include an
explanation that for the purpose of ascertaining 1000 number of shareholders and Rs. 5 crores or more paid up share
capital, the basis shall be the date of issue of notice.
12.2.0  The Committee recommended that Clause 122 may  be amended suitably so as to incorporate the suggestion as
agreed to by the Government.
12.2.1  The clause was adopted, as amended.
Clause 134
13.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  134 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals
Sub-clause (8) should be amended so that Board is not bound by the recommendations of Audit committee for sufficient
reasons to be disclosed.
It may be provided that if the Board does not accept the recommendations of the Audit Committee, it should record its
reasons for not accepting the same.
Government should have  powers to prescribe the functions of the Audit Committee through rules framed in this regard.
47
Audit Committee should also have discussions with Cost Auditors, Internal Audit apart from Auditors and also review
cost statements and cost audit report periodically.
Only listed companies should have Audit Committee.
Audit Committee to review compliance of Companies Act, other Corporate Laws and Fiscal Laws.
13.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
The supremacy of the views of Audit Committee of Board  of Directors in financial matters is recognised by the
corporate laws and also by recommendations of various committees on excellence in corporate governance. The
measure has to be given a fair trial and should not be brushed aside. The suggestion to dilute the recommendations of
Audit Committee by full Board of Directors is not accepted.
We may point out that RBI has proposed in the  Investors’ Protection Act that Non-Banking Financial
Companies(NBFCs)  with assets base of Rupees  50 crores should appoint an Audit Committee.
13.2.0  The Committee was not fully convinced with the rationale  provided by the Government in regard to  the
supremacy of Audit Committee.  The Committee was of the view that if the Board of Directors did not agree with the
views of the Audit Committee, it would  have to give reasons for not accepting it and the shareholders should know it.  
Accordingly, sub-clause (8) of  new Section 292A may  be suitably re-drafted.  Thereupon, the representatives of the
Department of Company Affairs read out the amended sub-clause as follows :-
“Recommendations of the Audit Committee on any matter relating to financial management, including audit report,
shall be binding on the Board. However, if the Board of Directors does not agree, the reasons for disagreement in
writing will be intimated to the shareholders, to be reported in Annual General Meeting, and the view of the
shareholders shall be final.”
13.2.1  The Committee then suggested that instead of  the word “however”,  the words “Provided that” may be
substituted.
13.2.2  The Clause was adopted, as amended.
Clause 165
14.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  165 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals
(i)        The Compliance Certificate be attached to Directors’ Report in addition to the same being filed with the
Registrar.
Instead of Compliance Certificate the clause may provide for Compliance Report to give it a wide scope.
Proviso to sub-section (1A) be deleted to avoid its misuse.
The requirement for companies between paid up capital from Rs. 10 lakhs to below Rs. 50 lakhs was in order.
The monetary limit should be increased to Rs. 25 lakhs for Secretarial Compliance Report.
48
Chartered Accountants may also be allowed to undertake the certification task as proposed.
14.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
A practicing Company Secretary is specially trained in corporate laws and his practical training includes study of
compliance of corporate laws by studying records in the Office of Registrar of Companies. The requirement of carrying
on check of compliance of Companies Act, 1956 by a qualified Company Secretary in whole time practice alone, and
not by a Chartered Accountant, is fully justified.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
The  suggestion that in addition to filing ‘Secretarial Compliance Report’ it should also be attached to the Directors’
Report, may be accepted and suitable amendments will be made in this regard.
Suggestion to increase the limits of paid up Capital for this purpose from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 25 Lakhs or Rs. 50 lakhs is
not acceptable as most of the small companies are found to be violating even the basic provision of filing Annual
Accounts and Annual Returns.
14.2.0  The Committee noted the comments of the Government. The Committee recommended that provision may be
made that in addition to filing “Secretarial Compliance Report” it should also be attached to the Directors’ Report.  The
Committee also recommended  that consequential changes might  be made in  Section 217 of the Principal Act.
14.2.1  Subject to the above, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 214
15.0     Following suggestion was  received  on the provisions contained in Clause  214 of the Bill from different
organizations/ individuals
           If it is intended that the SEBI’s authority be limited only to contravention in relation to the specified sections,
then suitable qualifying words need to be inserted.
15.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
It is proposed to add a proviso to the effect that SEBI shall be eligible to file prosecutions only in respect of offences
relating to sections specified in Section 55A.
15.2.0  The Committee recommended that the clause  might  be amended suitably so as to incorporate the suggestion as
agreed to by the Government.
15.2.1  Subject to the above, the Clause was adopted
16.      Clauses 4 to 6, 8 to 11, 13 to 15, 17, 18, 20 to 74, 76 to 121, 123 to 133, 135 to 164, 166 to 213, 215 to 224 were
adopted without any change.
17.      Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or
drafting nature, namely, “1999” and “Fiftieth” to be substituted by “2000” and “Fifty-first”, respectively.
18.0     The Committee noted that the nomenclature of the Companies Act  had been  framed almost a century ago.  In
the present day corporate parlance, corporate governance was  being talked about.  In this context, the Committee felt 
that the Government might  deliberate on
49
the need for changing the nomenclature of the Companies Act to “Corporate Governance Act” because the whole
purpose of the amendments sought to be made through the two Bills  and those already enforced  by the Companies
Amendment Act, 1999, was to ensure that there may be   transparency, efficiency, competitiveness  and effectiveness
which were  the hallmarks of good corporate governance.  The Committee, therefore , felt  that it would be timely and
appropriate if the essence of corporate governance could be reflected in the nomenclature of the Companies Act itself.
18.1     Accordingly, the Committee called upon  the Department of Company Affairs to take  appropriate follow up
action in the matter.
18.2     Secondly, in the context of giving representation to the small investors in the Board of Directors, the Committee
was of the view that  since a large number of women professionals were entering the arena of corporate management,
giving them adequate representation on the Board of Directors of Companies should be considered by the Government.
19.0     While clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill was taken up, a point was raised that the “Notes on Clauses”
appended to the Bill were  insufficient, incomplete and examples of  paraphrasing without being able to convey the
purport of the amendments and the rationale behind them.  Such deficient notes were of hardly any help to the Members
while considering the Bills either in Parliament or in Committees.  It was further pointed out that “Notes on Clauses” 
were  being prepared almost in a routine and ritualistic  manner.
After  some discussion,  the Committee  directed the representatives  of  theDepartment  of Company Affairs and the
Legislative Department to take note of the objections raised and take corrective steps in future.
19.2     The Committee hoped that in future the “Notes on Clauses”    appended to the Bills  would be meaningful and
helpful to the Members.
20.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
21.      The Committee adjourned at 5.20 PM o meet again at 11.00 AM on Wednesday,  28 June 2000.
XXVI
TWENTY-SIXTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 AM on Wednesday, 28 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘B’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri Hiphei
3.        Shri Sangh Priya Gautam      
4.        Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.        Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
Shri Vinay Katiyar
8.        Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
9.        Shri Anadi Sahu
Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
14.      Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
Shri Samar Choudhury
17.      Shri Subodh Roy
18.      Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
19.      Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
20.      Shri P.H. Pandian
21.      Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
           Dr. P.L. Sanjeev Reddy, Secretary
           Shri  A. Ramaswamy, Jt. Secretary
           Shri S.B. Mathur,  Director
REPRESENTATIVE  OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
           Dr. K.D. Singh, Jt. Secretary & Legal Advisor
50
51
REPRESENTATIVE  OF LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT
           Shri V.K. Bhasin, Jt. Secretary & Legislative Counsel
 
2.        *                               *                               *
THE COMPANIES BILL, 1997
3.0      The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Companies Bill, 1997. 
3.1      The Committee noted that the Department of Company Affairs had not furnished their comments on the
suggestions received from various organizations/individuals on the provisions of the Companies Bill, 1997.   It,
therefore, decided that the Clauses on which there had been no suggestions/amendments, may be taken up first and
adopted.  As regards the clauses on which suggestions/amendements had been received, the Committee directed the
Secretary, Department of Company Affairs to furnish their comments by the afternoon of 29 June, 2000 so that Clause-
by-Clause consideration of the remaining clauses could be resumed on 30 June, 2000.
3.2      The Committee noted that no suggestion had been  received  on clauses 3 to 29, 31 to 47, 49 to 53, 55 to 63, 65
66, 68 to 80, 82 to 141, 143 to 159, 161, 162, 164, 169 to 179,  181 to 221, 223, 225 to 251,  254 to 262, 264 to 296, 298
to 415,  417 to 458  and, therefore, adopted  them without any change.
4.        The clause-by-clause consideration of  the Bill was not concluded. The Committee decided to take up
consideration of  remaining clauses on 30 June 2000 after the receipt  the comments of the Department of Company
Affairs on the suggestions on the provisions of the Bill received from different quarters.
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6.        The Committee then adjourned  at 1.10 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 29 June, 2000.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
____________________________________________________________
*** Relates to some other matters.
 XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 30 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘B’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri Hiphei
3.        Shri Sangh Priya Gautam      
4.        Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.        Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
6.        Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
7.        Shri Drupad Borgohain
8.        Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
9.        Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
10.      Shri Anadi Sahu
11.      Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
12.      Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
13.      Shri Jitendra Prasada
14.      Shri Samar Choudhury
15.      Shri Subodh Roy
Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Shri Arun Kumar
18.      Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
19.      Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
20.      Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
           Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
           Dr. P.L. Sanjeev Reddy, Secretary
           Shri A. Ramaswamy, Joint Secretary
           Shri S. B. Mathur, Director
52
53
REPRESENTATIVE  OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
           Dr. K.D. Singh, Jt. Secretary & Legal Advisor
REPRESENTATIVE  OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE  AFFAIRS
           Shri V.K. Bhasin, Jt. Secretary & Legislative Counsel
THE COMPANIES BILL, 1997
2.        The Committee resumed clause-by-clause consideration of the  remaining clauses of the Companies Bill, 1997 on
which suggestions were received from different organizations/  individuals    and the Department of Company Affairs
had since furnished their comments thereon. 
3.0      The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2 (61)
3.1      Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Clause  2(61) of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
The words “any other managerial and administrative functions” to be added.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
3.2      The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
           The suggestion may be accepted.
3.3.0    The  Committee recommended that the sub-clause may be amended as agreed to by the Government.
3.3.1    The sub-clause was adopted, as amended.
Clause 30
4.0      Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Clause  30 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
The word “someone” appearing at the end of sub-clause (2)(a) (i) may be deleted.
The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under:-
           Department agrees because particulars of Directors to be filed with RoC have already been prescribed.
4.1.0    The Committee recommended that  the word “someone” appearing at the end of sub-clause (2)(a)(i) may  be
deleted.
4.1.1    The clause was adopted, as amended.          
54
Clause 48
5.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in 
Clause                                                                                          48 of the Bill from different organisations/ individuals
           Words “intended company” be deleted; sub-clause 8(b) be deleted; clarification required in case of securities
offered through book building process; merchant bankers be included in clause 49.
5.1      The Government’s views on the suggestion were as under
           The suggestion is not acceptable.   However, the term “intended company” may be clarified by way of an
Explanation to mean  “a company which intends to be listed with a Stock Exchange”.
           The suggestion to delete sub-clause 8(b) of clause 48 is not acceptable as this sub clause corresponds to section
56(5) of the Companies Act, 1956 and is essential to exempt from issuing Prospectus. 
           Suggestion to include Merchant Bankers may be accepted.
5.2.0    The Committee  recommended    that   the clause may  be  amended  as agreed  to by the Government.
5.2.1    Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 54
6.0      Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Clause  54 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
           To be applicable to red herring prospectus also.
6.1      The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
           Department of Company Affairs accepts the suggestion, as it will protect the interest of investors.
6.2.0    The Committee recommended that clause may be suitably amended as suggested and agreed to by Government.
6.2.1    Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 64
7.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  64 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
sub-clause 1(a) to be deleted and  sub-clause (5 )to be modified.
Large investors should not be allowed to withdraw after 3
rd day of  opening the issue.
7.1      The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
           Department is of the view that clause 64(1) (a) should be retained as it takes care of the interest of small
shareholders.  Besides shareholding of the company will be widespread by this clause.
55
Department of Company Affairs agrees with the suggestion at (ii).
7.2.0    The Committee recommended that the clause may be suitably amended to incorporate the suggestion accepted
by the Government.
7.2.1    Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 67
8.0      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  67 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals:-
To specify that a copy of contract for payment of  commission is delivered to Registrar and SEBI.
Proviso should provide for better underwriting commission subject to upper limits.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
8.1      The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
Department of Company Affairs agrees with the  suggestion at (i).Department of Company Affairs does not agrees with
the suggestion at (ii) as Government may prescribe rate of commission on the basis of market conditions.
8.2.0    The Committee recommended that the clause may be suitably amended to incorporate the suggestion accepted
by the Government.
8.2.1    Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 81
9.0      Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Clause  81 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individual
Consequent to Clause 78, new sub-clause under Clause 81 have to be inserted to empower the company to pay
differential dividends.
The Government’s view on the suggestion  was as under:
The Department  of Company Affairs  accepts the suggestions.  It is further felt that an explanation  can be added below
81 (3) to empower the company to pay different rate of divided for shares with differential rights.
9.2.0    The Committee recommended that the clause may  be suitably amended to incorporate the suggestion accepted
by the Government,  as also suggested by it.
9.2.1    Subject to above, the clause was  adopted.
Clause 142
10.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  142 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
sub-clause (3) to be modified.
Under sub - clause (5) the words “or on the election of the Chairman” to be added.
56
10.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
(i)        The Department of Company Affairs is of the view that the  clause is in order.  The suggestion is not specific.
(ii)       Suggestion is acceptable. 
Department of Company Affair will like to clarify that it is in clause 140(2) and not clause 142(5).  In actual practice
there is a Chairman of the meeting who conducts the poll. Therefore, the question of  election of Chairman does not
arise.
10.2.0  The Committee recommended that the clause may be suitably amended to incorporate the suggestion accepted
by the Government.
10.2.1  Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 160
11.0     Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Clause  160 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
Past losses as well as any arrears should be provided for before declaring dividend.
11.1     The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
The Department of Company Affairs accepts the suggestion.
11.2.0  The Committee recommended that the clause may  be suitably amended so as to incorporate the suggestion
accepted by the Government.
11.2.1  Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause163
12.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  163 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
Every director should be liable for maintenance of books of accounts only when the company has neither MD nor
Manager nor whole time director in charge of finance or Chief Financial Officer.  Work of Inspection also be entrusted
to persons having prescribed qualifications.
Sub-clause (7) be modified to give clear meaning.
12.1     The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
The suggestion at (i) is  acceptable and that is the present practice in deciding prosecution.
12.2.0  The Committee recommended  that the clause may  be suitably amended to incorporate the suggestion accepted
by the Government.
12.2.1  Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
57

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Clauses 165, 166, 167 & 168
13.0     Following suggestions were received on the provisions contained in Clauses  165, 166, 167 &168 of the Bill
from different organisations/ individuals
Regarding presentation of group accounts it should be in addition to and not in substitution of the requirement of
individual accounts.  Consequential changes are required in clause 167 also.
Power, infrastructure and service sectors to be included.
To eliminate quantitative information from the requirements of annual report.
Companies be permitted to submit subsidiary company accounts in abridged manner.
Section referred in sub-clause (1) of clause 165 is 133 instead of 135. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause requires
modification.
13.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
(i)        The suggestion is not acceptable; Consolidated accounts are yet to be put in place.   The intention of the
Department has been explained in Statement made on 28.6.2000 by the Secretary.
Department of Company Affairs have examined the suggestion. An appropriate notification as and when warranted can
be considered under the Act.  There is no need to make the amendment.
(iii)      Department of Company Affairs does not accept the suggestion. No specific reasons have been given to
eliminate quantitative information, to consider the proposal.
Department of Company Affairs does not accept the suggestion as shareholders should know full picture about
subsidiaries.
(v)       The Department agrees that sub-clause (1) Section 133 instead of 135 may be substituted.  However, it has not
been made clear what modification is required in Clause 135(2).
13.2.0  The Committee recommended that sub-clause (1) of clause 165 may be amended as suggested and agreed to  by
the Government.
13.2.1  Clause 165 was  adopted, as amended.
13.2.2  Clauses 166, 167 and 168 were adopted without any change.
Clause 180
14.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  180 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals:-
The provision to be made applicable only to listed Companies.
System of rotation be substituted by strong quality control systems.
58
Sub-clause (2) relating to rotation of auditors based on international trend and for giving stability to the appointment of
auditors to be dropped.
Sub-clause (1) may be amended to provide for a period of 7 days.
The proposed sub-clause (2) be deleted; instead a concept of Joint Auditors to be introduced.  Existing sub-limit to be
continued  - Total 20 companies and not more than 10 companies,  having a paid up capital above Rs. 25 lacs.
14.1     The Government’s view on the suggestions was as under:
The Department of Company Affairs is in agreement with the suggestions at (ii), (iv) & (v).  With the acceptance of the
suggestions, the effect will be that the Government will be introducing for the first time, the concept of Joint Auditors,
which is prevailing in some of the advanced countries and to ensure at the same time that   continuity in audit is not
broken. Sub-Clause(2) will be,  accordingly, amended. 
Regarding sub-clause (4) which refers to limit of  number of audits,  the same has already been considered in
Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999 in the meeting held on 27.6.2000.
14.2.0  The Committee recommended  that the clause may   be suitably amended to incorporate the suggestions accepted
by the Government.
14.2.1  Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 222
15.0     Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Clause  222 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals:
           Directorship in subsidiaries should be exempted. Directorship in holding and subsidiary to be treated as one.
Performance of subsidiary be clubbed by way of equity consolidation.
15.1     The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
Both suggestions have been considered and replied while discussing  the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999. 
The Department agrees with the suggestion.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
15.2.0  The Committee recommended that clause may be suitably amended in the light of Government’s response.
15.2.1  Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 224
16.      Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  224 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
Proposal to be dropped.
Clause is totally unwarranted and it should be  left to discretion of shareholders and the Board.
59
To be dropped.
To be deleted and no upper limit to be prescribed.
16.1     The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
           The Department of Company Affairs considered the suggestions and accepted it. As
such the clause may be deleted.
16.2.0  The Committee recommended that the clause may  be deleted.
Clauses 252 & 253
17.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clauses 252 & 253   of the Bill from
different organisations/ individuals
Different sets of rates to continue.
Different sets of rates to continue.  Rates not to change in case of continuous process plant.
Some modifications in the rates are required. For calculating director’s commission, the depreciation to be calculated as
prescribed under Clause 160(2).
Existing rates to continue.
Sub-clause 4(k) be modified
Separate classification for continuous processing plant be given and rate be prescribed in view of its useful life.
17.1     The Government’s view on the suggestion was as under
The Department has carefully considered the suggestions at (i) and (ii) and Schedule III is accordingly proposed to be
modified.  This may kindly be accepted.
17.2.0  The Committee recommended that Schedule III may be modified as proposed by Government to give effect to
the suggestions accepted.
17.2.1  Subject to above the clauses were adopted.
Clauses 263 and 297
18.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clauses  263 and 297 of the Bill from
different organisations/ individuals
Clarifications required to avoid misleading picture whether the holding of all members is 1% or individually 1%.
Certified Fraud Examiner  may be appointed as the investigator under liquidation proceedings.
Appointment of lawyers, Chartered Accountants , Company Secretaries, or firms of such professionals or body
corporate as company liquidators.
60
18.1     The Government’s view on the suggestions was  as under:
           The Department has considered the suggestion and feels that clause 263 as drafted is clear and only require
substitution  of the words ‘Postal Ballot’,  for  the word ‘proxy’,  wherever it  occur  in the clause.
18.2.0  The Committee recommended  that clause 263 may be amended as suggested by Government.
18.2.1  Clause 263 was adopted, as amended.
18.2.2  Clause 297 was  adopted, without any change.
Clause 406
19.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  406 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
Clarifications are required to implement the scheme practically in respect of  Companies belonging to the group to
which Licensed Registrar belongs.
Rules to be prescribed for organisational structure etc., of the proposed Licensed Registrar and slight modifications in
the draft clause are required.
Establishment of Licensed Registrars (of companies) in private sector is necessary.
19.1     The Government’s view on the suggestions was  as under
           This  Clause needs to be deleted as already explained since the sovereign functions of the Registrar cannot be

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
entrusted to a private person.
19.2     The Committee recommended that clause 406 may  be deleted.
Clause 416
20.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Clause  416 of the Bill from different
organisations/ individuals
Professional Members from practice or academics may also be taken.
Company Law Tribunal should not have any jurisdiction in the matters governed by SEBI under relevant
act/rules/regulations.  Necessary clarification be made.
Technical correction is suggested.  The word “whole time” should be added before the word “practice” in the first line
of sub-clause (4).
The Association of Fraud Examiners  be included to place one nominee.
20.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
(i)        Department of Company Affairs has carefully considered the suggestion and feels that the qualifications of
members of  Company Law Tribunal is proper and do not  call for any change.
(ii)       The suggestion is not acceptable to the Department.
61
(iii) &   Provision has been made after careful consideration in the Department and no
(iv)      change is called for.
20.2.0  The Committee was of the view that in constituting the proposed Company Law Tribunal  representation
of professionals, academics and others from a wide cross-section of the society, may  be considered.
20.2.1  Subject to above, the clause was adopted.
SCHEDULES
Schedule-I Part-I
21.0     Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in  Schedule-I Part-I of the Bill:
Additional disclosure to be made for better transparency.
21.1     The Government’s views on the suggestion was as under:
There is no specific suggestion regarding what are additional disclosures to be made. Hence, no comments can be
offered.
21.2.0  The Committee recommended that the Department of Company Affairs may get in touch with Institute 
of Chartered Accountants of India which has made the suggestion, for their specific proposal in this regard. 
Thereafter, the same may  be examined in the Department.
Schedule I   Part IA
22.0     Following suggestions were received  on the provisions contained in Schedule I Part IA of the Bill from
different organisations/ individuals :
Modifications required in marginal notes appearing against share capital, under the sub head ‘Securities premium
account’ under ‘Reserves’, under the head “secured loans”, under the head “investments” and under the head “current
assets”.
22.1     The Government’s views on the suggestions were as under
(i)        The Department agrees that in marginal notes the word ‘were’ should read as ‘where’. The company issues
securities and may issue them at Premium.  As such no change is required.
“Security Premium Account” does not make any distinction between long term and short term investment. Hence no
change is required.
62
22.2     The Committee recommended that Schedule I Part IA may  be modified as indicated by Government at (i)
above.
Schedule I  Part-IB
22.3     Following suggestion was received  on the provisions contained in Schedule-I  Part-IB of the Bill:
           Drafting errors to be removed under various clauses.
22.4     The Government’s views  on the suggestion were as under:
Drafting errors have not been specifically indicated . Hence no comments can be offered by the Department.
22.5     The Committee recommended that drafting  errors, if any,  may be  rectified  and for this purpose the
Department of Company Affairs may  get in touch with the  ICAI who had pointed out the lacunae.
23.      Subject to above, Schedule I was   adopted.
Schedule-III

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
24.0     Following  suggestion   was  received  on  the  provisions  contained in  Schedule-III
  of  the Bill from different organisations/ individuals:
           Number of categories of  fixed assets to be increased; Rate of depreciation on plant and machinery to be
increased.
24.1     The Government’s views on the suggestion were as under:
The suggestion has been examined by Department of Company Affairs. Comments on Schedule III have  been offered
by the Department in connection with Clause 252 and modified Schedule III may kindly be accepted.
24.2.0  The Committee recommended that Schedule III may  be modified as suggested by the Government.
25.      Subject to above, Schedule III was adopted.
26.      Schedule II was adopted without any change.
27.      Clause 1, the  Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or
drafting nature, namely, “1997” and “Forty-eighth” to be substituted by “2000”  and “Fifty-first”,  respectively.
28.      A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept .
29.      The Committee then adjourned at 12.34 P.M.
 
XXX
THIRTIETH   MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 11 July 2000, in Committee Room ‘A’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
Dr. L.M. Singhvi       
Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
Shri C.P.Thirunavukkarasu
Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
7.        Shri Manabendra Shah
8.        Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
9.        Shri Anadi Sahu
Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
Shri Samar Choudhury
Shri Subodh Roy
Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Shri Arun Kumar
Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
Shri P.H. Pandian
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
2.        The Committee took up consideration of its draft Sixty-fourth Report on the Companies (Second Amendment )
Bill, 1999 and adopted the same with certain modifications.
3.0      The Committee thereafter, decided to present/lay the Report in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha during the ensuing
monsoon session,  on 27 July 2000.
3.1      The Committee further decided that the Evidence recorded on the  Bill  may also be laid on the Table of both the
Houses  along with the Report.
63
64

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
3.2      The Committee authorised its Chairman  and in his absence  Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj to present/lay the Report and
the Evidence in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anadi Sahu  and in his absence  Shri N. Janaradhana Reddy to lay the Report
and Evidence in the Lok Sabha.
4.        The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 12 July 2000.
APPENDIX
_____________________________________________________________                                           
APPENDIX-A
LIST OF ORGANISATIONS/INDIVIDUALS WHO SUBMITTED MEMORANDA
1.        Shri Tarun Das, Secretary-General,
           Confederation of India Industries,
           23, 26 Institutional Area, Lodi Road,
           New Delhi.
2.        Shri Jayant Bhuyan, Secretary-General
           Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry,
           11, Community Centre, Jamrudpur,
           East of Kailash,
           New Delhi.
3.        Dr. Amit Mitra, Secretary-General
           Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry,
           Federation Chamber, Tansen Marg,
           New Delhi.
4.        Dr. S.P. Narang, Secretary
           Institute of Company Secretaries of India,
           ICSI House, 22, Institutional Area,
           Lodi Road,
           New Delhi.
5.        Shri Udayan Ray, Secretary
           Institute of Cost & Works Accountants of India,
           Cost Accountants Hall,
           12 Sudder Street,
           Calcutta-700016
6.        Shri Ashok Haldiya, Secretary
           Institute of Chartered Accountants of India,
           P.B.No.7100, Indraprastha Marg,
           New Delhi-110002.
7.        Shri D.R. Meha, Chairman,
           Securities & Exchange Board of India,
           Mittal Court,
           B-Wing, 224, Nariman Point,
           Mumbai-400021.d
8.        Shri S.H. Bhojani, Executive Director,
           Industrial Credit & Investment Corporation of India Ltd.,
           163, Backbay Reclamation,
           Mumbai-400020.
67
68
9.        President,
           Bombay Chamber of Commerce & Industry,
           Mackinnon Mackensie Marg, Ballard Estate,
           Mumbai-400001.
10.      Shri Arvind Pande, Chairman
           Steel Authority of India Limited,
           Ispat Bhawan,

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
           Lodi Road,
           New Delhi-110003.
11.      Executive Director,
           The Council of EU Chambers of Commerce in India,
           Info. & Admn. Centre,
           3
rd Floor, Y.B. Chavan Centre,
           Gen. J. Bhosale Marg,
           Mumbai-400021
12.      Shri T.M.M. Nambiya, Managing Director,
           The Associated Cement Companies Limited,
           Cement House,
           121, Maharshi Karve Road,
           Mumbai-400020.
13.      Secretary,
           PHD Chambers of Commerce and Industry,
           PHD House,
           Opp. Asian Games Village,
           New Delhi.
 
APPENDIX-B
LIST OF VARIOUS CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE, PROFESSIONAL
BODIES AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE
THE COMMITTEE
1.        The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, New Delhi.
The Institute of Companies Secretaries of India, New Delhi
The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, Calcutta.
Securities and Exchange Board of India, Mumbai (SEBI)
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi (CII)
The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India, New Delhi
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi(FICCI)
ICICI, Mumbai
PHD, Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi.
69
ANNEXURE-C
CLAUSE-WISE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS CHAMBERS/
INSTITUTIONS/PROFESSIONALS ALONGWITH COMMENTS OF
DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
COMPANIES  (SECOND AMENDMENT)  BILL, 1999
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 2 (14A) Section 2
Definition of Dividend
Include interim dividend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Kirit Somaiya,
Member of Parliament
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confederation of Indian
Industries BCCI Sh. C.M.
Bindal, Jaipur
 
Dividend amount should be
transferred to a separate Bank
account within 5 days from the
dated of AGM.  This amount
can not be utilised for any other
purpose.
 
It should be clarified whether
interim dividend has to be
declared in AGM.
 
 
This suggestion may be
accepted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An explanation below
2(14A) may be added to
clarify that company'’

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICSI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASSOCHAM
 
 
 
 
 
 
                            70
 
 
                            
71             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHD Chamber of
Commerce & Industries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Payment of interim dividend
should be in compliance with
section 205, 205A, 205D, 206,
206A and 207.  No interim
dividend shall be paid in cash. 
The dividend should be paid by
cheque/dividend warrant.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remittance of dividend even
electronically is not possible
unless stock exchange agree for
notice of 15 days for book
closure etc.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time limit of 90 days be
prescribed for payment of
interim dividend.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Board of Directors may
declare interim dividend
and provisions of
Section 205, 205A,
205C, 206, 206A and
207 shall apply to any
interim dividend.  The
dividend should be paid
by cheque/dividend
warrant so that
disbursement of
dividend can be
verified.
 
 
The suggestion may be
accepted.  SEBI will
requested for make a
suitable amendment in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clause 16 of the Listing
Agreement to reduce
the period of notice of
Book Closure from 42
days to 15 days.
 
 
In view of the above the
proposal to increase
time limit to 90 days
may not be accepted.
 

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Clause 2- Section 2(14A)- Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
           An explanation below Clause 2 (14A) may be added to clarify that the Board of Directors may declare interim
dividend and he amount  of dividend   shall be deposited in a separate Bank Account within 5 days from date of
declaration.  The dividend shall be paid only by cheque/dividend warrant.
Clause 3 (Section 3)
Definitions of “Company”
“existing company”
“Private Company &
“public company”
Enhancement in the
minimum paid up capital
of Pvt.and Public
company
 
ICAI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BCCI
ICSI
 
                            72
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries
 
 
Calcutta Study Circle
on Corporate Law &
Allied Subjects,
Calcutta
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The word “paid up capital”
appearing in sub-clause (a)(iii)
(A) of the Bill, 1999 be
substituted by paid up equity
capital
 
 
 
 
 
This provisions should not be
applicable to Companies
registered
 
 
under section 25 of the Act.
 
 
 
 
In case Private companies
minimum paid up capital added
should not be prescribed.
 
This amendment should be
made applicable to those
companies that will be
incorporated after the
enactment of the Bill, 1999 and
not to existing companies
 
This suggestion may
not be considered as a
company under section
85 of the Act, 1956 can
issue either equity or
preference share capital.
 
 
The suggestion may be
accepted and a proviso
to
 
 
exempt see 25
companies from
requirement of
minimum paid up
capital be added.
 
The suggestion may not
be accepted.
 
 
The suggestion may not
be accepted as existing
companies have been
given two years to
enhance capital to
prescribed amount.
 
Clause 3 – Section 3- Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           The Companies Licensed under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 are proposed to be exempted from
requirements of having minimum paid up capital by adding a suitable provision to this effect in Section 3.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of Company
Affairs
Clause 7 (New Section
17A) Change of
Registered  
office  within a
Confederation of India
Industries
ICAI
Proposed  section 17A
should be deleted as this
clause  requires  permission
Deletion of this clause  is
not acceptable.  However,
clarification  will be  added

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
state.   No Company  shall
change  the place of its
Registered  office from one
place to another  within  a
State unless it is confirmed
by the Regional Director
BCCI
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries 
Sh. C.M. Bindal Jaipur
 
 
 
 
 
                              73
 
ASSOCHAM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICSI,
Calcutta Study Circle
on Corporate  Law &
Allied Subjects, Calcutta.
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICICI
from Regional  Director
even for shifting 
Registered Office from one
address to another  address
 
 
 
 
 
Some time office is
changed in same building
or vicinity, which will
require permission of RD,
which is  against the
intention.
 
Approval of Regional
Director be required  only
for shifting of Registered
Office from jurisdiction of
one Registrar of
companies  to another
Registrar in same state.
 
 A time period has to be
fixed within which the RD
will confirm the change of 
Registered  Office.  Upon 
elapse of specified time
period, it will be deemed 
that RD has consented to
such change.
 
that provision of this
clause  17A shall apply
only in the case of change
of Registered Office of a
company from the
jurisdiction of one Registrar
of 
 
 
Companies (ROC) to
another ROC in the same
State.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggestion may not be
accepted.
 
Clause 7-Section 17A- Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
The  intention behind  Section 17A  is that a company which shifts Registered Office from jurisdiction of one Registrar
of Companies to another Registrar of Companies  within a  State only will be required approval of the Regional
Director.  The suggestion to delete Clause 7 is not accepted.
Clause 12 (Section 43A)
Private Company to
become public company
in certain cases.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deletion of provisions of
this section
Confederation of Indian
Industries, ICAI, BCCI
Calcutta Study Circle on
Corporate Law & Allied
Subjects, Calcutta
 
 
 
 
                              74
 
ICSI
Modus operandi and time frame
for changing the status of
existing deemed public
companies has not be indicated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision be made that existing
deemed public companies be
reverted to private companies
status unconditionally.
It is proposed to retain
provision of Section
43A (4), i.e. approval of
ROC should be required
to change a deemed
public company to
private company.
 
 
Clause 12-Section 43A – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           Total Section 43A may not be deleted.  The provision of Section 43(A)(4) may be retained so that deemed public

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
companies may submit the Certificate of incorporation to Registrar of Companies for correction by adding the word
‘Private’ before the word ‘Limited’ in the name as indicated in the Certificate of incorporation.  The Registrar will do so
forthwith. No fee need be paid for this change as it is a statutory requirement on amendment of the companies Act,
1956.
 
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause16 (Section 55A)
Poweres of Securities &
Exchange Board of India
55A  the provisions
contained in  Sections 55
to 58, 59 to 81, 108, 109,
110, 112, 113,116, 117,
118, 119, 120, 121,122,
205, 205A, 206, 206A,
207, 209 and 211 shall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)******
(b) in case of those public 
public companies which
purport to be listed be
administered by SEBI’.
Confederation of India
Industries  ICICI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASSOCHAM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              75
 
ICWAI,
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Calcutta Study Circle on
Corporate Law & Allied
The term ‘public  companies
which purport to be listed’  may
be clarified.
 
 
 
 
 
 
If administrative powers shifted
to SEBI  then some  some of
the sections relating to capital
market  will  not exist.  So that
certain documents required to
be filed  with ROC will not be
filed by the company. Hence,
Department  may not be  able to
function properly.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative  powers
over sections  209 and 211
should  remain with the Central
Government.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was not clear whether various
forms require to be  filed under
chapters relating to the Capital
Market with SEBI
 
We may clarify the term
“purport”  to be  listed
as a company which
intends to get its shares
is listed in a Stock
Exchange.
 
See 55A may be
amplified  to indicate 
that SEBI  exercise 
powers u/s  55A in
respect of sections listed
in Sec.  55A only  in
relation to matter
concerning issue of
Capital, transfer  of
shares and payment of
dividend.
 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions may be
accepted as these
sections relate to
maintenance  of books
of accounts  and form
and contents  of
Balance Sheet & Profit
and Loss  Accounts 
respectively which
concerns day to day
management of a
company.
 
This needs to be 
clarified that the
Prospectus, Annual
Accounts will continue
to be filed with ROC in
addition to SEBI so that
public can inspect these
documents on  payment
of a nominal fee.
 

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Subjects, Calcutta
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEBI
ICSI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Power to frame  rules. 
Amend relevant  schedules  and
prescribe  regulation in respect
of section which are to be
administered by SEBI may be
conferred on SEBI by
amending Section 642 of the
Act.
The power to frame
rules and amend
schedule being a
Subordinate Legislation
can only  be exercised 
by Central Government
i.e. Department of
Company  Affairs and
as such can not be
exercised by SEBI.
76
Clause 16-New Section 55A-Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
           Section  55A needs substantial  amendments to clarify the doubts expressed and issues raised by Securities &
Exchange  Board of India.  The power to administer  Company Law is conferred upon Department of Company Affairs
by allocation of business  rules.  Intention of 55A is not  to create a separate Companies Act exclusively  applicable  to
Public Listed Companies.  The function of Registering  Prospectus (Section 60), Statement in lieu of Prospectus (
Sec.70), Return of allotment (Sec. 75) will continue to be with the  Registrar of Companies.
           Powers to hear petitions  regarding issue of shares at a discount  (Sec.79). Redemption of irredeemable 
preference shares (Sec.80A), extension  of time to issue of shares/debentures  certificate (Sec.113) will  require to be
retained with the Company  Law Board as SEBI is not a quasi-judicial body.
           Powers to decide applications submitted to the Central Government.  Further issue of shares on conversion of
loan/debenture into equity (Sec.81 (3) & (4)), depreciation methods (Sec.205) and power to make Rule and prescribe
schedule will remain with Central Government.  Thus the above aspect need to be incorporated by suitable amendment
in Section 55A of the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 19 (Section 58AA)
Small Depositors – CLB
to pass orders within  30
days of receipt  of
intimation of default of
payment from small
depositors.  58 AAA
offences  with respect to
small depositors are
proposed to be made
congnizable.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CII
 
 
 
 
 
 
FICCI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The word ‘deposited’ should be 
substituted for the word
‘invested’.
 
 
 
 
Only such offences as are
committed knowingly and
willfully or with fraudulent
intention  should be  severely 
punished.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestion is
acceptable.  Suitable
amendment shall be 
made.
 
 
The suggestion is not
acceptable as in matters
like non-filing of
document  it is not
feasible  to prove  that
the intention  was
fraudulent.  Non
payment  of deposit on
due date causes 
harassment and the
offence has to be
severely punished.
 
 
 
The suggestion is not

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sec.58AA(7)
 
 
                              77
 
CII
BCCI
 
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries
 
 
 
 
ICSI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICICI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78
 
 
 
 
This is rather drastic and
Needs to be deleted.
 
Only such offences as are
committed knowingl and
willfully or with fraudulent
intention  should  be severely
punished.
 
Instead of information for
individual default company send
periodical statement of default.
 
 
 
 
 
 
-No company shall at any time
accept further deposit from small
depositors….. Apart from the
present definition of small
depositor amendment to include 
successor, therefore legal
representative and nominee.
 
-Requirement to disclose default
in future advertisement inviting
deposits be for a period 3 years
from the date of default.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May be deleted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acceptable as all
Directors what so ever
are responsible to face 
prosecution and
penalties for non-
payment to small
depositors.
 
A monthly statement of
default be prescribed to
be sent by company to
Company Law Board to
facilitate processing by
the Board.
 
Suitable definition of
small depositor be
amended  as under. 
‘Small   depositors
includes his/her 
successor, nominee and
other legal
representative.
 
Suggestion not
acceptable as deposits
ought to know past
defaults by the company
in repayment  of
deposits on due dates
and this information
should be in print and
not be word of mouth 
as it is at present.
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-sec.7 need not be
deleted.  The provision
is intended  to safe
guard the interest of
small depositors.
 
The suggestion is
acceptable.
 
 
 
The suggestion is not
acceptable.  The right to
attend  meeting  is
confined to members

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
ICICI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kirit  Somaiya, MP
 
 
The word ‘ invested’ be replaced
by deposited.
 
 
 
Depositors would get the right to
vote in AGM when the company
commits defaults in repayment
of deposits.
holding Voting Equity. 
In principal Depositors
rights can not be
equated  to shareholders
who has put his capital
to risk.
 
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company
Affairs
 
Clause 75 (Sec. 192
A) Postal Ballot
Companies  to pass
certain resolution 
by Postal Ballots as
prescribed by the
Central
Government.
Confederation of
Indian  Industries
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and
Industries
 
 
 
 
 
 
FICCI
ASSOCHAM
BCCI
Calcutta Study
Circle
On Corporate Law
& Allied Subjects,
Calcutta
 
 
CII
 
 
80
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICSI
 
 
 
 
 
 
The language of this
sub-clause suggests as
if all the shareholders
to vote only by Postal
Ballots.
ii)  Value of share
should be given
weightage for purpose
of poll.
 
 
This system is
expensive and time
consuming.  Instead
role of proxies could
be strengthened. 
Practical difficulties
should also be taken
into account while 
framing rules.
 
The topics which are 
to be covered by
postal ballot  should
be given
 
in Act itself.  A few
objections have been 
raised such as cost of
ballot  paper, practical
difficulties etc.
 
In clause 192(4) the
word `requisite’ may
be inserted before the
words majority of
shares holders.  The
date on which
resolution will be 
This proposal is
on lines with
provision 87(1)
(b)i.e., Voting
Rights on Poll in
a company shall
be proportion to
share of paid up
equity capital.
 
These are mere
apprehension  and
are  not based on
specific  actual
case.  Even
notice  of AGM
etc.  are being
sent by post.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This suggestion
may be accepted
and word
‘requisite’
majority
substituted for
majority.
 
Procedure in for

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICICI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sh. C.M. Bindal
Jaipur
deemed to have been
passed specified.
Electronic mode be
permitting for issue 
of notices and
response for Postal
Ballots. Procedure be
proposed by Kumar
Manglam Birla
Committee adopted.
 
The amendment be
modified to add
after “thirty days” or
“further period”  as 
may be  specified in
the notice.
Sub-section (4) be
modified.
 
Amendment be made
sub-clause(5) for
examination of
rejected ballot papers
by an independent 
person to be
appointed by BOD.
 
 
The word ‘share
holders be substituted 
with the word
Members.
 
Postal Ballots will be
verified by
scrutinisers appointed
by Chairman of the
meeting as prescribed 
in Sec.184 of the Act.
Electronic  mode
etc. will be
prescribed in the
rules by the
Central
Government.
 
 
Suggestions may
not be accepted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Postal Ballots will
be verified by
scrutinizers
appointed by
Chairman of the
meeting as
prescribed in Sec.
184 of the Act. 
These are
procedural 
matters which can
be taken care of
by rules to be
prescribed by the
Central
Government.
 
 Clause 19 Section 58AA – Views of the Department of Company Affairs
 
           The words ‘invested’ appearing in explanation below sub-clause 11 of Sec. 58AA may be submitted by the word
‘Deposited’.  Suggestion to modify Sec.58AAA and make  offence cognizable  in respect of only Whole
Time/Managing Director is not acceptable.  Disclosing of defaults in Advertisement and Application form investing
Deposits shall be for all times is required as it is in investors interest to know  fact of default in printed words and not by
word of mouth.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of Company
Affairs
Clause 23 (Sec.67)
Construction of references
to offering shares or
debentures to the public
ASSOCHAM
 
 
 
Preferential issue of pure debt
securities should be spared from
this provision.
 
The restriction has been
introduced  in investors 
interest and the suggestion
may not be  accepted as

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
etc.-
Private Placement
Any offer made to more than
50
 
 
 
persons shall be treated as
public issue.
 
 
CII
 
 
 
79
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and
Industries
 
The provision should  be on same
line  as is in definition of private
 
 
 
company and  provide for similar
exclusion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The number 50 prescribed  in this
clause is too small.  It should be
250 to avoid complication.
provisions of 67(3)(b) are
being
 
 
 
 
misused  by companies to
collect  huge amount 
subscribed from persons
even other than those
receiving the offer.
 
Suggestion not accepted.
 
Clause 23 Section 67-Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
           The above amendment will put to an end to the mockery to Private placement.  The number 50 prescribed  in this
Section shall be retained to retain the character of the private company as provision of section 3 provides that private
limited companies means a company which limits the number of its members to 50.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 90 (Sec.209A)
Inspection of Books of
accounts, etc., of
companies
Confederation of Indian
Industries-
Both SEBI  and Registrar of
Companies or official of
Central Government are
empowered  to inspect listed
companies.  This is to be
clarified.
SEBI’s powers should
only be conferred to
matters concerning
issue of Capital transfer
of Shares and payment 
of dividend.  SEBI  not
been authorised to
inspect  matters
concerning day to day
management.
 81
Clause 75-New Section 192A- Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
Postal ballot includes Electronic Voting.  Experience of several decades have shown that most of the share holders who
resides in far flung  area unable to attend Annual or Extra ordinary  General Meetings.  By Postal Ballot shareholders
can take part in decision making of the company.  The concept of Postal Ballot was also  recommended  by Working 
Group set up by Government to propose a new Bill to re-enact Companies  Act, 1956 and also by Kumar Mangalam
Birla Committee on corporate  governance.  The provisions of Postal Ballot  will be  prescribed only  on issues where
participation of  every  share holders is essential e.g. investment  proposals,  appointment  of Directors etc.  as proposed
in the report  of Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee.  The procedure for postal ballot prescribed by Government  will
provide for appointment  of scrutinisers, electronic voting and other safe guards  against destruction of post ballot
received from share holders of the company.  The word ‘requisite’ may be added before the words ‘majority of share
holders’ in sub-clause 4 of Section 192(A).
Clause 90-Section 209A-Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
           The Securities and Exchange Board of India has only been authorised to inspect  books of accounts only in
relation to matters covered under Sections referred to in Section 55A.  This is already clear from second proviso to
Section 209 A(I)(a)(iii).

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause  95 {Section 217 A
(2AA)}
Board Report Board
Report shall also
 
include a director
responsibility statement
FICCI
 
 
 
82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICWAI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICSI
Non-executive  directors are not
involved   in day to day
meeting.  Therefore provision
 
needs to be amended to include
only MD  or full time directors
for the purpose of
accountability.
 
 
Director
Responsibility
Statement  shall also state that
Directors have taken  proper 
and sufficient  care for the
maintenance of adequate cost 
accounting  records
 
 
 
Statement  should  state steps
taken by  Directors  to comply
various laws applicable to the
company.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  intention of this 
proviso is to make all
the directors to be
 
responsible  for the
working of the company
and compliance of the
provisions of the Act.
 
Suggestion may not be 
accepted as it is the
expected  responsibility 
of Directors to maintain 
cost accounting records
where ever prescribed.
 
Suggestion is not
acceptable as it is not
feasible to list out
compliances of all the
laws applicable to a
company in Director’s
report.
 Clause 95-Section 217A(2AA)-Views of the Department of Company Affairs:
           The  suggestion that only Whole-time/Managing Director should be required to sign Directors Responsibility
Statement is not acceptable as all Directors should be responsible for what is stated in the Director Report and
Responsibility Statement is only a part of the Directors Report.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 101 ( Sec.224)
Number of Companies
which can be audited by
an auditor.  Private
companies to be excluded
for the requirement of this
Section
Calcutta study circle, ICAI The amendment shall have
monopolistic  concentration of
audit in fewer
individuals/firms.  The existing
provision should be retained
No justify reason has
been given justifying
the amendment and the 
suggestion need not be
accepted.
83
Clause 101 – Section 224(1B) – explanation – Views of the Department of Company
           The suggestion is not acceptable as existing limit of 20 companies having paid up capital of Rs.2.5 lakhs or more
to be audited per auditor has been retained.  Remaining 10 companies can be companies with paid up capital below
Rs.25 lakhs.  The monopolistic concentration as an effect of amendment has not been justified.  The suggestion to not to
exclude private companies can not be accepted.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 102 {Sec. 226 (3)}
Qualification and
disqualification of
auditors -–Disqualification
of becoming an Auditor. 
Person holding security of
a company after a period
of one year from the date
of commencement of this
Act will not be appointed
as an auditor of the
company.
Confederation of Indian
Industries.  ICAI 
ASSOCHAM BCCI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BCCI  PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries
 
 
ICSI
 
 
 
 
ICICI
 
 
 
 
ICAI
The word ‘security’ is capable
of different interpretation
whether it would cover equity
share or all shares and
debentures.  The word
“security” need to be defined.
 
 
 
 
The restriction may be made
applicable to those who hold
more than a certain percent of
capital.
 
The words any security be
changed to “any security having
voting rights”
 
The word ‘Securities’ be
substituted by “Shares or
instruments convertible into
shares.”
 
The period of disinvestment
should be three years instead of
one year.
 
 
This suggestion may be
considered.  “Security”
may be defined for
Section 226(3) by way
of an explanation to
mean an instrument
which carries voting
rights eg. Equity shares.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestion is not
acceptable as it has no
reasons have been given
for this amendment.
84
Clause 102 – Section 226(3)- Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           The word ‘Security’ for section 226(3) may be defined by way of an explanation to this sub-section to mean any
instrument which carries voting rights.  Definition does not include deposit holder.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 103 {Sec. 227
Auditors to give their
adverse observations in
thick type or in bold
letters in their report and if
any director has been
disqualified for becoming
director in any company
under section 274(1)(g)
ICAI It may be beyond the scope of
audit report to comment on
adverse effects on the
functioning of the company.
 
 
 
 
 
Auditors have no powers to call
for information from other
companies in which such
director is a director.
The suggestion is not
acceptable because the
auditor can assess the
impact of the adverse
comments or
observations on
functioning of the
company.
 
Suggestion is not
acceptable as the
responsibility cast on
the Officers and
companies to furnish
information refused by

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
the Directors.
Clause 103 – Section 227 – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           The suggestion to remove the requirement that an Auditor should disclose observation or comments which has
adverse effect on the functioning of the company can not be accepted as auditor can assess the impact of such
observations on working of the company and can make a qualitative comment whether it will adversely affect the
working of the company.
           The companies records should disclose to an auditor as to whether a company has filed annual accounts and also
whether it has failed to repay deposits, interest thereon, debenture, dividend on due dates and if necessary call for
information in course of audit.  Therefore, the requirement to disclose violations of section 274(1)(g) by an auditor in
respect of Directors of the Company may not be deleted .
85
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 122 {Sec.252(1)}
Minimum number of
directors – Small share
holders can elect one
directors in BOD of
Companies with a paid up
capital of Rs.5 crores or
more and having 1000 or
more small shareholders.
Confederation of Indian
Industries – FICCI, BCCI,
ASSOCHAM, PHD
Chamber of Commerce and
Industries.
 
 
ICWAI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICSI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The requirement of atleast one
director for small shareholder
shall be deleted.
 
 
 
 
 
Suggest that small shareholders
should be defined as one who
along with his relatives holds
nominal value of shares of
Rs.20,000/-or less.
 
 
 
 
 
Record date for ascertaining
1000 or small share holders be
indicated in Section.
 
 
 
 
 
 
To clarify whether all holdings
of a previous held solely jointly
are the aggregated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The apprehensions are
not based on any
specific actual case and
are being expressed
without even a fair trail
to proposal of
representation Board of
small shareholders on
the Board.  The Clause
is proposed for the
protection of small
investors.  Hence
suggestion may not be
accepted.
 
We may add the words
on the date of issue of
Notice to clarify on
what date criteria of
paid up capital’ and
number of share holders
is to be applied.
 
Suggestion not accepted
a clarification by
circular on all issues
related to this section
may be issued by
Government at
appropriate time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestion is not
acceptable. 
Representation of Small

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
 
 
 
86
 
ICICI
 
 
This requirement should be
confined to only listed public
companies, public financial
institutions and schedule banks
should be excluded.
Shareholder is required
in all types of
companies
 
Clause 122 – Section 252(1) – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           The suggestion to omit the provision for representation of small shareholders by electing at least one among them
on Board of Directors can not be accepted because small shareholders do not have a voice to represent on Board of
Directors as on date.  The Election will take place in the manner as may be prescribed.  It is proposed to include an
explanation for the purpose of ascertaining 1000 number of shareholders and Rs.5 crore or more paid up share capital,
the basis shall be the date of issue of notice.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 126 (Sec. 274)
Disqualification of 
Directors.  The directors
of companies making
default in repayment on
maturity to small share
holder and fails in filing
annual accounts and return
with be barred from
becoming director of a
public company for a
period of 5 years.
ASSOCHAM  BCCI
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kirit Somaiya, MP
Officer should be ineligible
only if he has been held
individually accountable.
 
 
 
Only executive directors should
be held responsible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Directors of companies not
filing Returns and Annual
Accounts continuously for two
years (instead of three years) be
debarred from Directorship of
other companies for five years.
Suggestion is not
acceptable as the
Section it self provides
that the court has held
the director or officer
responsible for default
of sections specified in
the clause.  Therefore
no distinction can be
made on the basis that a
person is not a Whole
Time Director.
 
Suggestion is not
acceptable period of 3
years as suggested is
quite reasonable.
87
Clause 126 – Section 274(1) – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           A director is expected to ensure that the Balance Sheet and the Profit and Loss Accounts and Annual Return is
filed by the Company and circulated to its members.  Similarly, he must ensure that the declared dividend is distributed
to its members with in the prescribed time.  Therefore, the suggestion to disqualify only Whole-time/Managing Director
for reference under this clause can not be accepted.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 127 (Sec.275) No
person to be a director of
more than 15 companies
FICCI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No country in the world has
such restrictions.  The earlier
limit of 20 should be restored
and should be applicable only to
listed companies a limit on paid
up capital.
 
 
Suggestion is not
acceptable.  The
reduction in number is
proposed so that a
director will have
sufficient time to put
his efforts for the better
management of the

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
 
 
 
 
 
SEBI
 
 
 
The number of companies of
which a person should be a
director be reduced from 20 to
10, as prescribed in listing
agreement.
company.
 
Listing Agreement may
be got amended by
SEBI to be in tune with
the Companies Act.
Clause 127 – Section 275 – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           The existing limit of 20 Directors in Section 275, 277 and 279 was carefully considered by the Working Group
appointed by Government and the group recommended reduction of maximum number of Directorship to be held by a
person from 20 to 15 companies.  Even though Listing Agreement have no force of Law.  SEBI will be requested to
bring the limit in Listing Agreement in tune with proposal in Clause 127 of the Bill.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 134 (Sec. 292A)
Audit Committee Every
public company having
paid up
 
 
capital of not less than
Rs.5 crores shall have an
audit committee.
CII  BCCI  PHD Chamber
of Commerce and
Industries ICAI Shri C.M.
Bindal, Jaipur.
88
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FICCI, ICAI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASSOCHAM
 
 
 
 
 
ICWAI
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-clause 8 should be
amended so that Board is not
bound by the recommendations
of Audit Committee for
 
 
sufficient reasons to be
disclosed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It may be provided that if the
Board does not accept the
recommendations of the Audit
Committee, it should record its
reasons for not accepting the
same.
 
 
 
Government should take
powers to prescribe the
function of the audit committee
through rules framed in this
regard.
 
Audit Committee should also
have discussions with cost
auditors, internal audit apart
from Auditors and also review
cost statements and cost audit
report periodically.
 
Only listed companies should
Suggestions may not be
accepted as Committee
has been constituted of
both Working
 
 
and Full time Director
and non-working
Directors and make
representation on
Financial mattters only.
 
Suggestion may be
accepted.  The directors
shall be asked to report
to the shareholders the
reasons for not accepting
recommendations of the
Committee.
 
The proposal is contrary
to liberalisation policy
and may not be
accepted.
 
Discussion with Internal
audit already provided
which also covers Cost
Audit.
 
 
 
The amendment
proposed after due
consideration of all
justifications, hence no
change is called for.
 

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
 
 
BCCI  PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industries
 
 
 
 
ICSI
 
 
 
 
 
 
89
 
have Audit Committee.
 
 
 
 
 
Audit Committee to review
compliance of Companies Act,
other Corporate Laws and
Fiscal Laws.
Since Secretarial
Compliance Report is
also prescribed in Bill
which will include on
report on compliance
 
 
 
Companies Act and
Corporate Laws the
Audit Committee need
not duplicate effects on
the same subject.
Clause 134-Section 292A – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           The Supremacy of view of Audit Committee of Board in financial matters is recognised by the Corporate Laws
and also by recommendations of various Committees on  Excellence  in  Corporate
Governance.  The  measures has to be given a fair trail and should not be brushed aside in off handed manner.  The
suggestion to dilute the recommendations of Committee by full Board of Directors is not accepted.
           We may point out that RBI has proposed in Investors Protection Act for NBFC’s that a company with assets base
of 50 crores should appoint an Audit Committee.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 165 (Sec. 393A)
Appointment of Company
Secretary Companies not
required to have a whole
time Company Secretary
and having a paid up
capital ten lakh or more to
file with ROC a certificate
from a Secretary in whole
time practice.
ICSI
Shri A.K. Biswas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Calcutta Study Circle on
Corporate Law & Allied
Subjects, Shri C.M Bindal.
 
 
90
 
 
 
The Compliance Certificate be
attached to Directors’ Report in
addition to the same being filed
with the Registrar.
 
Instead of Compliance
Certificate the clause may
provide for Compliance Report
to give it a wide scope.
 
 
Proviso to sub-section (1A) be
deleted to avoid its misuse.
 
The requirement for companies
between paid up capital from
Rs.10 lakhs to below Rs.50
lakhs was in order.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal may be
considered.
 
 
 
 
Not required to be
considered.
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestion need not
be considered.
 
 
 
The suggestion is not
acceptable as most of
small
 
 
 
sized companies are not
complying with the
provisions of the Act.

64th report of committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/64threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:35:37]
 
 
 
 
Swela Properties &
Investment (P) Ltd.
 
 
 
 
ICAI
It is suggested that the monetary
limit should be increased to
Rs.25 lakhs for Secretarial
compliance Report.
 
Chartered Accountants may
also be allowed to undertake the
certification task as proposed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestion is not
acceptable.
Clause 165 – Section 383 A- views of the Department of Company Affairs :
           A practicing Company Secretary is specially trained in corporate laws and his practical training includes study of
compliance of Corporate Laws by studying records in the Office of Registrar of Companies.  The requirement to
carrying on check of compliance of Companies Act, 1956 by a qualified Company Secretary in whole time practice
alone and not by a Chartered Accountant is fully justified.  This suggestion that in addition to filling ‘Secretarial
Compliance Report'’ it should also be attached to the Directors Report may be accepted and suitable amendments will
be made in this regard.  Suggestion to increase the limits of Paid up Capital for this purpose from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.25
lakhs or Rs.50 lakhs is not acceptable as most of the small companies are found to be violating even the basic provision
of filling Annual Accounts and Annual Returns.
Amendments
(Clausewise)
Suggestion
Received from
Suggestion Comments of
Department of
Company Affairs
Clause 214 (Sec.621)(1)
Offences against Act to be
cognisable also on
complaint by ‘SEBI’ in
addition to the Registrar.
ICSI If it is intended that the SEBI’s
authority be limited only to
contraventions in relation to the
specified sections, then suitable
qualifying words need to be
inserted.
The suggestion is worth
considering and may be
accepted.
 
Suitable amendment
may be made.
91
Clause 214 – Section 621 (1) – Views of the Department of Company Affairs :
 
           The suggestion that the authority of SEBI to file complaint should be clearly spelt out clearly by specific sections
in respect of which they have been empowered to administer companies under Section 55A.  It is proposed to add a
proviso to the effect that SEBI shall be eligible to file prosecutions only in respect of Offences relating to sections
specified in Section 55A.
§ Nominated w.e.f. 15th March vice  Shri Akhilesh  Das
  Re-nominated w.e.f. 5th  May, 2000
¨ Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section 2, dated 23 December, 1999.
©  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, dated 14 January, 2000 (please see Annexure for a copy of the Bill).