Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
194
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on nd December, )22 2015
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on nd December, )22 2015
ONE HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka)
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-third
Report on the Strengthening of the     orking of MinistryW
of o for Effective Implementation of PoliciesD NER
Programmes, Schemes and Projects
meant for North Eastern Region

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Seventy-third Report on the Strengthening
of the Working of Ministry of DoNER for Effective
Implementation of Policies Programmes, Schemes and
Projects meant for North Eastern Region
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December , 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December , 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.)-380


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv )
2. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (v) -(vii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-41
CHAPTER -I Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by
the Government ....................................................................................... 2-21
CHAPTER -II Recommendations/Observations on which the committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s Reply ............. 22-29
CHAPTER -III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ......................... 30-40
CHAPTER-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply
of the Government have not been received ............................................. 41
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 42-47
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 49-58

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2015)
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Goel
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Dr. V. Maitreyan
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
*16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar
21. Shri Harish Meena
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
23. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
24. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
25. Shri Dilip Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil
(i)
* Shri Prataprao Jadhav, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 9 th September, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of  Shri Chandrakant
Khaire, MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9 th September, 2015

29. Shri Bishnupada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Ninety Fourth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventy Third Report on the
Strengthening of the working of the Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of Policies,
Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region.
2. The One Hundred and Seventy Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented/laid to the Rajya Sabha and on the Table of the
Lok Sabha on 29th August, 2013. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent
to the Ministry of DoNER requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations
of the Committee contained in the Report. The Action Taken Notes thereon were received from the
Ministry of DoNER on 22nd September, 2014. Based on the ATN the Secretariat forwarded a
Questionnaire to the Ministry of DoNER and the replies thereon were received.
3. The Committee visited the States of Assam, Meghalaya and Manipur from 25th to 29th May,
2015 for on-the-spot assessment of action taken on the recommendations contained in 173rd Report.
During the visit, the Committee held discussions with the Chief Secretaries and other officers of
the State Governments of Assam, Meghalaya and Manipur including local/district administrations and
other stakeholders on development projects in North-East Region.
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 29th June, 2015 decided to hear Chief Secretaries of
remaining five North Eastern States in Delhi which could not be heard during the aforesaid visit.
Accordingly, the Committee, in its meeting held on 27th July, 2015 heard the Secretary, Ministry
of DoNER along with the representatives of States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura in Delhi itself. In the said meeting, the Committee, after a detailed assessment,
observed that the Ministry of DoNER has furnished superfluous, evasive and unsatisfactory response
to 31 recommendations out of a total of 49 recommendations as contained in 173rd Report. The
Committee observed that the Ministry of DoNER responded to six recommendations were found to
be incomplete and unsatisfactory. The Committee further observed that with regard to eight
recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of DoNER just responded by indicating ‘noted for
compliance’ and while six recommendations were communicated to the other agencies without any
follow up action and eleven recommendations of the Committee were without exclusive response.
The Committee thereon directed the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER to hold detailed discussions with
State Governments and other Central Ministries and Departments and furnish revised action taken
notes to the Committee for examination and consideration.  The Ministry of DoNER furnished the
revised action taken notes on 14th August, 2015 after holding detailed discussion on 3rd August,
2015 with the representatives of North Eastern States.
5. The Minister of DoNER laid the statement on the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee on the Table of Lok Sabha on
(iii)

17th December, 2014 and Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2014, pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha’s Direction dated 24th September, 2004.
6. The present report has been prepared on the basis of revised action taken notes in the
backdrop of Committee’s meeting on 27th July, 2015 and the direction given by the Committee to
the Ministry of DoNER in the said meeting.
7. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred and Ninety Fourth Report and adopted the
same at its meeting held on 18 December, 2015.
8. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
P. BHATTACHARYA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman
18 December, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana, 27, 1937 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha
(iv)

ACRONYMS
NEC : North Eastern Council
BADP : Border Areas Development Programme
BRO : Border Roads Organisation
DoNER : Development of North Eastern Region
NEDFI : North Eastern Development Finance Corporation
NERLP : North Eastern Region Livelihood Project
NERAMAC : North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation
NEHHDC : North Eastern Handlooms & Handicrafts
NER : North Eastern Region
NLCPR : Non-La psable Central Pool of Resources
BTC : Bodoland Territorial Council
SIDF : Social and Infrastructure Development Fund
GBS : Gross Budgetary Support
B E : Budget Estimate
RE : Revised Estimate
NHAI : National Highway Authority of India
SARDP-NE : Special Accelerated Road Development Programme For North East
PGCIL : Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
NETC : North East Transmission Corporation
IW AI : Inland Waterways Authority of India
SIDF : Social And Infrastructure Development Fund
MOUS : Memoranda of Understanding
CCEA : Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs
NMFP : National Mission on Food Processing
MOFPI : Ministry of Food Processing Industries
NMNEH : Horticulture Mission for North East & Himalayan States
(v)

NHM : National Horticulture Mission
RKVY : Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
NEIIPP : North Eastern Industrial and Investment Promotion Policy
MSE : Micro and Small Enterprises
NOSSE : Nedfi Opportunity Scheme for Small Enterprise
NEEDS : North East Entrepreneurs Development Scheme
WEDS : W omen Enterprise Development Scheme
SNEHH : Scheme for Northeast Handloom and Handicrafts
JEDS : Jute Enterprise Development Scheme
IDEA : Initiative For Development of Entrepreneurs in Agriculture
EDPS : Entrepreneurship Development Programmes
MOS : Memorandum of Settlement
NEBS : North East Business Summit
ICC : Indian Chamber of Commerce
CDG : Community Development Groups
PIP : Project Implementation Plan
SHGs : Self Help Groups
CSP : Community Service Providers
ADP : Asian Development Bank
IMG : Inter-Ministerial Group
PMO : Prime Minister’s Office
SMG : Special Monitoring Group
MORTH : Minister of Road Transport & Highways
PMGSY : Prime Miniter Gram Sadak Yojana
FLS : Final Location Survey
IRCON : Ircon International Limited
TDC : Target Date For Completion
AAI : Airport Authority of India
LAD : Least Available Depth
RITES : Railway Infrastructure Technical and Economic Services
(vi)

CPWD : Central Public Works Department
SWOT : S trengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and  Threats
MSMEs : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
HRD : Human Resource Development
NESRIP : North East States Road Investment Program
PMA : Project Monitoring Agency
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
OBC : Other Backward Class
NGO : Non Governmental Organisation
BL T : Bodo Liberation Tigers
CEA : Central Electricity Authority
IAF : Indian Air Force
KSU : Khasi Students Union
RO-RO : Roll On-Roll Off
L&T : Larson and Turbo
IW A T : Inland Waterways Authority of India
(vii)

1
1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its One Hundred Seventy Third Report on Strengthening of the Working
of Ministry of DoNER for Effective Implementation of Policies Programmes, Schemes and Projects
meant for North Eastern Region. The said Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29 th August,
2013 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2013.
2. Updated Action Taken Note was received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 173 rd Report on 14 th August, 2015.  The updated Action Taken Note
received from the Ministry of DoNER has been categorized as follows:
Chapter-I: The recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 5.2.1, 5.3.2, 5.3.4, 5.4.1, 5.5.1, 5.7.1, 5.7.2, 5.7.3, 5.7.4, 5.9.1, 5.9.2,
5.9.3, 5.10.1, 5.10.2, 5.12.1, 5.13.1, 5.13.2, 5.14.1, 5.20.1 and 5.25.1 (of One
Hundred and Seventy Third Report) T OTAL Recommendations-20.
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter-II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 5.3.1, 5.3.2, 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.6.3, 5.8.4,
5.17.1, 5.18.1, 5.19.1, 5.19.2, 5.19.3, 5.21.1, 5.21.2, 5.24.3 and 5.24.4 (ibid) T
OTAL
Recommendations-15.
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry
and, therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter-III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 5.3.5, 5.3.6, 5.8.1, 5.8.3, 5.11.1, 5.15.1,
5.16.1, 5.16.2, 5.22.1, 5.23.1, 5.23.2, 5.24.1 and 5.24.2 (ibid)  T OTAL
Recommendations-13.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its
recommendations contained in Chapter - III and desires that the Ministry should
furnish convincing explanations in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter-IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 5.8.2 (ibid) T OTAL Recommendation-01.
In respect of 01 recommendations in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished interim reply
or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should
furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized in
Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendations.
3. The details of the A TRs have been analysed in various Chapters in the succeeding chapters.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
1.0 After hearing the views of various stakeholders viz. Ministry of DoNER, line Ministries,
representatives of North Eastern State Governments, Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Secretary,
Planning Commission and Cabinet Secretary on the subject, the Committee has arrived at the following
conclusions observations/ recommendations.
Recommendation
1.1 AVOIDANCE OF PROCEDURAL DELAY
1.1.1 From the evidence available, the Committee takes note of the fact that the major drawback in
the timely implementation and completion of the projects lies in the procedural delay. The Committee
is of the view that in order to give fillip to the development process in the region, the whole
Government machinery involving both the Central Government and State Governments need to pull up
their socks right from the stage of conceptualisation of schemes, allocation of funds, formulation of
DPRs, technical vetting of DPRs, obtaining environment/forest clearances to actual take-off of projects
on ground involving land acquisition, capacity building, conducive law and order situation, etc. This
requires a well balanced planning, good coordination between various agencies and time bound
clearances/rejections of projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a robust monitoring
mechanism should be put in place so that procedural delays at every stage of the projects are brought
down to minimum level, though ideal situation would be to remove all delays.
                                                 (Para 5.2.1 of the 173rd Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 In pursuance of the directions given by Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Home Affairs, in its meeting held  on 27/07/2015, detailed discussions were held with the NE States
on 03/08/2015 through video conferencing so as to put in place a simplified procedure for expeditious
processing/execution of projects  under the NLCPR scheme. After  consultations and after examination
of feasibility, the following simplified procedure, which includes pre as well as post sanction of the
projects,  is proposed to be put in place so as to remove the bottlenecks and delays in the timely
completion of the projects:-
(i) The NE States to submit Priority Lists by September of the year for the next financial
year commencing from this year itself.
(ii) The normative allocation for the States will be intimated well in advance based on past
years’ trend after taking account of their infrastructure development indices, absorption
capacity as shown in pending projects and after accommodating needs for ongoing and
retained projects.
2

3
(iii) A project should be at a single location and should not a composite of several locations
as already specified in the Guidelines of NLCPR.
(iv) Priority List should be continuous and in a running format (No sector-wise, district-wise
categorisation of projects should be in the Priority List).
(v) The total value of projects included in the Priority List should not exceed 1.5 times of
the total normative allocation so intimated.
(vi) Projects exceeding 1.5 times of the allocation shall be summarily rejected.
(vii) The current specification in guidelines for reserving 25% of new projects for backward
areas is vague and will be specified as intended for Autonomous Territorial/District
Councils.
(viii) The concept paper for each project should clearly specify if the expenditure is to be
incurred on creating public assets, the nature of landholding, Government control and
management etc.
(ix) Chief Secretary/Planning Secretary/Departmental Secretary (when concerned) shall alone
attend the meeting of the NLCPR Committee, convened for initial screening of concept
papers and later for sanction of finalised DPRs of the projects included for the State. In
case these officers are unable to attend the meeting, another authorised representative,
who is able to take on the spot decisions, may alone attend the meeting.  In case the
authorised representative is unable to satisfactorily answer the queries of the Committee,
the project shall be rejected as unsupported and the funds diverted to next in priority or
to approved projects of other States.
(x) Once the project(s) are cleared, the States will be invariably (by default) required to
submit DPRs within a period of two months. In case more time is sought by the State
at the time of approval of concept, such time not exceeding two months beyond the
default period shall be given.
(xi) DPRs should invariably include all the mandatory certificates viz. Environment and forest
clearance, availability of land, free from encumbrances,  non-duplication certificate and
availability of stone and sand quarry in the proximity of the project (in case of road
projects) etc.
(xii) The DPRs should be prepared as per the check-list prescribed by respective line Ministries
and on standard software for which the Ministry will arrange training/workshops for the
State Government officials and for potential vendors nominated by States as part of the
Ministry’s Vendor Development efforts.
(xiii) During the consultation process, many State Governments requested that the cost of
preparation of DPRs may be included in the project cost. In response to query by
Secretary, DoNER with regard to the cost incurred by the States on preparation of DPR,
the State representatives assured him that they would advise the same shortly after
consultations. After receiving response from all NE State Governments, the same shall be
considered suitably for incorporating the costs of soil testing for buildings and bridges and
DPR preparation in the NLCPR guidelines.

4
(xiv) The State shall also certify that these projects have not been taken up or proposed to be
taken with any other funding mechanism in the past or during the current financial year.
(xv) On the receipt of DPRs, Technical Wing of Ministry of DoNER will carry out  preliminary
scrutiny. The consolidated queries of Technical Wing, if any, shall be circulated, online/
through e-mail, to the State Planning and Implementing Department within 15 days. In
case the reply is not received within the period of 15 days from receipt of query, it shall
be presumed that the State is not interested to pursue the project and the project will be
deleted within seven days thereafter without any further notice.
(xvi) On receipt of reply to the queries raised by the Technical Wing, the DPRs will be sent
to the vetting agency/line Ministries, with the request to vet the DPRs. The vetting agency
shall raise consolidated queries, if any, which will be forwarded to the State Government
through Ministry, which will be required to furnish replies to the same within a period of
15 days. If these queries are not settled within 15 days of communication, the State
Government will be given another 15 days for furnishing replies to the query from the
vetting agency, failing which it will presumed that the State is not interested to pursue the
project and the said project will stand rejected. However, if the State Government finds
it difficult to collect data for a reply and gives cogent and substantial reasons, further time
of up to 30 days may be provided and not beyond.
(xvii) Vetting agency will give techno-economic vetting of the projects within one month from
receipt of replies to the consolidated queries within a period one month. In case any further
query is raised because of unsatisfactory replies or issues arising, these should be settled
before or on the date the project is placed for sanction before the Screening Committee.
(xviii) The line Ministries/NITI Aayog/NEC will be approached in parallel for non-duplication
certificates and for certifying if the project is fit for gap funding. The line Ministries/NITI
Aayog/NEC shall give their comments/observations within one month else it will be
presumed to be clear for non-duplication and gap funding angle. In any event, these views
shall be finally provided at the time of project sanctions.
(xix) NLCPR Committee meeting shall be convened periodically to consider sanctioning of the
cleared projects, duly vetted by the vetting agency and will also record the information/
views on non-duplication and gap funding character.
(xx) Release of funds:
     States laid great priority on streamlining the release of funds by the Ministry.
Therefore, after sanction of the project by the inter-ministerial NLCPR Committee, the
administrative and financial sanction shall be issued after following the laid down
procedures. Tendering process shall be finalised within two months by following
transparent process of bidding and Work Order issued. A copy of the tender shall
mandatorily also be placed on the NEC and NLCPR websites. Ministry of DoNER would
release funds in three instalments comprising 30%, 50% and 20%.
Release of first installment of funds:  30 % of the central share i.e. 90% of the total
approved cost of the project, shall be released along with administrative and financial
sanction.

5
Release of second installment of funds:  50% of the central share subject the condition
that 50 % of the funds released as first instalment has been utilised by the State for the
project and commensurate physical progress.
Release of third and final installment of funds: 20% of the central share subject to
the condition that 90% of the released amount, including full State share of 10% stands
utilised and  on achievement of 70% of physical progress of the project.
(xxi) States shall release funds to the implementing agency within a period of 15 days from
receipt from this Ministry. A copy of the release order shall be uploaded on the NLCPR
website and/or sent to the Ministry and will be taken note of for further releases in this
and other projects of the State as an instance of diversion of funds.
(xxii) In case of delayed projects, not more than two extensions shall be given, with overall
cumulative ceiling of one and half years (two working seasons) from the original date
of completion of the project. Reasons for delay shall be approved by Principal Secretary/
Secretary, Planning, on the recommendations of Secretary of the Implementing
Department. In the event that the project remains incomplete, the State may retain the
projects for pursuit by themselves so that the Ministry may transfer the funds to other
projects selected for the States. In case the delay is on account of reasonable
justification acceptable to the Ministry, this requirement may be waived on a case to
case basis.
1.1.3 On the issue of expeditious implementation of programmes/schemes, the Secretary, Ministry of
DoNER apprised the Committee during its meeting held on 27th July, 2015 as under:-
“ On expeditious implementation, ...., we have advanced the timeline. Last year, we had the
Committee meeting for approving projects in November, but this year, we are having it in
September. We have already asked the States to give the priority list in September .....and they
come with the DPRs. They take some time to prepare the DPRs. They come back to us, we
sanction it, and then it goes on with that, .... The idea is that they don’t miss a season. The
working season is only from September to March-April. Therefore that season should not be
missed. After a project is sanctioned, they tender it and all that, and they will be ready for the
next season.”
1.1.4 In regard to use of software in preparation of detailed project report, the Secretary, Ministry
of DoNER stated as under:-
“ we have written to the States to use software for the preparation of DPRs so that there is
no occasion to see that once a DPR is approved and sanctioned and the funds are released,
the Project Officer should not suddenly discover that the project parameters, the ground depth,
the hill slopes or whatever are different from what were mentioned in the DPR and, therefore,
it is not feasible to implement it. Therefore, we have told them to use software, go by realistic
field parameters and then send us the DPR. ....... We have also asked our contractors – now
we have appointed one CPSU as a contractor for below 
` 50 crores projects and another for
above ` 50 crores projects – to use the software to vet the DPRs, and this is likely to lead to
efficiency.”

6
1.1.5 As reg ards, the procedural delay in vetting of the DPRs, the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER
explained the action taken by the Ministry as under:-
“ The vetting of  DPRs can be expedited only if there is a common agreed system of developing
the DPRs, and that common system is possible through use of common softwares.  There are
softwares available in the market, which are specifically utilized for such purposes — for
building roads and bridges.  It is used in all the large projects all over the country and across
the world also.  This is easily available even in the North-Eastern Region.   So, that is what
we feel is a method of having a commonality in approach for preparing DPRs so that it can
be prepared fast and also vetted fast... on the issue of enhancing transparency,  we are
developing a software... But we are preparing a software with the help of NIC on the uploading
of DPRs, on the transfer of information between  the DoNER and States, on issuing SMS alerts
on responses that are required from DoNER and from States, so that those SMS alerts go to the
concerned officer.  And, if the concerned officer does not take action, it goes to the next higher
level officer  who is required to take action to ensure that expeditious processing of papers is
done.   This should enable the States to upload the inspection reports, current photos of the
site, digital photos of the site, and also enable  the public to see them, upload their own photos
if they so feel like  and also to write their comments. So, this will be a web-enabled software.”
1.1.6 Apprising the Committee of the need for the software and arrive at a common approach to the
issue of preparing DPR, the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER submitted before the Committee as under:-
“ When we have a software the State agencies that are responsible for preparing DPRs are
forced to go and look at the field situation before filling in the contents of the software.  It
is not possible to fill in the contents of the software with imaginary or table calculations.
Therefore, that kind of a discipline is being introduced by the process of a structure being
created for that purpose. That is the first point, ...  A DPR can, again, not be prepared by
the engineers.  What we have proposed is that the States should acquire the DPR.  It is also
possible to fund the acquisition of DPR through the NLCPR.  That is not a problem.  The more
important thing is, because it does not entail a very high cost, to train the engineers and the
concerned agency officers of the State Governments in the use of the DPR.  Secondly, there
has to be vendor development.  Since it is not going to be done by the State officers themselves,
the vendors who prepare the DPRs must be trained in the use of that software.  So, there has
to be both vendor development and engineers’ development programmes, which we are prepared
to fund.  We are discussing the issue with the States.  That is present position of the matter.
It takes some time. I appreciate the Committee’ s concern on this issue.”
1.1.7 The Secretary, Ministry of DoNER, replying to the queries of the Committee as to how the
existing mechanism ensures appointment of the representatives of the concerned State Government in
the NLCPR Committee, deposed before the Committee in its sitting held on 27
th July, 2015 as under:-
“... from the last year, we have ensured that the State Government representatives are invited whenever
projects are considered by the Committee. We have invited them and they have invariably attended
directly from the State or through their local representatives. So, that is the position and that has not
changed at all.  The State Government representative, therefore, is invited to be a member of the
Standing Committee. The Standing Committee, as such, will consist of only four members - from NITI

7
Aayog, from Home Affairs, from Expenditure and from our Ministry.  That is the position.  There is
also one member from the Ministry which is concerned with that particular subject.”
Further Recommendation
1.1.8 The Committee observes that in compliance with the Committee’s recommendation for
avoidance of procedural delay and direction given it its meeting held on 27 th July, 2015, the
Ministry of DoNER in tandem with the State Governments and the concerned line Ministries has
undertaken a number of measures from the stage of conceptualization of scheme, preparation
and submission of priority list, expeditious processing/execution of projects under NLCPR
scheme, setting detailed guidelines and simplification of procedures for preparing and
submission and vetting of DPRs, sanctioning, allocation and release of funds for timely
implementation and completion of projects.  The Committee, however, would like to be apprised
of perceptible outcome of the measures so undertaken on the ground level in the form of period
of time reduced in clearance of projects and its completion in comparison to pre and post
reforms phase on removal of all unnecessary procedural delays.  The kernel spirit of the
Committee’s recommendation made in para 5.2.1 of the Committee’s 173
rd Report is to give
fillip to developmental process in NER through procedural facilitation and timely implementation
of policies, programmes, schemes and projects meant for all round balanced development of the
region.
1.1.9 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should take up the
issue of revisiting the instant specification in guidelines for reserving 25% of new projects for
backward areas which is at present vague and therefore needs modification on the lines of
autonomous territorial/district council.
1.1.10 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should persuade the line
ministries to arrange training/workshops for the State Government officials and for potential
vendors nominated by States as part of the Ministry’s Vendor Development efforts.  The
Committee believes that such measures would enable the State Government officials for
preparation of DPRs with great specification and on rationale basis to take into account detailed
survey and baseline facts. The Committee further desires that the request of the State
Governments for incorporating the cost of preparation of DPRs in the project cost should be
considered at the earliest and the same may be laid down in the NLCPR guidelines.
1.1.11 The Committee observes that no guidelines have been set up on frequency of meeting
of the NLCPR Committee and timeline for consideration  and sanctioning of cleared projects.
Therefore, the Committee desires that the meeting of the NLCPR should be convened
periodically with a set time-frame, known to the State Governments so that requisite
information may be furnished to the NLCPR Committee well in advance.  Also, timelines for
consideration and sanctioning of projects should be let up to avoid delays on their part.
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee also takes note of the complaints of the State Governments that the comments/
queries/clarifications of the Line Ministries are not sought in one go rather they are sought in 2-3
installments which are then replied to by the State Governments to the Line Ministries through the
Ministry of DoNER.  The entire process takes about 1-2 years and sometimes more, for sanction of

8
projects after submission of the DPRs, thus resulting in time/cost escalation of the projects. The
Committee also notes the complaint of the States that except for prioritization of projects, the States
have no role in the process of selection of projects to be funded under NLCPR.  The sanction of the
projects would be expedited if the representatives of the State Government are invited to attend the
meetings held for sanctioning of the projects, to give clarifications on the spot. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in order to address the problem of delays by the Line Ministries/Departments,
a strict time-frame should be given for clearing DPRs. The Committee also recommends that required
administrative mechanism, including inviting representative of the concerned State Governments in the
meetings for on the spot clarifications, may be put in place.  The Line Ministries should not take
long time in approval and sanctioning of DP Rs. The time Lines as are to be fixed, should be strictly
adhered to. (Para 5.3.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 Timelines have been put in place for vetting of DPRs by the Line Ministries or the PSU engaged
for the purpose. It has been decided that the Technical Wing of the Ministry will scrutinise the DPRs
within 15 days of its receipt and raise consolidated queries, if any. The queries shall be forwarded,
electronically, to State Governments for suitable clarification/modification, in the DPRs, of so required.
The States shall be given 15 days’ time to furnish their replies to the Ministry of Development of North
Eastern Region. This will go a long way in reducing delays at various levels.
1.2.3 The following procedure will  take care of the concerns expressed by the Hon’ble Committee:-
1.2.4 The Ministry has engaged PSUs for expeditious vetting of DPRs submitted by the State
Governments. The following measures have also been taken to optimally reduce the time taken for
vetting of DPRs submitted by the State Governments:-
(a) On receipt of DPRs from the State Governments, the Technical Wing of the Ministry of
DoNER will do the preliminary scrutiny.  The consolidated  query, if any, of the Technical
Wing shall be given within 15 days to the Programme Division, which will be forwarded
online/through e-mail, to the State Planning and Implementing Department. In case the
reply is not received within the period of 15 days from receipt of query, it shall be
presumed that the State is not interested to pursue the project and the project will be
deleted within seven days thereafter without any further notice.
(b) On receipt of reply to the queries raised by the Technical Wing, the DPRs will be sent
to the vetting agency/Line Ministries, with the request to vet the DPRs. The vetting
agency shall raise consolidated queries, if any, which will be forwarded to the State
Government through Ministry, which will be required to furnish replies to the same within
a period of 15 days. If these queries are not settled within 15 days of communication,
the State Government will be given another 15 days for furnishing replies to the query
from the vetting agency, failing which it will presumed that the State is not interested to
pursue the project and the said project will stand rejected. However, if the State
Government finds it difficult to collect data for a reply and gives cogent and substantial
reasons, further time of up to 30 days may be provided and not beyond.
(c) V etting agency will give techno-economic vetting of the projects within one month from
receipt of replies to the consolidated queries within a period one month. In case any

9
further query is raised because of unsatisfactory replies or issues arising, these should be
settled before or on the date the project is placed for sanction before the Screening
Committee.
(d) The Line Ministries/NITI Aayog/NEC will be approached parallelly for non-duplication
certificates and for certifying if the project is fit for gap funding. The Line Ministries/NITI
Aayog/NEC shall give their comments/observations within one month else it will be
presumed to be clear for non-duplication and gap funding angle. In any event, these views
shall be finally provided at the time of project sanctions.
(e) NLCPR Committee meeting shall be convened periodically to consider sanctioning of the
cleared projects, duly vetted by the vetting agency.
Recommendation
1.3 REPRESENTATIVES FROM STATE GOVERNMENT IN NLCPR
1.3.1 The Committee agrees with the demand of the North Eastern State Governments that there
should be a representative of the State, possibly the Chief Secretary or the Commissioner/Secretary, in
charge Planning Department of the State in the NLCPR Committee for retention and sanctioning of
projects and recommends that necessary steps be taken to ensure representation of the concerned State
Governments in the NLCPR Committee. (Para 5.3.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 Representatives of State Governments concerned are invariably invited to attend the meetings of
the inter-ministerial NLCPR Committee for retention and sanction of the projects taken up for funding
under the scheme of NLCPR. To further strengthen the procedure, it has been agreed that Chief
Secretary/Planning Secretary/Departmental Secretary (when concerned) shall alone attend the meeting of
the NLCPR Committee, convened for initial screening of concept papers and later for sanction of
finalised DPRs of the projects included for the State. In case these officers are unable to attend the
meeting, another authorised representative, who is able to take on the spot decisions, may alone attend
the meeting.  In case the authorised representative is unable to satisfactorily answer the queries of the
Committee, the project shall be rejected as unsupported and the funds diverted to next in priority or
to approved projects of other States.
Recommendation
1.4 CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS
1.4.1 The Committee finds that the State Governments have to do a lot of catching up as far as
capacity building is concerned.  The Committee takes note of the complaints regarding inadequate
investigations and project formulation which led to changes in scope and revision of drawings at later
stage. It also notes problems related to inappropriate and inadequate procurement and faulty contractual
management system. Poor selection of contractors due to low bids with no technical capability to handle
the project led to cost overruns, schedule delays, poor quality etc. The Committee also finds that in
some cases the project lengths are very large and there is lack of technical expertise in State PWDs
in implementing the projects. The Committee further observes that there is dearth of local contractors
with sound financial and technical capabilities and low participation of contractors from other parts

10
of the country in the tenders also. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that concerted
effort is required on the part of the Ministry of DoNER and Planning Commission to improve State
Governments’ capabilities for project preparation and execution. The Ministry of DoNER in consultation
with Finance Ministry and Planning Commission should chalk out a long-term plan for capacity
building of State Governments of NER keeping in mind huge infrastructure needs of the region. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should extend technical and other related help
to the State PWDs to improve their technical capacities and execution capabilities. The State
Governments and Ministry of DoNER should also take necessary steps for assisting local contractors
to upgrade their skills. (Para 5.4.1 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 It is proposed to enhance the technical and execution capabilities of the State agencies by
imparting training of their technical personnel, organising workshops etc.
Further Recommendation
1.4.3 The Committee may be apprised of the action plan prepared with regard to capacity
building i.e. technical and execution capabilities of State Government.
Recommendation
1.5 PROBLEMS RELATED TO LAW AND ORDER SITUATION
1.5.1 The Committee finds that the law and order situation is one of the biggest problems in NER
which is posing a threat to the projects by preventing them from taking off. The Committee has on
record the suggestion of Line Ministries that the local problems and law and order issues should be
addressed by State and local administrations to ensure smooth completion of projection. Agreeing with
the view of Line Ministries, the Committee suggests that all local issues including problems of law and
order should be addressed by the local administration and State Authorities.
(Para 5.5.1 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 State Governments are responsible for the law and order situation and are expected to provide
conducive environment for execution of the projects.  Chief Secretaries of all the eight North Eastern
States have been requested to ensure safety of the personnel working at the respective work sites.
Recommendation
1.6 LACUNAE ON THE PART OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
1.6.1 The Committee is of the view that the onus of development in NER lies as much on the State
Governments as on the agencies of the Central Government. The Committee is constrained to express
its displeasure to find that the Line Ministries and State Governments pass the buck to each other while
facing bottlenecks during the course of implementation of projects for development. But, the need is
to exercise introspection. State Governments cannot get away just by pointing fingers towards the Centre
and vice-versa. The case in point is the 3,000 MW Debang Power Project to be executed by NHPC,
where  even holding of public hearings, which was one of the first things to happen, could not be
conducted because of law and order situation and had to be postponed 12 times. After a lot of

11
intervention by the Ministry of Power and the personal intervention of the Minister of Power, the public
hearing was conducted. Similar is the case with many projects which certainly hampered the process of
development in NER.
1.6.2 The Ministry of Surface Transport and Highways cited a case under Arunachal package for road
construction of 740 kms., in two packages—one of 300 plus kms. and the other of 440 kms.  But land
acquisition for these stretches could not be completed for a long period of two years.  Since the Ministry
had decided to award projects only when 90% of the land was available, the programmes could not
be executed for want of land acquisition.
1.6.3 Another case that has come to the notice of the Committee is that of a scheme of providing
100 per cent central assistance to the North-Eastern States for taking up river development works.
Apart from the National Waterway-2, that is, the Brahmaputra River , there are other river stretches also
which could be developed for cargo transportation.  The Committee is disappointed to note that
response or the initiative from the States of the North-Eastern Region is lacking. The Central
Government, on its own, engaged M/s. RITES to identify river stretches which could be developed for
such cargo transportation and RITES had identified 22 river stretches in all the States of North-Eastern
Region for development.  Those identified river stretches had been shared with the concerned State
Governments and they had been requested to send proposals for assistance.  However, so far, only three
proposals have been received, one of which had been sanctioned.  The Committee is of the opinion that
the North-Eastern States need to be more proactive in sending the proposals for development of these
river stretches for cargo transportation.
1.6.4 One more example that has come to the notice of the Committee is the case of fixed terminal
at Pandu which is supposed to be completed by June, 2014. Dedicated road connectivity has been
sanctioned at a cost of 
` 11 crore to connect National Highway-31 and for this, land was required from
the Railways.  The requisite amount had been paid but the land had not been transferred owing to
2,150 encroachments which are to be cleared by the State Government. The Committee was informed
that either the encroachment had to be removed or an alternative piece of land for an alternative
alignment has to be given. This dedicated connectivity from the Waterway Terminal to the National
Highway would be an essential requirement for smooth flow of cargo. The Committee observes that the
removal of encroachments by the concerned State Government at the earliest is the only option as there
is no other alignment possible.  In view of the above illustrations,  the Committee is of the firm view
that the Ministry of DoNER should play a pro-active role in resolving issues amongst Line Ministries
and State Governments for timely execution of projects and State Governments should also come
forward with their cooperation.  Unless States take initiative and cooperate, projects cannot take off
and development will continue to be hampered.
(Para 5.7.1, 5.7.2, 5.7.3 and 5.7.4)
Action Taken
1.6.5 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region shares the recommendation that development
process in NER needs full cooperation between State Governments and agencies of Central
Government. State Government have been impressed upon to be more proactive in sending proposals
and taking initiative so that development process in the region does not hamper and also to hasten
process of land acquisition, wherever required. Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region has
taken due cognizance of the proactive role that is required to be played by it in resolving issues amongst

12
Line Ministries and State Governments for timely execution of the projects. Recognising the importance
of States’ cooperation, views of all stakeholders are now taken before deciding a policy. Changes in
policies are preceded by detailed stakeholder consultations.  In pursuance of this shift in policy, a Chief
Ministers’ Conference was organized on 21 & 22
nd August at Guwahati in Assam where aspirations of
the NE people were articulated by the States and Ministry of DoNER is now engaged in putting in place
appropriate mechanism for converting these into reality.
1.6.6 In the said C onference of the Chief Ministers of the North Eastern Region, the dignitaries, the
State Governments and the Task Groups constituted during the Conference presented and shared their
views on the state of development of transport connectivity, such as Rail, Road, Air and Waterways
in North Eastern Region; the factors/issues impeding the development of transport network and road-
map/vision for improvement thereof within North Eastern Region and of the region with other parts of
the country/adjoining countries. The conference also shared the view that dismal state of transport
network in North Eastern Region is one of prime factors impeding growth and development in the
region.  To address the issue, Ministry of DoNER has constituted a inter-ministerial Working Group on
development of transport network in North Eastern Region with the following terms and reference:-
(i) to assess and map the present state of development of transport network in North Eastern
Region;
(ii) to make recommendations for coordinated development, roadmap and vision of various
transport network/sectors in North Eastern Region in medium and long terms;
(iii) to make recommendations with regard to action plan, strategy and modalities for
implementation of its recommendations;
(iv) to identify issues, concern areas and challenges;
(v) to crystallize approach and make recommendations to address issues, concern areas and
challenges;
Further Recommendation
1.6.7 The Committee would like to be apprised of the recommendations of inter-ministerial
working group on development of transport network in North Eastern Region alongwith action
taken by the Government thereon.  The Committee would further desire to know about
progress on 3000 MW Debang Power Project that was to be executed by NHPC, Arunachal
Package for road construction of 740 km., decision granting scheme of providing 100% central
assistance to NER states for taking up river development works.
Recommendation
1.7 TELECOM SECTOR
1.7.1 The Committee takes note of the poor telecom connectivity in North-East.  The telecom system
is linear which if broken at a point disturbs the whole segment. The Committee agreeing with the
suggestion of the Department of Telecommunications, recommends that provision of having ducts
alongside the roads is a good suggestion and it should be made mandatory for road works not only
in NER but also in the whole country so that no OFC is damaged on account of road works. The
Committee recommends that the existing infrastructure available with organizations like Power Grid

13
Corporation, Railtel etc. as well as State Governments should provide Right of Way at a reasonable
cost for better connectivity in the region. The Committee also notes that the Department of
Telecommunications had suggested an alternative connection from Tripura to Akhora in Bangladesh to
provide an alternative path and the matter is being negotiated through the Ministry of External Affair
Ministry. The Committee desires that the negotiations in this regard may be concluded at the earliest
to ensure communication connectivity to the North East Region with the country.
1.7.2 The Committee also notes that the Power Grid Corporation is not ready to lend a pair of fibre
in the cable going on the transmission lines on cost sharing basis as it is rather interested in giving
the bandwidth on lease commercially to earn more money.  The matter had been brought to the notice
of the PMO and Cabinet Secretary, but with no avail.  The Committee in this connection would like
to impress upon the Government that connectivity to the North East Region should not be viewed solely
on commercial lines to make profit as it is for the national cause. The Committee therefore recommends
that the PMO and Cabinet Secretary should intervene in the matter to sort out the issue at the earliest.
1.7.3 As mentioned earlier, losses can make any activity unsustainable for long period and keeping
in mind that the viability gap funding is needed to ensure commercial feasibility for regular provision
of telecommunication services in North East, the Committee recommends that the issue of viability gap
funding may be examined and may be provided for regular provision of telecommunication services in
North East. (Paras 5.9.1, 5.9.2 & 5.9.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.4 Use of OPGW (Optical Ground Wire) of PGCIL’s Transmission lines for setting alternate
telecommunications network:- MOU signed between BSNL and PGCIL in June, 2014 to augment
broadband capacities at 20 places on payment basis.  Implementation period is 12-18 months. Telecom
connectivity in border areas - MHA has agreed to fund strengthening of telecom services in border area
in general and BSF posts in particular for which survey is under progress. This will also address the
problem of use of mobile network of neighbouring countries in border areas. Setting of utility duct
along National Highways (as done in Mumbai - Pune Expressway) - Utility duct provisioning along NH
from Guwahati to Shillong is being taken up by MORTH on pilot basis. Alternate transmission
connectivity between Kolkata and Tripura via Dhaka: Dhaka - Akhaura - Agartala OF link (10G) - is
under discussion. Setting up International internet gateway at Agartala (for better and reliable internet
connectivity) through cox bazar by using existing submarine cable of BSCCL- is also under discussion.
Based on the request of the Department of Telecom, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
issued Recommendations on “Improving Telecom Services in North-Eastern States: An Investment
Plan”, dated 26
th September, 2013.  In its meeting held on 13.06.2014, the Telecom Commission
approved a proposal to implement the comprehensive telecom development plan at an estimated project
cost of ` 5336.18 crores. Union Cabinet has since approved the “Comprehensive Development Plan for
NER” on 15/09/2014. Main thrust areas identified for improvement and augmentation of telecom
services in North-Eastern Region (NER) are:-
(i) to provide 2G  mobile coverage in identified uncovered villages.
(ii) to provide seamless 2G mobile coverage along the National Highways in NER.
(iii) to ensure reliability of and redundancy in the transmission network at State capitals and
district headquarters in NER.

14
1.7.5 Nat ional Optical Fibre Network (NOFN):  NOFN project is planned to connect all Gram
Panchayats (approx. 2.5 lakh) in the country including those in the North Eastern Region (inclusive of
Sikkim) through optical fibre utilizing existing fibers of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and laying
incremental fiber wherever necessary to bridge the connectivity gap between Gram Panchayats (GPs)
and Blocks, for providing broadband connectivity. NOFN project is being executed by BSNL (in Sikkim
and Assam) and Rail Tel (in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura).
NOFN will deliver bandwidth of 100 Mbps at each Gram Panchayat. The roll-out of NOFN is planned
to be completed by 31.03.2017.
Recommendation
1.8 AIR CONNECTIVITY
1.8.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that airports in the region have certain problems with regard
to the night landing facilities.  The region has got all the ground base facilities and visual facilities.
However, some instrument landing facilities are required to be provided in some States. The Committee
has been assured that by end of the financial year 2013-14, all these North-Eastern airports will be
equipped with instrument-related night landing facility. The Committee desires that there may not be any
delay in this regard. (Paras 5.10.1 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 For improving the air connectivity in North East Region, AAI had taken up a number of
infrastructure development works at various airports in the past decade and is planning number of
development works in coming years. The objective is to make Guwahati as Inter-Regional Hub and
Agartala, Dibrugarh and Imphal as Intra-Regional Hubs.
1.8.3 Three Greenfield airports are also considered to be developed in NE Region viz. Sikkim
(Pakyong), Arunachal Pradesh (Itanagar) and Nagaland (Site not finalized).
There are twelve non-operational airports in the region out of which there is proposal to develop and
operationalise eight – Along, Daparizo, Pasighat, Tezu and Ziro in Arunachal Pradesh, Tura in
Meghalaya, Rupsi in Assam and Kailashahar in Tripura.
1.8.4 Night landing facilities and clearance for night operation are available for Agartala,  Dibrugarh,
Dimapur, Guwahati, Imphal and Lilabari airports out of which night operations are there at Agartala,
Guwahati and Imphal. For Jorhat, Silchar and Tezpur Airports, IAF has been requested for providing
night landing facilities and approvals for night operation. For development of the airports at Lengpui and
Tura, AAI has been instructed to take over the airports from the concerned State Governments.
Current Status of major works in progress in operational airports
(as on 02.09.2014):-
Sl. State/Airport Name of Project AA&ES PDC Remarks /progress
No Amount as on 31.7.2014
(` in crore)
1    2      3     4 5         6
1 Assam (i) C/o Three    29 Physical progress-91%
Guwahati Hangars for A-321 Expenditure `22.70
crores upto July, 2014

15
(ii)  C/o Integrated 13.16 Mar., 2015 Physical progress 58%.
Office Complex for Expenditure
AAI/DGCA `1.78 crore
2 Manipur (i) Extension of 8 Dec., 2014 Work is in slow
Imphal Apron progress. Physical
progress-64%.
Expenditure `4.91
crores. Due to poor
performance, the
agency has been
issued show cause
notice on 19.6.2014.
(ii) C/o Boundary 15 Sep., 2014 Physical progress-90%.
wall for newly Expenditure
acquired land `12.08 crore.
3 Meghalaya C/o Boundary 6 — Work stopped due to
Shillong W all for newly obstructions by
acquired land villagers from Aug.,
2012 stating non-
payment of
compensation by State.
Physical progress 39%.
Expenditure `2.25
crore.
Current Status of works in progress in Non-Operational Airports (as on 02.09.2014)
State/Airport Name of Project AA&ES PDC Remarks/progress as on
Amount 31.7.2014
(` in crore )
Arunachal Operationalisation/ 79 Dec., Physical progress-39%.
Pradesh upgradation of 2015 Expenditure 24.56 crore
Tezu Tezu Airport for Major Law and Order Problem.
ATR 72 operations
1.8.5  Status of Progress of works of Greenfield airports (as on 02.09.2014):
(a)  Arunachal Pradesh (Itanagar):
(i) New Greenfield airport planned at Holongi site for which the acceptance of the State
Government was conveyed on 24.07.2012;
1    2      3     4 5         6

16
(ii) AAI has prepared a draft Master Plan for ultimate development (Phase-1 & 2) and forward
to State Government on 24.8.2012 for acquisition of 790 acres of land and other actions.
The total land to be acquired is 1060 acres for airport, approach road and for rehabilitation;
(iii) Request sent for NoC to MoD and MHA on 29.08.2012 and DGCA on 03.9.2012;
(iv) Application forwarded to the Steering Committee on GF Airports for in-principle approval;
(v) Preliminary cost is ` 1069 crore, including cost of land, rehabilitation, approach road, etc.;
(vi) AAI has requested for 100% grant by the Government;
(vii) Gauhati High Court in a PIL against shifting of site from Banderdeva to Holongi has issued
status-quo and a Committee appointed for selection of site on 18.9.2013.  The court has
quashed the PIL on 13.3.2014;
(viii) Consultancy awarded on 18.3.2014; and
(ix) Land acquisition and rehabilitation processes started by State Government.
(b) Sikkim (Pakyong):
(i) A new Greenfield airport is under construction at Pakyong (Gangtok) in Sikkim at a cost
of ` 359 crore (probable completion cost) with likely date of completion being December,
2015;
(ii) Funding – 90% Government grant and 10% by AAI;
(iii) Overall physical progress 83%;
(iv) Work got hindered due to intermittent bandhs, local interference, heavy rain and
earthquake;
(v) The work including earthwork of cutting and filling, Geogrid reinforced retaining wall,
drainage system, aerodrome pavements etc. has been awarded to M/s. Punj Llyod at a
cost of ` 264.29 crore 86% work completed;
(vi) Terminal Building work for ` 43.45 crore awarded and in progress; and
(vii) Overall physical progress 83%. PDC – December, 2016.
(c) Nagaland:
Initially Chiethu was identified for development of Greenfield airport in Nagaland, but the site
was not found suitable.  The State Government has been requested to find out an alternate site
which is more flat and suitable for capital city airport.  State Government has identified an
alternate site; the feasibility study for the same is to be carried out.
Recommendation
1.9 FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO AIRPORTS IN NE
1.9.1 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the drawback in the Route Disbursal
Guidelines, under which airlines are obliged to deploy 10 per cent of their capacity, which they are

17
operating on the metro routes, to the North-East and however, by taking advantage of the drawback,
they are operating a lot of services to Guwahati and Bagdogra and the main problem of the
connectivity within the North-East is still very much there, thus defeating the very purpose of the
Guidelines in letter and spirit. It has been suggested that there may be Airport Connectivity Guidelines
(ACG) and Code Sharing with national and regional airlines to overcome this problem. The Committee
recommends that the matter of having Airport Connectivity Guidelines (ACG) and Code Sharing with
national and regional airlines may be examined earnestly to ensure air connectivity to all parts of the
North East, and not just Guwahati and Bagdogra in the name of obligation under Route Disbursal
Guidelines.  The Committee also received a suggestion that Ministry of DoNER/NEC should give 100%
financial support as all the airports are making losses. The Committee recommends that this suggestion
of Ministry of Civil Aviation may be examined. (Para 5.10.2)
Action Taken
1.9.2 Subsidy to Alliance Air based on viability gap for providing increased air connectivity in North
Eastern Region: A meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 13.08.2014 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, DoNER recommended for sanction the scheme of NEC, “Providing Air
Connectivity in North Eastern Region” at ` 124.12 crore to be implemented during 2014-15 and 2015-16.
Administrative approval for the scheme was issued on 25
th August 2014. Under scheme, North Eastern
Council (NEC) provides subsidy to Alliance Air based on viability gap (based on total cost minus
revenue formula) for providing air connectivity to unconnected/inadequately connected airports in NER,
namely, Lilabari, Shillong, Silchar and Tezpur, to begin with. Alliance Air Ltd. has commenced air
services connecting these airports with Guwahati/Kolkata. A provision that within the recommended cost
of ` 124.12 crore, new routes may be added or flight schedules and frequencies may be added, in
public interest, has been built into the scheme so that future changes in air connectivity requirements
can be met from the scheme.
1.9.3 Due to inadequate Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) received by the Ministry of DoNER, the
Ministry/NEC regrets its inability to extend 100% financial support to airports in NER.
Further Recommendation
1.9.4 The Committee notes the inability of DoNER/NEC to provide 100% financial support to
airports in NE.  The Ministry of Finance may look into this aspect and find a way out for the
problem.
Recommendation
1.10 CONSTITUTION OF EMPOWERED GROUP OF MINISTERS TO REVIEW KEY
INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMMES
1.10.1 The Committee notes the suggestion made by Ministry of DoNER that suitable and adequate
institutional arrangements are the need of the hour for monitoring of infrastructure projects of key line
Ministries viz. Road Transport and Highways, Railways, Power, Civil Aviation, Telecommunications,
Communications Information Technology, Shipping, etc. The Committee is of the considered view that
NER being strategically significant considering its long international borders it is but natural that the
targets in the key infrastructural projects as planned by line Ministries are achieved to improve
connectivity, power generation and ward off security threat.  The Committee, therefore, agrees that there
must be some institutional arrangements/mechanism in the form of Empowered Group of Ministers to

18
review key infrastructural projects. The Committee notes that the Government is already seized of the
matter and the Prime Minister has directed the Cabinet Secretary for setting up of EGoM for the review
of NE projects etc.  The Committee, subsequent to the discussions it had with Cabinet Secretary, has
been informed that the EGoM has since been constituted to look into the major projects and issues of
NE Region. The Committee notes that this step will accelerate implementation of projects and
programmes in NE Region. (Para 5.12.1)
Action Taken
1.10.2 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region shares the optimism of the Committee on the
recommendation.
Recommendation
1.11 ENGINEERING PROCUREMENT PROJECT (EPC) MODE OF DELIVERY
1.11.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Transport Secretary that in the case  of a
project consisting of four stretches  in the State of Nagaland at a total cost of 
` 1,300 crore, it was
enhanced to ` 2,900 crore in the revised estimate and  the local requirement for these four stretches
was completely at variance with the project report. Dealing with the same issue of cost escalation
though citing another example, the State Government also mentioned  that  sanction of projects under
Power sector for Nagaland was stalled on the ground that the cost of power projects appeared to be
‘two times’ the normal cost of projects compared to the process prevailing in the rest of India. The State
Government felt that the Ministry should take the ground reality of cost in hilly/terrain region such as
difficult terrain, lack of vendors’ response, etc.
1.11.2 The Committee takes note of the views of Secretary, RT & HW that for reducing escalation of
project cost, they are going towards EPC mode. Cabinet Secretary also emphasized the EPC mode.  The
Committee also notes that there is some resistance in accepting EPC mode.  The Committee, however,
strongly recommends that the Ministries should shift from ‘item rate’ mode-of-delivery to the
‘Engineering Procurement Contract’ mode-of-delivery so as to avoid the escalation of project costs and
delay.  The Committee is also of the view that where EPC model is not being followed, the contractors/
consultants should be penalized for faulty projections at the stage of project formulation itself by State
PWDs when they receive exaggerated or faulty project reports.
(Paras 5.13.1 and 5.13.2)
Action Taken
1.11.3 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has since taken a policy decision to insist upon
awarding of all future contracts on “EPC” mode.  Ministry of DoNER has also already stipulating that
contracts under NLCPR projects be given on “Turnkey Basis”.
Recommendation
1.12 TAILORING OF SCHEMES
1.12.1 The Committee notes that the guidelines issued under various schemes in the way of
implementation in the NE States due to topographical and other disadvantages.  The Committee was
informed that for strengthening Trauma Centre, the conditions prescribing minimum number of beds and
doctors are difficult to be fulfilled, likewise, HRD Ministry has provided ten computers in a school,

19
but power connection under the scheme RGGVY does not permit this.  The Committee, therefore, is of
the view that Ministries should frame broad based schemes or a component within existing scheme to
suit NER and the guidelines of programmes with all-India nature may be tailored/modified and relaxed.
The Committee desires that Central Ministries should conduct analysis of their on-going schemes from
the view point of their suitability to the special needs of NER. The Ministries should prepare alternate/
sub-scheme for NER or have a broad based “umbrella scheme” within which individual projects suitable
for North East States could be implemented. The Line Ministries should, as far as possible, formulate
the schemes in consultation with the State Governments. The Committee is of the opinion that it would
be better if, under the broader guidelines, the State Governments are allowed to frame their own
schemes and States should have liberty in deciding the modus operandi for planning and implementation
of the programmes in the best interest of area specific requirements. In this regard, the Committee
welcomes the recent decision of the Government that State-specific guidelines within the overall core
guidelines of every Centrally Sponsored Scheme would be received from the States, in the first instance,
and would be looked into by a Committee comprising of Secretary, Planning Commission, the
Expenditure Secretary and the Chief Secretary or any other representative of the State so that the
schemes could be better tailored to the requirements of the States.  Another decision that there would
be a Flexi fund of ten per cent in each Centrally-Sponsored Scheme which would be available to the
State to try innovations and tailor these schemes to their own requirements is a step in right direction.
The Committee recommends that concerted steps be taken to implement the above decisions of the
Government at the earliest so that the grievances of State Governments in this regard are addressed
appropriately. (Paras 5.14.1)
Action Taken
1.12.2 All the Ministries/Departments concerned have been advised to take note of the observations
made by the Hon’ble Committee.
Recommendation
1.13 WITHHOLDING OF FUNDS
1.13.1 The Committee took note of the issue of holding of funds by State Governments. The Committee
takes into account the views of the Finance Secretary that the Government normally prescribe that the
money should go through the State Government and for any particular project, State Government must
release the fund within fifteen days time for that particular project and if the State Government fails
to do so, it has to pay penal interest on that amount. The Committee came across the specific case
where funds were transferred to Assam for the Bodoland Territorial Council under a package on the
basis of a peace accord signed by the Government and the funds were withheld for a considerable time.
However, some State Governments are averse to the idea of direct funding to the implementing agencies
and feel that the system of direct funding will have repercussions on the federal structure of the
Constitution and is fraught with chances of impropriety and will also reduce the oversight of the State
administration on the implementation of the directly funded projects/programmes. In view of the
Committee, this is a peculiar situation where the Central Government can’t do anything except appealing
the State Governments to release the funds. The Committee is therefore, of the view that the State
Governments must follow the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance for releasing the fund within fifteen
days time for any particular project. The Committee recommends that a system may be developed under

20
which all the State Governments must rationalize the existing process of repetitive clearance so that
money can be transferred to the implementing agencies as soon as it is received from Government of
India. (Para 5.20.1)
Action Taken
1.13.2 In the proposed simplified procedure, States shall release funds to the implementing agency
within a period 15 days from receipt from this Ministry. A copy of the release order shall be uploaded
on the NLCPR website and/or sent to the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region and will
be taken note of for further releases.
Recommendation
1.14 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
1.14.1 Besides the above mentioned issue specific recommendations, the Committee would also like to
make the following recommendations:
• There should be a separate fund of strategically national important projects in the region.
• Use of video-conferencing in various Ministries/Departments may be adopted with the
State Governments of the North Eastern Region as it takes officers one day to reach Delhi
and one day to come back for a meeting, apart from financial burden on the cash-
deficient States.
• It is relevant to point out that non-availability of construction materials is creating further
hurdle in the development drive. Non-availability of construction materials like cement,
steel etc. and long procurement time makes many projects especially the hydro projects
costly and unviable. The Committee feels the need for setting up industries for
construction material in NER to meet the infrastructural requirement. The Committee
desires that Ministry of DoNER should consult Ministry of Heavy Industry and Planning
Commission and draw a plan for setting up industries in NE Region.
• The Committee observes that Ministry of DoNER is still to come up with a regional
perspective plan to implement Vision-2020. The Committee therefore desired that a
comprehensive plan for NER development should be mooted by the Ministry of DoNER
with flexibility for State-specific modification.
• Provision for third party monitoring for quality and quantity of works of the projects
sanctioned by the Ministry of DoNER should be done by the States through their own
Consultants/Experts appointed by them.
• The Committee also takes note of the issues raised and suggestions made by various other
line Ministries/Departments.  The general issues raised by those Ministries have been dealt
under the various categories. In regard to the specific suggestions made by those Ministries
and the issues raised therein (the list is at Annexure- IV) the Committee desires that the
Ministry of DoNER may examine all the issues and take appropriate action in consultation
with the State Governments to address the issues.
(Para 5.25.1)

21
Action Taken
• Separate Fund for strategically national important projects:   Ministry of Finance has
since been apprised with the recommendations of the Committee.
• Use of Video Conferencing:  The facility of video conferencing is already in place in the
Ministry of DoNER. It will be ensured that maximum use of the same is made in
interacting with the State Governments of the North Eastern Region.
• Plan for setting up Industries in NE Region:  Ministries of Heavy Industry and Planning
Commission have since been apprised with the recommendations of the Committee.
• Regional Perspective Plan to implement Vision-2020:  Guidelines along with identified
areas on regional planning for NER has been circulated to all Chief Secretaries of the NER
vide letter No.NEC/Plan/1-54/2014 dated 11.4.2014.
• Third Party Monitoring of Projects: IQMs have already been empanelled for undertaking
the assigned task.
• Suggestions by line Departments/Ministries:  State Governments have been asked to
give their inputs for addressing suggestions of the line Ministries/Departments.
Further Recommendation
1.14.2 The Committee desires that Ministry of DoNER should take pro-active follow up steps
with the Ministry of Heavy Industries and also appeal to the private sector for making
investment for industries providing construction material in NER, so that the problem of non-
availability of construction material like cement, steel, etc. is well taken up in the long term.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendation
2.1 Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)
2.1.1 The Committee observes that the State Governments do not have sufficient wherewithal to make
proper analysis and investigations. This has been agreed by all sides. Because of this, most of the DPRs
submitted by the State Governments entail a lot of short comings. The Ministry of DoNER has to send
them to the States back again and again for clarifications and sometimes advise the States that they
should outsource this work so that State Governments can have inputs of experts in DPRs. The State
Governments on the other hand suggested for the preparation of DPRs only after the projects are
retained by the Ministry as it involves huge expenditure to prepare DPRs. The State Governments
suggested that the Ministry of DoNER should accept the idea of concept papers for proposing projects
under NLCPR and only after retention, the specific details in the form of DPRs may be called for . The
Committee is of the view that the Ministry of DoNER and Planning Commission should look into the
feasibility of the suggestion of the State Governments or else the State Governments should outsource
their DPRs to improve the quality. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER
in consultation with Planning Commission and the State Governments should workout the best course
in this regard so that unnecessary delays do not take place at the DPR stage itself.
2.1.2 The Committee takes note of the complaint of the line Ministries that while preparing DPRs,
the State Governments/agencies do not make proper survey and study of the local situation.  This leads
to cost escalation many a time.  This calls for development of efficient agencies for preparing DPRs
and outsourcing DPRs to them. Ministry of DoNER should prepare a plan and for this purpose and
get it implemented by States. The Committee feels that if the above recommendation is implemented,
this can be taken care of. (Paras 5.3.1 and 5.3.2)
Action Taken
2.1.3 The recommendation made by the Hon’ble Committee that the State Governments may be asked
to submit DPRs only after retention of projects based on the Concept Papers submitted by them, is
already in vogue. State Governments have also been advised to submit, alongwith with DPRs, all the
mandatory certificates viz. Environment and forest clearance, availability of land free from all
encumbrances,  non-duplication certificate and location of stone quarry, in case of road projects.  This
will considerably speed up the process of sanction and release. The Ministry has engaged PSUs for
expeditious vetting of DPRs submitted by the State Governments. The following measures have been
taken to optimally reduce the time taken for vetting of DPRs submitted by the State Governments:
(a) On receipt of DPRs from the State Governments, the Technical Wing of the Ministry of
DoNER will do the preliminary scrutiny. The consolidated  query, if any, of the Technical
Wing shall be given within 15 days to the Programme Division, which will be forwarded
22

23
online/through e-mail, to the State Planning and Implementing Department. In case the
reply is not received within the period of 15 days from receipt of query, it shall be
presumed that the State is not interested to pursue the project and the project will be
deleted within seven days thereafter without any further notice.
(b) On receipt of reply to the queries raised by the Technical Wing, the DPRs will be sent
to the vetting agency/line Ministries, with the request to vet the DPRs. The vetting agency
shall raise consolidated queries, if any, which will be forwarded to the State Government
through Ministry, which will be required to furnish replies to the same within a period of
15 days. If these queries are not settled within 15 days of communication, the State
Government will be given another 15 days for furnishing replies to the query from the
vetting agency, failing which it will presumed that the State is not interested to pursue the
project and the said project will stand rejected. However, if the State Government finds
it difficult to collect data for a reply and gives cogent and substantial reasons, further time
of up to 30 days may be provided and not beyond.
(c) Vetting agency will give techno-economic vetting of the projects within one month from
receipt of replies to the consolidated queries within a period one month. In case any further
query is raised because of unsatisfactory replies or issues arising, these should be settled
before or on the date the project is placed for sanction before the Screening Committee.
(d) The line Ministries/NITI Aayog/NEC will be approached in parallel for non-duplication
certificates and for certifying if the project is fit for gap funding. The line Ministries/NITI
Aayog/NEC shall give their comments/observations within one month else it will be
presumed to be clear for non-duplication and gap funding angle. In any event, these views
shall be finally provided at the time of project sanctions.
(e) NLCPR Committee meeting shall be convened periodically to consider sanctioning of the
cleared projects, duly vetted by the vetting agency.
2.1.4 Besides, the Ministry is in the process of developing through NIC, a Project Management
software for monitoring the implementation and execution of NLCPR funded projects.
Recommendation
2.2 ISSUES RELATED TO ENVIRONMENT/FOREST CLEARANCES
2.2.1 Regarding forest clearance at the State level and the Central level, the Committee finds that
time limits are generally not adhered to and they do not even have sub-limits. It appears that there is
no time limit for any particular agency to give the clearance. The Committee is, therefore, of the
opinion that the clearances should be given within the prescribed time limits and there should be sub-
limits for different stages. The time limit for the Central and State Governments and their concerned
agencies should be fixed and strictly adhered to.
2.2.2 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forest should apply
different standards in the cases of strategically important projects such as the ones located on
international borders or near to it, as these locations are of strategic importance for the safety and
security of the country. The absence of such infrastructure will severely hamper the movement of
artillery and logistics in times of border tension.

24
2.2.3 The Committee also desires that the Cabinet Secretary may hold review meetings particularly on
the projects pending for environmental clearances and issue instructions to Ministry of Environment and
Forests to give clearances within specific time limits.  The State Governments also need to be instructed
in this regard as all the projects, after all, are going to create assets in the respective States.  Ministry
of DoNER may take initiative in this regard and take up with the State Governments.
(Paras 5.6.1, 5.6.2 and 5.6.3 )
Action Taken
2.2.4 The NLCPR scheme is basically meant for bridging the infrastructure gaps in the NER. The
projects under the scheme are generally of smaller value. Clearance of such projects are normally well
within the delegated powers for grant of environment/forest clearance to the State Governments or
within the powers of regional offices. In case any reference comes to the Ministry of DoNER, the same
shall be co-ordinated, on case to case basis, by according highest priority.
Recommendation
2.3 MoUS FOR POWER TRANSMISSION
2.3.1 The Committee recommends that Ministry of DONER should tie up with NE States for quick
decision making for finalisation of MOUs for Power Transmission projects and for resolving issues like
Right of Way and forest clearance by the States. (Para 5.8.4)
Action Taken
2.3.2 Secretary, DoNER has taken a review of projects of Ministry of Power in NER on 02.09.2014.
During the review, Ministry of Power has stated that presently that Ministry is not facing any significant
road blocks in implementing its schemes in all North East States.
Recommendation
2.4 KEEPING NLCPR FUNDS IN A REVOLVING FUND
2.4.1 Regarding the suggestion that NLCPR funds should be kept in a Revolving Fund to be operated
by DoNER, and it should  be made available to the States based on their demand and capacity without
being constrained by yearly budgetary ceilings, the Committee agrees with the view of the Finance
Ministry that creating a Revolving Fund for NLCPR would practically be not feasible. It also agrees
with the view that such funds being made available based on demand and capacity of States without
constraint of yearly budgetary ceilings would have implications on Government of India finances,
adversely affecting fiscal deficit, etc., besides, withdrawals from such funds , in Public Account, would
also require Parliamentary approval. Keeping in mind such practical difficulties, the Committee
recommends that a better course of action is required to make line Ministries spend the mandatory
allocation for the North East, which will automatically result in lesser accruals to the NLCPR funds,
through administrative oversight mechanism having sufficient teeth to pressurize the line Ministries to
spend their share of money. The Committee is of the view that the Government should vigorously
sensitize Ministries to spend 10% GBS meant for NE States more quickly and effectively.
(Para 5.17.1)

25
Action Taken
2.4.2 Ministry of DoNER fully agrees with the views expressed by the Committee. The basic
objective of earmarking of at least 10% of GBS of the ministries is that each ministry should utilise
fund in the respective sectors for the North East so that every sector gets equal attention for overall
and balanced development of the region.
2.4.3 It is observed that wherever schematic guidelines of programmes are not suitable for the North
East utilisation of funds under such programmes invariably goes down resulting in transfer of unutilised
balance to the non-lapsable “notional pool”. In many cases the concerned ministries are also asking for
exemption of such schemes from earmarking for NER. The stand taken by Ministry of DoNER in such
cases is that the broad guidelines issued by the erstwhile Planning Commission mandates earmarking
10% of GBS allocation to the Ministries and does not require 10% schematic earmarking, which the
concerned Ministries can alone decide.  Ministries are invariably advised to formulate suitable schemes
for north east or modify schematic guidelines for better utilisation of earmarked fund. Some ministries
have also positively responded to M/o DoNER’s suggestion and changed the guidelines relating to
eligibility criteria or funding pattern. For example, eligibility criteria for PMGSY for unconnected
habitations was brought down from initial 500 persons to 250 persons for the North East. Similarly,
M/o Textiles formulated an umbrella scheme, namely, “North East Region Textile Promotion Scheme
(NERTPS)” to cover various sub-schemes for the North East. Subsequently, utilisation of funds for the
north east by the Ministry of Textiles is quite encouraging. There are number of schemes for which
funding pattern was changed for better utilisation.
2.4.4 Apart from sensitising the non-exempted Ministries and the States of North East, for better
utilisation of funds, Ministry of DoNER and NEC is focusing on the monitoring of utilisation on regular
basis. Web based information of the Ministry of Finance on schematic fund releases is a good source
of information on day to day monitoring and timely intervention by the ministries and the States. NEC
has already initiated sectoral programme reviews at the State level based on available information.
Recommendation
2.5 FINANCING PATTERN OF SCHEMES UNDER NLCPR
2.5.1 Most of the representatives of the State Governments expressed before the Committee their
inability to finance State share of 10 percent under NLCPR Schemes. Their grievance is that NLCPR
financing pattern of 90% grant and 10% loan implied borrowing of huge amounts of funds from open
markets to finance projects, thus proving a burden for the States’ finances. The State Governments felt
that the requirement of 10% loan component should be done away with so that the heavy financial
burden of the State can be eased. Various Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) administered by various
Central Ministries have varied funding patterns of 50:50, 75:25, 80:20, 90:10, and 100:00 etc. The
State Governments were of the view that since the requirement of the State share is met out of the
limited untied Plan Fund, the States are left with less funds for implementation of their own prioritised
schemes and projects. The State Governments, therefore, requested for full funding of the schemes/
projects.  The Committee, however, is not in agreement with the views of the State Governments and
is of the considered view that the State Governments should also show their involvement/interest/
ownership/commitment/participation in the implementation and execution  of the projects which could
only be ensured with their being financial  stakeholder in the projects. However, wherever the cost

26
escalation increases the share of the State, the Ministry of DoNER and Planning Commission may
consider the component of cost escalation to reduce the financial burden on the States.
(Para 5.18.1)
Action Taken
2.5.2 It is a fact that capacity to provide State share for a programme depend on the resource
position of the State as well as the funding pattern of various programmes implemented by the States.
It may be mentioned there is a drastic change in the pattern of resources flow to the States after the
14
th Finance Commission (FC) devolution. According to the Department of Expenditure, FC has
awarded devolution of Taxes @ 42% to the States in comparison to 32% recommended by the 13 th
FC. Further, the share of devolution of taxes to the North Eastern States, including Sikkim,
recommended by 14 th FC has been 7.91% as against 6.15% recommended by the 13 th FC. Therefore,
there will be significant enhancement of transfer of resources to NE States.  Apart from the Devolution
of Taxes, 14 th FC has recommended Revenue Deficit Grant to the eligible States.
2.5.3 However, S tates of NE have expressed their reservations about the enhancement in the
resources flow. According to them Central Assistance provided through certain plan programmes (like
Special Plan Assistance, Special Central Assistance, Normal Central Assistance and other block grant
programmes excluding NEC, NLCPR and ACA for EAP) has been de-linked from plan and subsumed
in the 14
th FC award resulting in shrinkage in the total flow of resources. States have also expressed
concern about likely change in the funding pattern of certain Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and
committed liabilities of the delinked programmes. Presently, NITI Aayog has constituted a Sub-group
for consultation with the States on Rationalisation of CSS and funding pattern. The concerns expressed
by the NE States have been brought to the notice of NITI Aayog. It is expected that the final report
of the Sub-group will take into account the views expressed by the NE States.
2.5.4 Notwithstanding the facts explained above, the view expressed by the Committee with regard
to accommodating cost escalation of the sanctioned scheme in the scheme itself, it may be mentioned
that the extant NLCPR Guidelines have provision for bearing the cost escalation upto 10-20% of the
approved cost by the Ministry of DoNER and the State Government concerned as per the existing
pattern of funding
Recommendation
2.6 SEPARATION OF ALLOCATIONS FOR NLCPR AND NEC SCHEMES FROM ANNUAL
PLANS OF STATES
2.6.1 The Committee notes the overwhelming demand of the North Eastern States that the allocation
of NLCPR and NEC schemes, which have been included in the Annual Plan allocations during 2013-14,
should be separated from State Plan. According to the State Governments the present dispensation of
including NLCPR/NEC within the State Annual Plan would give rise to undue procedural delay as any
additionality over and above the projection made in the Plan would call for revision of State Plan and
thus obtaining of again a second approval from the Planning Commission. In their view resources of
Ministry of DoNER are distinct from and additional to what the States were entitled to get as part of
their normal planning process and devolution from the Planning Commission. By making them part of
the Plan outlays, the States have not only been denied their legitimate share in the plan resources meant
for the States, it had also affected their flexibility in use of these resources. The State Governments
were of the opinion that the Central Government should either revert to the earlier practice wherein

27
NEC and NLCPR outlays were kept beyond the ambit of State Plan or agree to this regime only if the
Ministry of DoNER was given a larger political role in deciding the developmental priorities of the
region and financial outlays under the Plan for the Region as a whole, as determined by the State
Governments through a democratic interaction with the Ministry of DoNER.
2.6.2 The Committee also notes the Comments of the Planning Commission that the inclusion of NEC
and NLCPR in the States’ Annual Plan is required. In the Union Budget, NEC and NLCPR have been
always a part of Central Assistance to State Plans and there has been omission to mention as such in
the Scheme of Financing of Annual Plans of NE States.  When this omission was pointed out in the
reconciliation process, the Central assistance on this account has been correctly reflected in States’
Annual Plans for 2013-14 fully in line with Union Budget approved by Parliament. This was a
misclassification in the accounts of the State Governments which had been rectified in the 12
th Plan.
2.6.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given by the Planning Commission as the
funds in the NLCPR are the unspent funds of the 10% allocations earmarked by different Ministries
each year, that too not surrendered at the end of the financial year, but treated as an amaanat for all
practical purposes to finish the incomplete works. The Committee also notes the protest of the Ministry
of DoNER in this regard and is of the considered view that the principle and objective behind NEC
and NLCPR schemes are to fill critical gaps in normal developmental schemes and, consequently, NEC
and NLCPR have been treated as complement to normal Plan programmes, as stated in the NLCPR
guidelines....”Funds available under the Central Pool are not meant to supplement the normal Plan
Programmes either of the State Governments or Union Ministries/Departments/Agencies”. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the funds released under NLCPR and NEC schemes should be
over and above the allocations made to State Governments of the North-Eastern Region in their Annual
Plans and the practice of including allocations for NLCPR and NEC schemes in the Annual Plans of
States should be discontinued henceforth. (Paras 5.19.1, 5.19.2 and 5.19.3)
Action Taken
2.6.4 With regard to Separation of Allocations for NLCPR and NEC Schemes from Annual Plans of
States, it may be mentioned that NEC and NLCPR provisions are part of the Central Assistance to the
States (or State Plan fund) and reflected in the Demand for Grants of DoNER and in Statement 16
on Central Assistance to State Plan of Expenditure Budget), which were not reflected in the Scheme
of Financing (SOF) of States’ Annual Plan till 2012-13. Planning Commission mentioned that when this
omission was pointed out by the Ministry of Finance in the reconciliation process, the Central assistance
on this account was correctly reflected in States’ Annual Plans since 2013-14 in line with Union budget
approved by Parliament.
2.6.5 When NEC and NLCPR provision was included as part States Annual Plan in the (SOF) of
2013-14, the States of NE objected to Planning Commission stating that these amount was coming as
“additionality” to the states. Though in practice, while submitting expenditure statements the State
Governments always included as part of States Plan.  Since 2014-15 the whole process of allocation
of schematic fund undergone a change due to rationalisation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS),
which was completed in June, 2013. In 2014-15, CSS numbering 146 was brought down to 66 CSS
and decision was also to provide the fund as ‘Central Assistance to State Plan’. Thus since 2014-15
not only NEC and NLCPR but also 66 CSS became part of SOF for the States’ Annual Plan.

28
Further Observation
2.6.6 The Committee, in its meeting held on 27 th July, 2015, came across the suggestion of
separation of allocation of NLCPR and NEC scheme from the annual plan of States.  The
Committee observes that against allocation of ````` 230 crore for the year 2014-15 under NLCPR
for the Government of Nagaland only ````` 54 crore was released thus leaving shortfall of 76%
of the sanctioned amount thereby instilling a huge deficit causing great concern and loss for
a resource constrained State i.e. Nagaland which ultimately to led to accumulation of in
completed projects and retained projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that to
improve the process of selection and implementation of projects, the funds available for
NLCPR and NEC may be sub allocated to NER States upfront i.e. at the beginning of the
financial year so that State Government must be aware of funding pattern well in advance.
This will allow them to make ‘Priority List’ of the projects besides ensuring enhanced active
participation of States besides retaining the power of sanctioning and supervision of projects
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of DoNER.
Recommendation
2.7 Delay in Land Acquisition and Inclusion of Land Cost in Projects.
2.7.1 The Committee notes that most projects have a precondition that the land should be made
available by the State Governments. However, North Eastern State Governments are reluctant on this
part on the ground that with increasing pressure on land and loss of land due to erosion, it is becoming
increasingly difficult for the States to fulfill this criterion. At times, the land is available at unviable
locations. The State Governments viewed that Ministry of DoNER should incorporate the land cost in
the projects. It should also help NER States to procure land for projects given by other line Ministries.
The Committee came across the issue related to land acquisition, in Arunachal Pradesh, where public
hearing, the first and foremost procedure for land acquisition, had to be postponed twelve times and
finally was held after a lot of persuasions. The Committee agrees with the Cabinet Secretary that only
States ought to address the issue since the major projects are essentially executed through the State
PWDs.
2.7.2 The Committee is in agreement to general principle that for all the Central Sector and the
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, land should be provided by the State Governments as this is essential to
make the State Governments committed. The Committee therefore recommends that the State
Governments should provide land for the projects as the projects are meant for the overall economic
development of the North East Region. (Paras 5.21.1 and 5.21.2)
Action Taken
2.7.3 This has already been made as a pre-condition for sanctioning new projects.
Recommendation
2.8 INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM
2.8.1 The Committee is surprised to find that although according to the present system, the plenary
session of the North-Eastern Council, is supposed to happen twice in a year, it is being held only once
in a year and there is no time for review, and, only when the Secretary, DoNER or the Secretary, NEC

29
visits the States, they review it.  The Committee feels that institutional mechanism may be created under
NEC for review of projects more frequently and regularly. (Para 5.24.3)
Action Taken
2.8.2 The mandate of North Eastern Council is to function as a regional planning body for North
Eastern Region. North Eastern Council is a statutory body, created through an act of Parliament viz.
NEC Act, 1971,  headed by Hon’ble Minister, DoNER and comprising Governors and Chief Ministers
of the eight NE States as Members and precedes creation of Ministry of DoNER in 2004. The efforts
of NEC and Ministry of DoNER are complementary in nature and perfect synergy exists between the
two organisations.
2.8.3 As already explained above (in the action taken statement on 5.17.1) is  the common interest
for both DoNER and NEC to synergise the efforts for working out a regional planning and focus on
better utilisation of earmarked funds for the NER focusing on the monitoring of utilisation on regular
basis for overall development of the region.
Recommendation
2.9 SYNERGY BETWEEN NEC AND MINISTRY OF DONER
2.9.1 The Committee observes that the NEC has the Governors and the Chief Ministers of the NE
States as its members. The State Governments made a complaint that it should not be reduced to the
level of a Directorate under a Ministry of the Government of India rather it should have an appropriate
status and power to make decisions and provide the required funds for the development of the Region.
The Committee further notes that the NEC has the technical manpower for most of the sectors, however
main constraint with the NEC lies in its limited budgetary outlays and the inflexible sectoral approach
followed by the NEC in allocation to States. A State Government suggested that this can easily be
overcome if synergy is generated between the two bodies and united and integrated approach is adopted.
While the outlays of the NEC can be a part of the overall outlays of the Ministry of DoNER, the
decision making process in respect of allocations and schematic or sectoral priorities could be
democratised through the NEC which  should continue to play its active role as regional Planning Body.
Another suggestion was also made that the NEC may act as the Standing Council or Consultative Body
for the Ministry of DoNER and the Ministry itself could be located in Shillong with its headquarters
in the present NEC. This will help a strong organisational structure grow within a democratic set up
with proper financial outlays, competent technical manpower and delivery mechanisms.  The Committee
desires that the suggestions may be examined thoroughly by the Government and steps may be taken
early to bring synergy. (Para 5.24.4)
Action Taken
2.9.2 The mandate of North Eastern Council is to function as a regional planning body for North
Eastern Region. North Eastern Council is a statutory body, created through an act of Parliament viz.
NEC Act, 1971,  headed by Hon’ble Minister, DoNER and comprising Governors and Chief Ministers
of the eight NE States as Members and precedes creation of Ministry of DoNER in 2004. The efforts
of NEC and Ministry of DoNER are complementary in nature and synergy is continually promoted in
the efforts of the two organisations.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
3.1 FINAL APPROVED COST OF PROJECTS
3.1.1 The Committee notes that in some cases final approved cost of projects based on techno vetting
from Line Ministries differ from the projected estimated cost in the DPR, and the deleted components
are not informed to the State Governments, thus creating  problems in implementation. The State
Governments have strongly objected to this. The Committee, in this connection, recommends that the
State Governments should be kept well informed about the whole process so that they get enough time
to adjust for better implementation of the projects.  The Planning Commission and Ministry of DoNER
should address this issue appropriately. (Para 5.3.5)
Action Taken
3.1.2 Detailed components of the sanctioned projects are reflected in the administrative/financial
sanctions.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the final approved cost of the projects must
be communicated to the State Government well in advance so that project gets a take off without
financial snags. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance, NITI
Aayog and the line Ministries should take care of grievances of the State Government on this count
and accordingly redress the grievances by apprising the State Government of information about the
whole process of finalization of cost of the projects well in advance so that the State Government get
enough time for suitable amendment in their project plan for better execution of the project.
Recommendation
3.2 ARBITAARY RETENTION AND SANCTIONING OF PROJECTS
3.2.1 Several State Governments brought to the notice of the Committee that there were many cases
where the retention and sanctioning of projects by the Ministry of DoNER were found to be arbitrary.
The Committee is anguished to note an instance, where a road project of 62 kms. was retained in two
phases (31 km. each for 
` 31 crore each), whereas, sanction was approved for only the Phase II of
31 kms. after reduction of almost ` 10 crore from the detailed estimate of the DPR. The Committee
also notes another instance where only a small length out of the proposed road projects was retained,
which was totally illogical. The Committee feels that such arbitrary retention of projects and
unreasonable sanctioning of projects with much lower cost as compared to the proposed amount in the
DPR would be detrimental to the creation of infrastructure. The Committee feels that completion of
30

31
many projects had been stalled due to this reason. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
the Ministries should avoid adopting such irrational and arbitrary approach and also to be more
realistic in allocating funds considering the topography of the region.
(Para 5.3.6)
Action Taken
3.2.2 Retention and sanction of projects by the Empowered Committee is contingent on a variety of
factors inter alia including availability of funds, ceilings for a particular State Government for retention,
relative backwardness of district, priority given by the State Governments etc. There is no ground for
arbitrariness since the State Government representatives are invariably present in the meetings of the
inter-Ministerial NLCPR Committee. Further, the State Government have been advised to submit Priority
Lists within the overall allocation available to them and covering all the sectors.  This will discourage
skewed selection of projects by the States. To further strengthen and streamline the procedure, Chief
Secretary/Planning Secretary/Departmental Secretary (when concerned) shall alone attend the meeting of
the NLCPR Committee, convened for initial screening of concept papers and later for sanction of
finalised DPRs of the projects included for the State. In case these officers are unable to attend the
meeting, another authorised representative, who is able to take on the spot decisions, may alone attend
the meeting.  In case the authorised representative is unable to satisfactorily answer the queries of the
Committee, the project shall be rejected as unsupported and the funds diverted to next in priority or
to approved projects of other States.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3 The Committee is of the view that the contention of NER State Governments about the
sanctioning of projects with much lower cost as compared to the proposed amount in the DPR
must be examined carefully keeping in account all cost consideration and ensuring that the final
approved cost of the project should not have a bearing on quality of infrastructure creation as
that may pose a great threat/hurdle to development process in NER.
Recommendation
3.3 POWER SECTOR
3.3.1 The Committee takes note of the suggestion of the Ministry of Power that in order to improve
the power situation in the North-Easter Region, there is a need for a comprehensive plan for laying
adequate road network in a time-bound manner to expedite the development of projects in the North-
East as these projects are located in very remote places.  The Committee feels that roads are required
for not only power sector but for overall development of North East.  Various agencies like the Border
Roads Organisation, Ministry of Roads and Highways, State PWDs, etc. need to work in a coordinated
manner for this purpose. (Para 5.8.1)
Action Taken
3.3.2 Ministry of DoNER equally shares the need for a comprehensive plan for laying adequate road
network in a time-bound manner to expedite the development of projects in NER and also the need of
working in coordinated manner by Border Road Organization (BRO), Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways (MoRTH), State Public Works Departments so that power situation in the North Eastern
Region gets improved. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has already constituted a Committee

32
to review progress of all road projects essential for development of hydro projects in Arunachal Pradesh
in a time-bound manner on 09-12-2013 with the following composition:-
(i) Secretary, RT&H – Chairman
(ii) Director General (Border Roads)
(iii) Representative of Ministry of DoNER (not below the level of Joint Secretary)
(iv) Representative of Ministry of Power (not below the level of Joint Secretary)
(v) ADG (NER), MoRTH
(vi) Chief Engineer (NER), HQ, MoRTH,
(vii) Chief Engineer, PMU, Itanagar, MoRTH (Special Invitee only).
3.3.3 The Committee is meeting periodically. In addition, Defence and Road Transport and Highways
sub-group of the Project Monitoring Group of the Cabinet Secretariat is intensively monitoring all
aspects of infrastructure requirements and statutory clearances for accelerating pace of harnessing of
hydro-electric potential in NER.
Further Recommendation
3.3.4 The Committee understands that there is need to give boost to the transport and
communication infrastructure, thereby requiring Comprehensive Plan for laying road network
in a time-bound manner to expedite the development of the projects in far-flung areas of NER
and accordingly it has recommended for striking a coordinated and collaborative working in this
direction. The Committee recommends that operational efficiency of implementing agencies viz.
BRO is required to be enhanced. The Committee further recommends that undertaken course
of action must entail perceptile changes on the ground level, thereby requiring also that the
Ministry of Power and the Ministry of DoNER must work in tandem to ensure optimum
utilization of power generation potential in a time-bound manner as continued supply of power
is itself a basic infrastructure for other industries and development projects.
Recommendation
3.4 AGGREGATE TECHNICAL AND COMMERCIAL (AT&C) LOSSES
3.4.1 The Committee was also given to understand that the Aggregate Technical and Commercial
(AT&C) losses were among the highest in NER in Distribution Sector and for implementation of
Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programmes (R-APDRP) in NER, three
States were yet to submit Part-B DPRs. The Committee is of the firm view that the losses for longer
period can affect the viability of the power projects and the remaining three States should come forward
with their DPRs so that reform programmes can be initiated to tackle the issue of distribution losses
at the earliest. (Para 5.8.3)
Action Taken
3.4.2 As per information received from Ministry of Power, the progress of major physical
activities completed under R-APDRP by the NER States are indicated below:-

33
States T owns Meters Base line GIS works Town
Sanctioned Installation A T&C Loss completed Go-Live
under completed Established in towns declared
Part-A (IT) in towns in towns
No. % No. % No. % No. %
Arunachal 10 3 30 - - 2 20 - -
Pradesh
Assam 67 67 100 67 100 28 42 6 9
Manipur 13 1 8 - - 4 31 - -
Meghalaya 9 9 100 8 89 4 44 - -
Mizoram 9 8 89 2 22 2 22 - -
Nagaland 9 4 44 ---- - -
Sikkim 2 2 100 2 100 2 100 2 100
Tripura 16 16 100 16 100 16 100 1 6
3.4.3 Except Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland all eligible Part-B projects have been sanctioned
to NER States. Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland are yet to submit Detailed Project Reports
(DPRs) of Part-B projects for sanction.
Further Recommendation
3.4.4 The Committee notes that the progress of major physical activities under
Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programmes (R-APDRP) by the
NER  States are at various stages of completion.  The Committee impresses that all out
efforts should be taken for expeditious completion of physical activities so that Aggregate
Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses are minimized/eliminated in NER.  The Committee
also recommends that the Ministry of DoNER must impress upon the State Governments of
Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland submission of DPRs of part B projects for sanctioned to
enable the Ministry of Power to push reform programme in the direction of minimization
of distribution losses without further delay.
Recommendation
3.5 ENHANCING OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCY OF BORDER ROAD ORGANISATION
3.5.1 The Committee came across the fact that for construction work the concerned Ministry is
overly dependent on BRO for substantial stretches, particularly closer to the border areas. The
Committee has been apprised that BRO had been organized in a manner where they are able to
take up only departmental activities and the problem is that a single unit of BRO at best can take
up 10 kms. in a year and at this pace of road construction, the set objectives of undertaken project
can never be achieved. The Committee recommends that suitable steps be taken for enhancing
operational efficiency of BRO . (Para 5.11.1)

34
Action Taken
3.5.2 The concerned Ministry and Border Roads Organisation have been advised to take note of
the observations made by the Hon’ble Committee.
Further Recommendation
3.5.3 The Committee expresses its anguish to observe the evasive reply of Ministry of
DoNER.  The representatives of Government of Sikkim in Committee’s meeting held on
27th July, 2015 stated about operation efficiency of BRO i.e. limitation of 10 kms. of road
construction by a single unit of BRO in a year which is in fact, also in the Committee’s
view point not at all impressive but rather disturbing.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates
its recommendation that the Ministry of DoNER take follow up action with MoRTH
suggesting BRO for undertaking requisite steps for enhancing its operational efficiency for
meaningful completion of road project within set time-frame.
Recommendation
3.6 OBSERV ANCE OF NLCPR GUIDELINES
3.6.1 The Committee has come across the fact that delay in vetting of DPRs by line Ministries
leads to consequential delay in sanctioning of project thereby making cost unworkable due to
change in Schedule of Rates (SoR).  In fact, the Ministry of DoNER is dependent on line
Ministries for vetting of DPRs under NLCPR Scheme.  The representatives of various State
Governments  also deliberated before the Committee in detail that delay caused in vetting of DPRs
due to repeated observations or otherwise results into further delayed sanctioning of projects which
at time causes time and cost overruns. It has come to the notice of the Committee that retained
NLCPR projects are cleared after 3 or 4 years which creates lots of difficulty as there are no takers
for the projects due to escalation of costs. The Co mmittee also notes the c omplaint of State
Governments regarding the nature of the observations conveyed to the States by the line Ministries
which are at times arbitrary, irrelevant, and not concerned to civil works matters (especially those
from the CPWD). The State Governments observe that DPRs for NLCPR projects are prepared
based on the Guidelines for Administration of NLCPR.  However, DPRs are being revised umpteen
times due to the fact that the reports were subjected to scrutiny against arbitrary standards which
were not specified in the Ministry’ s Guidelines. The State Governments are of the view that the role
of the technical vetting authority for DPRs of NLCPR projects is to examine the broad outline
feasibility and correctness of the DPR instead of raising observations on a particular drawing/
estimate being countersigned or not, or raising arbitrary observations. The Committee views that
undue delay in vetting of DPRs necessitates revision in Administrative and Financial approval
which finally delays completion of projects abnormally. The Committee recommends that the
Ministries should stick to Guidelines for Administration of NLCPR and avoid arbitrariness in their
observations for timely clearances of projects. (Para 5.15.1)
Action Taken
3.6.2 The recommendations made by the Hon’ble Committee stand subsumed in the simplified
procedure proposed to be put in place for administration of the NLCPR scheme, as per details
given above in reply to para 5.2. of the Report.

35
Further Recommendation
3.6.3 The Committee’s takes notes of merits of simplified procedure with regard to NLCPR
scheme, however, the Committee desires that line Ministry should adhere in relation to
vetting of DPRs of NLCPR projects to examine the broad outline feasibility and correctness
of DPRs, as per the guidelines for administration of NLCPR and avoid arbitrariness and
irrelevant observation for speedy clearance of projects and thereafter completion of projects
without time and cost overruns.  The Committee in its meeting held on 27th July, 2015
during its interaction with representative of Government of Nagaland came across instances
of procedural delay due to retention of 37 projects of Government of Nagaland from 2010-
11 till 2014-15 because vetting process kept on going as there was no time-limit set for
vetting up DPRs. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation made in Para
5.15.1 and recommends further that the Ministry of DoNER should examine the possibility
of outsourcing vetting of DPRs to competent public sector agencies like WAPCOS,
NAPCONS, National Institute of Technology, Jorhat (Regional Engineering College)  for
speedy vetting of infrastructure projects.
Recommendation
3.7 TECHNICAL WING IN MINISTRY OF DONER
3.7.1 The Committee received the suggestion for establishment of a full fledged Technical Wing
in the Ministry of DoNER for timely vetting of DPRs, which was in fact taken up  by Ministry
of DoNER with Committee of Secretaries (CoS).  The CoS considered the issue and observed that,
“it would not be practical to establish an elaborate technical wing in Ministry of DoNER,
possessing all the skills to examine the various types of projects, as it would invariably lead to
under employment as well as unnecessary duplication of the available manpower resources in the
Government”. The CoS desired that the Ministry of DoNER would initiate measures to have its own
small complement of technical manpower for preliminary checking of the projects and the cost
estimates. Accordingly, Ministry of DoNER established a Technical Wing in the Ministry in January,
2010 headed by Superintending Engineer with an Executive Engineer and 2 Assistant Engineers.
The Committee, however , wonders to find that as per CPWD norms SE is competent to issue
technical sanctions of projects upto 2.5 crore only, whereas, minimum cost of projects to be
considered for funding under NLCPR Scheme is 
` 3.00 crore, therefore, services of Technical Wing
remains underutilized.
3.7.2 The Committee feels that Technical Wing in the Ministry of DoNER needs to be
strengthened to obviate the present circumstances and to ensure expeditious vetting of DPRs under
NLCPR Scheme.  Technical Wing may be vested with full powers for issue of technical sanctions
of projects under NLCPR Scheme along with appropriate number of Executive Engineers and
Assistant Engineers of mixed discipline.  Such arrangements would curb unnecessary delays in
vetting of DPRs and streamline timely sanction of projects. The Committee also feels that Line
Ministries be assigned time bound targets for techno-economic vetting of DPRs. The issue of doing
away with the current practice of obtaining techno-economic feasibility from the line Ministries at
least for smaller projects may be examined. The Committee is in agreement with the views of the
Ministry of DoNER that routine observations of repetitive nature must be avoided and DPRs may
be corrected at Ministry’ s level to achieve timeline of two months.
(Paras 5.16.1 and 5.16.2)

36
Action Taken
3.7.3 The services of the Technical Wing will be utilised for preliminary scrutiny of DPRs and
close monitoring of the projects in coordination with North Eastern Council, Shillong. Besides,
the Technical Wing will also scrutinise the Concept Papers, furnished by the State Governments
at initial stage itself so as to provide guidance to the State in proper formulation of project
proposals.
3.7.4 The Ministry has engaged PSUs for expeditious vetting of DPRs submitted by the State
Governments. The following measures have also been taken to optimally reduce the time taken for
vetting of DPRs submitted by the State Governments:-
(a) On receipt of DPRs from the State Governments, the Technical Wing of the Ministry
of DoNER will do the preliminary scrutiny.  The consolidated  query, if any, of the
Technical Wing shall be given within 15 days to the Programme Division, which will
be forwarded online/through e-mail, to the State Planning and Implementing
Department. In case the reply is not received within the period of 15 days from
receipt of query, it shall be presumed that the State is not interested to pursue the
project and the project will be deleted within seven days thereafter without any further
notice.
(b) On receipt of reply to the queries raised by the Technical Wing, the DPRs will be sent
to the vetting agency/line Ministries, with the request to vet the DPRs. The vetting
agency shall raise consolidated queries, if any, which will be forwarded to the State
Government through Ministry, which will be required to furnish replies to the same
within a period of 15 days. If these queries are not settled within 15 days of
communication, the State Government will be given another 15 days for furnishing
replies to the query from the vetting agency, failing which it will presumed that the
State is not interested to pursue the project and the said project will stand rejected.
However, if the State Government finds it difficult to collect data for a reply and gives
cogent and substantial reasons, further time of up to 30 days may be provided and
not beyond.
(c) V etting agency will give techno-economic vetting of the projects within one month
from receipt of replies to the consolidated queries within a period of one month. In
case any further query is raised because of unsatisfactory replies or issues arising,
these should be settled before or on the date the project is placed for sanction before
the Screening Committee.
(d) The line Ministries/NITI Aayog/NEC will be approached in parallel for non-duplication
certificates and for certifying if the project is fit for gap funding. The line Ministries/
NITI Aayog/NEC shall give their comments/observations within one month else it will
be presumed to be clear for non-duplication and gap funding angle. In any event,
these views shall be finally provided at the time of project sanctions.
(e) NLCPR Committee meeting shall be convened periodically to consider sanctioning of
the cleared projects, duly vetted by the vetting agency.

37
Further Recommendation
3.7.5 The Committee takes into account the details of timeline arrangement made for the
speedy implementation of project, however, is of the opinion that the purpose of setting up
the technical wing in the Ministry gets defeated due to lack of administrative power to
Superintendent Engineer to issue technical sanction of projects upto 2.5 crore only whereas
the minimum cost of the project to be considered for funding under NLCPR scheme is
````` 3 crore, thereby, nullifying the role of technical wing in the Ministry of DoNER. The
Committee finds that the Ministry of DoNER is silent in its ATN over the issue of need for
strenghthening of technical wing of the Ministry of DoNER, while the State Government of
NER are in agreement to the Committee’s recommendation made in Para 5.16.2 of 173rd
Report. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation and desires that Ministry
of DoNER must reconsider its decision and accordingly apprise the Committee.
Recommendation
3.8 COMMITTED FUNDING FOR NORTH EASTERN REGION
3.8.1 The Committee notes the appraisal of Chairman, Railway Board that the main problem the
Ministry was facing was of the ‘funds’. With committed funding for the North-East Region, the
Ministry can complete the undertaken projects within a designated time-frame, because there was
absolutely no problem except some in Meghalaya, as far as the work was concerned.  The
Chairman, Railway Board further informed that the Ministry was dependent on the Gross Budgetary
Support for allocation of funds for all the projects. The Gross Budgetary Support has however not
been adequate and whatever promised by the Planning Commission, the Ministry was not able to
get even that amount resulting in the time and cost overruns.  However, according to the
Expenditure Secretary it was not funding constraint which was holding up or delaying the execution
of the national projects in the North-Eastern Region, but, the lack of execution capacity. In view
of the Committee, there appears to be communication gap between Ministry of Railways and the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee observes that there is complete discord amongst the Ministry
of Railways and Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission so far as the issue of
committed funding is concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Planning
Commission, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Railways must have meeting to resolve the issue
and apprise the Committee of the exact position in this regard. (Para 5.22.1)
Action Taken
3.8.2 Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Railways have been accordingly
asked to take further appropriate action.
Further Recommendation
3.8.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry of DoNER has asked Planning Commission
(NITI Aayog) Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Railways to take the appropriate
action to eliminate the communication gap amongst those Ministries so far the issue of
committed finance for development of NER States is concerned.  However, the Committee
feels that the role of Ministry of DoNER does not end here just acting like a post office.
It should facilitate meetings of these Ministries to sort out the problem of fund to complete

38
the undertaken projects with a designated time-frame or enhance executive capabilities as
pointed out by the Secretary, Department of Expenditure that it is not the lack of funds but
the lack of execution capabilities that is hindering the effective implementation of projects
in NER.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of DoNER must
proactively act in the matter.
Recommendation
3.9 MERGER OF NEC WITH MINISTRY OF DONER AND SHIFTING ITS
HEADQUARTERS TO SHILLONG
3.9.1 The Committee considered in detail the issue of merger of NEC with the Ministry of DoNER
and shifting of its headquarters to Shillong on the anology of the Space Department and
Department of Atomic energy and designating the Secretary to the Ministry of DoNER as  ex-
officio Secretary of NEC.  The argument put forth was that Ministry of DoNER has to play
coordinating role with the State Governments and oversee/monitor the execution of projects which
can better be done from Shillong rather than Delhi.  The Committee considered the views of the
Cabinet Secretary on the role of the Ministry of DoNER as coordinating Ministry and according
to him the coordination can be best done from Delhi where other Ministries are located and shifting
of the headquarters on the analogy of the Space Department and Atomic Energy, would not really
be an overall great advantage because State Governments are doing a lot of execution. The
Cabinet Secretary felt that the Ministry of DoNER should continue to remain in the national
capital.  The Committee also takes note of the views of  the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER that
only problem in shifting the Ministry of DoNER would be that the Secretary in the Ministry of
DoNER has to attend meetings in the Committee of Secretaries, Cabinet meetings and it would be
difficult for the Secretary to shuffle from Shillong to Delhi. The Committee would also like to
underline the submission of the DoNER Secretary that ‘otherwise there would be better synergy’.
3.9.2 The Committee is of the strong view that if the headquarters of the Ministry of DoNER is
shifted to Shillong, it would be in a better position to monitor the effective implementation of
projects due to on-the-spot supervision. Therefore, the Committee is not in agreement with the views
of Cabinet Secretary. The Committee is of the considered view that on-the-spot supervision and
monitoring would inject better synergy in the overall execution of the projects.  With the
Headquarters at Shillong, the Officers of the Ministry would be more accountable and more
focussed to their duties. Headquarters of the Ministry at Shillong would also provide opportunity
to the Officers of the Ministry to have frequent interaction with the officers of the State
Governments and implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government may consider shifting the headquarters of the Ministry of DoNER to Shillong and have
a camp office in Delhi to facilitate meeting with other Ministries or organizations in Delhi.
(Paras 5.23.1 and 5.23.2)
Action Taken
3.9.3 The Cabinet Secretary has already put the views of Government in this regard before the
Parliamentary Committee.  During his evidence before the Committee he has already stated that
Ministry of DoNER being a coordinating Ministry, co-ordination could best be done from Delhi
where other Ministries are located and thus shifting of the Ministry on the analogy of Department
of Space and Department of Atomic Energy would not be of much advantage and thus Ministry

39
of DoNER should continue to remain in the national capital. Even the effectiveness of Regional
Planning by the NEC in consultation with States requires coordination by Ministry of DoNER to
ensure that Central Sector scheme design is compatible with field requirements as expressed
through NEC.
Further Recommendation
3.9.4 The Committee observes/finds the dichotomy of opinion amongst two organs of the
Government i.e. on the one hand Ministry of DoNER deposed before the Committee that the
only problem in shifting of the Ministry of DoNER from national capital to Shillong would
be that Secretary, Ministry of DoNER had to attend the meeting of the Committee of the
Secretaries (CoS), otherwise there would be better-synergy in working of Ministry of DoNER
as coordinating role with State Government and monitoring the execution of projects due to
better on-the-spot supervision while on the other hand, the Cabinet Secretary had advanced
the view before the Committee that coordination should be best done from Delhi where
other line Ministries are located. The Committee in its 173rd Report made its
recommendation striking a balance amongst the views of Cabinet Secretary and the
Ministry of DoNER that headquarter of the Ministry be shifted to Shillong with a camp
office at Delhi.  In response to the Committee’s recommendation the Ministry of DoNER
is now back tracking from its earlier stand and is advancing the views of the Cabinet
Secretary and thus sculting  the merit of subject and without due scrutiny/examination. The
Committee, in this backdrop, reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 5.23.2 of 173rd
Report.
3.9.5 The Committee further reiterates its recommendation for merger of NEC with the
Ministry of DoNER and designating the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER as the ex-officio
Secretary of NEC.  The Committee is of the view that the measure would enable the
Ministry of DoNER to have holistic planning for balanced economic development of NER.
Recommendation
3.10 ROLES OF MINISTRY OF DONER AND NEC AND SYNERGY BETWEEN THEM
3.10.1 It was admitted before the Committee by the Secretary, DoNER that the Ministry of DoNER
and the North-Eastern Council (NEC) combined together contributed less than four per cent of the
total fund flow to the North-Eastern Region in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  Thus the impact of
NEC and the Ministry of DoNER in financial terms is very marginal. The North Eastern States also
have a feeling that the Ministry of DoNER is still acting as a distant arm of the central line
Ministries. It merely represents them in choosing and implementing projects and it has not been able
to play a proactive role in planning and implementing the Central projects/schemes/policies
implemented in the NE States. The State Governments also feel that the existence of the Ministry
of  DoNER, has, also led the line Ministries to neglect their responsibilities for the development
of the region, leaving it all to the Ministry of DoNER with its meager NLCPR resources. The
Committee also notes that the Cabinet Secretariat has denied this and stated that the percentage
utilization of 10% earmarked allocation has been increasing steadily over the past ten years.
3.10.2 The Committee, however, agrees that the Ministry of DoNER has not been able to play the
role assigned to it very effectively because of various factors discussed in the proceeding

40
paragraphs. However , the Committee is of the view that the Ministry of DoNER can play a bigger
and effective role in shaping the regional developmental priorities and implementing the regional
or State-specific programmes and projects. Active involvement of the Ministry of DoNER is a
precondition in deciding the policies, programmes, schemes, and projects by the Planning
Commission and line Ministries meant for NE region. The Committee, therefore, is of the strong
view that there is urgent need to review and redefine the role of the Ministry of DoNER in
coordinating and liaising with the line Ministries.   There should be a clear cut defined relationship
between the Planning Commission, the Ministry of DoNER, and the NEC for dovetailing and
synergizing of developmental plans, projects, and schemes and a mechanism for such coordination
should be evolved. The Committee is of the considered view that the Secretary, DoNER should be
equipped with more administrative and sanctioning powers to facilitate the smooth implementation
of developmental projects. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should
expand its project portfolio to include projects other than infrastructure sector, including projects
in tourism, agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry etc., besides loan linkages for these sectors.
(Paras 5.24.1 and 5.24.2)
Action Taken
3.10.3 As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry has started giving focus on
projects in sectors like Organic Farming,  Animal Husbandry, Horticulture, Rural Livelihoods etc.
Further Recommendation
3.10.4 The Committee finds that the Ministry of DoNER has just indicated that the Ministry
is expanding its project-portfolios in certain fields viz. Animal Husbandary, Organic
Farming, horticulture and Rural livelihood but has not apprised the Committee of action
taken even in brief in these field and the outcome thereof.
3.10.5 The Committee further observes that the Government has not furnished its action
taken details even the views on the Committee’s recommendation on enhancing
administrative and sanctioning powers to facilitate the speedy and effective implementation
of development plan/projects/scheme/programme.  The Committee, in this regard, in
conformity to the view of Government of Sikkim as expressed in Committee’s meeting held
on 27th July, 2015 reiterates its recommendation that the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER
should have more administrative and sanctioning powers for entailing a booster dose to
development process in NER States.
3.10.6 The Committee is express its concern to observe that Government in its action taken
notes has not furnished any information on steps taken in regard to Committee’s
recommendation for strengthening the role of Ministry and measures undertaken/being
undertaken for striking operational synergy between the Ministry of DoNER and NEC.  The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 5.24.1 and suggests
that the Ministry of DoNER must play pro-action role.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
4.1 PROBLEM OF INADEQUATE MANPOWER IN CEA
4.1.1 The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Power gave two reasons for the delayed
concurrence to schemes by CEA i) multi-disciplinary discussion process and ii) inadequate man
power in CEA. In view of the Committee, while due diligence and discussion can not be
compromised and Power Ministry has not much role nor should it try to curtail it, but ‘inadequate
man power’ is well within its domain, which should not have been allowed to take toll on the
clearance of the power projects. The Committee is not at all convinced with the second reason and
therefore recommends that all necessary steps be taken to address the problem of inadequate
manpower in CEA at the earliest so that power projects are cleared in an expeditious manner to
meet the country’ s growing demand of the power, particularly North East.
(Para 5.8.2)
Action Taken
4.1.2 Ministry of Power has since been asked to act on recommendation of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee and take all necessary steps to address the problem of inadequate manpower
in Central Electricity Authority at the earliest so that power projects are cleared in an expeditious
manner to meet the country’s growing demand for power particularly in North Eastern Region.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A GLANCE
AVOIDANCE OF PROCEDURAL DELAY
The Committee observes that in compliance with the Committee’s recommendation
for avoidance of procedural delay and direction given it its meeting held on 27 th July, 2015,
the Ministry of DoNER in tandem with the State Governments and the concerned line
Ministries has undertaken a number of measures from the stage of conceptualization of
scheme, preparation and submission of priority list, expeditious processing/execution of
projects under NLCPR scheme, setting detailed guidelines and simplification of procedures
for preparing and submission and vetting of DPRs, sanctioning, allocation and release of
funds for timely implementation and completion of projects.  The Committee, however,
would like to be apprised of perceptible outcome of the measures so undertaken on the
ground level in the form of period of time reduced in clearance of projects and its
completion in comparison to pre and post reforms phase on removal of all unnecessary
procedural delays.  The kernel spirit of the Committee’s recommendation made in para
5.2.1 of the Committee’s 173 rd Report is to give fillip to developmental process in NER
through procedural facilitation and timely implementation of policies, programmes, schemes
and projects meant for all round balanced development of the region.
(Para 1.1.8)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should take up the
issue of revisiting the instant specification in guidelines for reserving 25% of new projects
for backward areas which is at present vague and therefore needs modification on the lines
of autonomous territorial /district council. (Para 1.1.9)
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should persuade the
line ministries to arrange training /workshops for the State Government officials and for
potential vendors nominated by States as part of the Ministry’s Vendor Development efforts.
The Committee believes that such measures would enable the State Government officials
for preparation of DPRs with great specification and on rationale basis to take into account
detailed survey and baseline facts.  The Committee further desires that the request of the
State Governments for incorporating the cost of preparation of DPRs in the project cost
should be considered at the earliest and the same may be laid down in the NLCPR
guidelines. (Para 1.1.10)
The Committee observes that no guidelines have been set up on frequency of
meeting of the NLCPR Committee and timeline for consideration  and sanctioning of
cleared projects.  Therefore, the Committee desires that the meeting of the NLCPR should
be convened periodically with a set time frame, known to the State Governments so that
42

43
requisite information may be furnished to the NLCPR Committee well in advance.  Also,
timelines for consideration and sanctioning of projects should be let up to avoid delays on
their part. (Para 1.1.11)
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS
The Committee may be apprised of the action plan prepared with regard to capacity building
i.e. technical and execution capabilities of State Government. (Para 1.4.3)
LACUNAE ON THE PART OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
The Committee would like to be apprised of the recommendations of inter-ministerial
working group on development of transport network in North Eastern Region alongwith
action taken by the Government thereon.  The Committee would further desire to know
about progress on 3000 MW Debang Power Project that was to be executed by NHPC,
Arunachal Package for road construction of 740 K.M, decision granting scheme of providing
100% central assistance to NER states for taking up river development works.
(Para 1.6.7)
FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO AIRPORTS IN NE
The Committee notes the inability of DoNER/NEC to provide 100% financial support to
airports in NE.  The Ministry of Finance may look into this aspect and find a way out for
the problem. (Para 1.9.4)
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee desires that Ministry of DoNER should take pro-active follow up
steps with the Ministry of Heavy Industries and also appeal to the private sector for making
investment for industries providing construction material in NER so that the problem of non
availability of construction material like cement, steel, etc is well taken up in the long
term. (Para 1.14.2)
SEPARATION OF ALLOCATIONS FOR NLCPR AND NEC SCHEMES FROM ANNUAL PLANS
OF STATES
The Committee, in its meeting held on 27
th July, 2015, came across the suggestion
of separation of allocation of NLCPR and NEC scheme from the annual plan of States.  The
Committee observes that against allocation of ````` 230 crore for the year 2014-15 under
NLCPR for the Government of Nagaland only ````` 54 crore was released thus leaving shortfall
of 76% of the sanctioned amount thereby instilling a huge deficit causing great concern and
loss for a resource constrained State i.e. Nagaland which ultimately to led to accumulation
of in completed projects and retained projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
to improve the process of selection and implementation of projects, the funds available for
NLCPR and NEC may be sub allocated to NER States upfront i.e. at the beginning of the
financial year so that State Government must be aware of funding pattern well in advance.
This will allow them to make ‘Priority List’ of the projects besides ensuring enhanced active
participation of States besides retaining the power of sanctioning and supervision of projects
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of DoNER. (Para 2.6.6)

44
FINAL APPROVED COST OF PROJECTS
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the final approved cost of the
projects must be communicated to the State Government well in advance so that project
gets a take off without financial snags.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that the Ministry of Finance, NITI Ayog and the line Ministries should take care of
grievances of the State Government on this count and accordingly redress the grievances by
apprising the State Government of information about the whole process of finalization of
cost of the projects well in advance so that the State Government get enough time for
suitable amendment in their project plan for better execution of the project. (Para  3.1.3)
ARBITARY RETENTION AND SANCTIONING OF PROJECTS
The Committee is of the view that the contention of NER State Governments about
the sanctioning of projects with much lower cost as compared to the proposed amount in the
DPR must be examined carefully keeping in account all cost consideration and ensuring that
the final approved cost of the project should not have a bearing on quality of infrastructure
creation as that may pose a great threat/hurdle to development process in NER.
(Para  3.2.3)
POWER SECTOR
The Committee understands that there is need to give boost to the transport and
communication infrastructure, thereby requiring Comprehensive Plan for laying road
network in a time bound manner to expedite the development of the projects in far-flung
areas of NER and accordingly it has recommended for striking a coordinated and
collaborative working in this direction. The Committee recommends that operational
efficiency of implementing agencies viz. BRO is required to be enhanced.  The Committee
further recommends that undertaken course of action must entail perceptile changes on the
ground level, thereby requiring also that the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of DoNER
must work in tandem to ensure optimum utilization of power generation potential in a time
bound manner as continued supply of power is itself a basic infrastructure for other
industries and development projects. (Para  3.3.4)
AGGREGATE TECHNICAL AND COMMERCIAL (AT&C) LOSSES
The Committee notes that the progress of major physical activities under
Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programmes (R-APDRP) by the
NER  States are at various stages of completion.  The Committee impresses that all out
efforts should be taken for expeditious completion of physical activities so that Aggregate
Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses are minimized/eliminated in NER.  The Committee
alos recommends that the Ministry of DoNER must impress upon the State Governments of
Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland submission of DPRs of part B projects for sanctioned to
enable the Ministry of Power to push reform programme in the direction of minimization
of distribution losses without further delay. (Para  3.5.4)
ENHANCING OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCY OF BORDER ROAD ORGANISATION
The Committee expresses its anguish to observe the evasive reply of Ministry of
DoNER.  The representatives of Government of Sikkim in Committee’s meeting held on

45
27th July, 2015 stated about operation efficiency of BRO i.e. limitation of 10 kms of road
construction by a single unit of BRO in a year which is in fact, also in the Committee’s
view point not at all impressive but rather disturbing.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates
its recommendation that the Ministry of DoNER take follow up action with MORTH
suggesting BRO for undertaking requisite steps for enhancing its operational efficiency for
meaningful completion of road project within set time frame. (Para  3.6.3)
OBSERVANCE OF NLCPR GUIDELINES
The Committee’s takes notes of merits of simplified procedure with regard to NLCPR
scheme, however, the Committee desires that line Ministry should adhere in relation to
vetting of DPRs of NLCPR projects to examine the broad outline feasibility and correctness
of DPRs, as per the guidelines for administration of NLCPR and avoid arbitrariness and
irrelevant observation for speedy clearance of projects and thereafter completion of projects
without time and cost overruns.  The Committee in its meeting held on 27
th July, 2015
during its interaction with representative of Government of Nagaland came across instances
of procedural delay due to retention of 37 projects of Government of Nagaland from
2010-11 till 2014-15 because vetting process kept on going as there was no time limit set
for vetting up DPRs. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation made in
Para 5.15.1 and recommends further that the Ministry of DoNER should examine the
possibility of outsourcing vetting of DPRs to competent public sector agencies like
W APCOS, NAPCONS, National Institute of Technology, Jorhat (Regional Engineering
College)  for speedy vetting of infrastructure projects. (Para  3.7.3)
TECHNICAL WING IN MINISTRY OF DONER
The Committee takes into account the details of timeline arrangement made for the
speedy implementation of project, however, is of the opinion that the purpose of setting up
the technical wing in the Ministry gets defeated due to lack of administrative power to
Superintendent Engineer to issue technical sanction of projects upto 2.5 crore only whereas
the minimum cost of the project to be considered for funding under NLCPR scheme is
` 3 crore, thereby, nullifying the role of technical wing in the Ministry of DoNER.  The
Committee finds that the Ministry of DoNER is silent in its ATN over the issue of need for
strenghthing of technical wing of the Ministry of DoNER, while the State Government of
NER are in agreement to the Committee’s recommendation made in Para 5.16.2 of 173
rd
Report. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation and desires that Ministry
of DoNER must reconsider its decision and accordingly apprise the Committee.
(Para  3.8.5)
COMMITTED FUNDING FOR NORTH EASTERN REGION
The Committee notes that the Ministry of DoNER has asked Planning Commission
(NITI Ayog) Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Railways to take the appropriate action
to eliminate the communication gap amongst those Ministries so far the issue of committed
finance for development of NER States is concerned.  However, the Committee feels that
the role of Ministry of DoNER does not end here just acting like a post office. It should
facilitate meetings of these Ministries to sort out the problem of fund to complete the

46
undertaken projects with a designated time frame or enhance executive capabilities as
pointed out by the Secretary, Department of Expenditure that it is not the lack of funds but
the lack of execution capabilities that is hindering the effective implementation of projects
in NER.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of DoNER must
proactively act in the matter. (Para  3.9.3)
MERGER OF NEC WITH MINISTRY OF DONER AND SHIFTING ITS HEADQUARTERS TO
SHILLONG
The Committee observes/finds the dichotomy of opinion amongst two organs of the
Government i.e. on the one hand Ministry of DoNER deposed before the Committee that the
only problem in shifting of the Ministry of DoNER from national capital to Shillong would
be that Secretary, Ministry of DoNER had to attend the meeting of the Committee of the
Secretaries (CoS) , otherwise there would be better -synergy in working of Ministry of
DoNER as coordinating role with State Government and monitoring the execution of projects
due to better on the spot supervision while on the other hand, the Cabinet Secretary had
advanced the view before the Committee that coordination should be best done from Delhi
where other line Ministries are located.  The Committee in its 173
rd Report made its
recommendation striking a balance amongst the views of Cabinet Secretary and the
Ministry of DoNER that headquarter of the Ministry be shifted to Shillong with a camp
office at Delhi.  In response to the Committee’s recommendation the Ministry of DoNER
is now back tracking from its earlier stand and is advancing the views of the Cabinet
Secretary and thus sculting  the merit of subject and without due scrutiny/examination. The
Committee, in this backdrop, reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 5.23.2 of 173
rd
Report. (Para  3.10.4)
The Committee further reiterates its recommendation for merger of NEC with the
Ministry of DoNER and designating the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER as the ex-officio
Secretary of NEC.  The Committee is of the view that the measure would enable the
Ministry of DoNER to have holistic planning for balanced economic development of NER.
(Para  3.10.5)
ROLES OF MINISTRY OF DONER AND NEC AND SYNERGY BETWEEN THEM
The Committee finds that the Ministry of DoNER has just indicated that the Ministry
is expanding its project -portfolios in certain fields viz. Animal Husbandary, Organic
Farming, horticulture and Rural livelihood but has not apprised the Committee of action
taken even in brief in these field and the outcome thereof. (Para  3.11.4)
The Committee further observes that the Government has not furnished its action
taken details even the views on the Committee’s recommendation on enhancing
administrative and sanctioning powers to facilitate the speedy and effective implementation
of development plan/projects/scheme/programme. The Committee, in this regard, in
conformity to the view of Government of Sikkim as expressed in Committee’s meeting held
on 27 th July, 2015 reiterates its recommendation that the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER
should have more administrative and sanctioning powers for entailing a booster dose to
development process in NER States. (Para  3.11.5)

47
The Committee is express its concern to observe that Government in its action taken
notes has not furnished any information on steps taken in regard to Committee’s
recommendation for strengthening the role of Ministry and measures undertaken/being
undertaken for striking operational synergy between the Ministry of DoNER and NEC. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 5.24.1 and suggests
that the Ministry of DoNER must play pro-action role. (Para  3.11.6)

MINUTES

XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Monday, the 29th June, 2015 in Committee Room “C”,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P . Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
6. Shri Vijay Goel
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
8. Shri Baishnab Parida
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
13. Shri Ramen Deka
14. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
15. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
16. Shri Kaushal Kishore
17. Shri Harish Meena
18. Shri Nagarajan P .
19. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
20. Shri Dilip Patel
21. Shri Lalubhai babubhai Patel
22. Dr. Satya Pal singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P . P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
51

52
*** Relate to other matters.
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary, Disaster Management
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
Shri Vivek Joshi, OSD (Public Policy Division)
Opening Remarks
2.0 * * * *
2.1 * * * *
3.0 * * * *
Oral Evidence on Hudhud Cyclone
3.1 * * * *
3.2 * * * *
3.3 * * * *
4. The Chairman, thereafter, reiterated the Committee’s decision taken during the Study Visit
of the Committee to Assam, Meghalaya and Manipur from 24th to 29th May, 2015, to conclude
the examination of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
173rd Report after hearing the Chief Secretaries of the remaining five State Governments namely,
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura in Delhi itself. The Committee then
decided that Chief Secretaries of the five States may be heard in Delhi instead of going on tour.
5. A Verbatim record of the Proceeding of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 
A.M.

XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27th July, 2015 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P . Bhattacharya   —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
5. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shrimati Kirron Kher
9. Shri Harish Meena
10. Shri Nagarajan P .
11. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
12. Shri Dilip Patel
13. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
14. Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
15. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P . P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of DoNER
1. Shri R. Vijay Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri A. M. Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Shri V .B. Pathak, Joint Secretary
53

54
4. Shri Jitendra Kumar Sinha, Joint Secretary
5. Shri S. L. Meena, Director
6. Shri K. Guite, Director
7. Shri S.P . Singh, Director
8. Shri B.N. Prasad, Director
9. Shri S.R. Meena, Director
10. Shri Ravindra Choudhary, Director
11. Shri Atul Basumatary, Director
12. Ms. Mercy Epao, Director
13. Ms. Rouikullai, Director
Representatives of North East Executive Council
1. Shri S. N. Brohmo Choudhury, Secretary
2. Shri P.K. H. Singh, Adviser, Transport & Communication
Representatives of Other Ministries
1. Shri Shambu Singh, Joint Secretary (NE), M/o Home Affairs
2. Smt. Pooja Kapur, Joint Secretary, M/o External Affairs
3. Ms. Sripriya Ranganathan, Joint Secretary (BM), M/o External Affairs
4. Shri V .K. Rajawat, Chief Engineer, M/o Road Transport  & Highways
5. Shri Arun Kumar, Joint Secretary, M/o Civil Aviation
6. Shri Umashankar, Joint Secretary, Department of Telecommunication
7. Shri I.S. Sastry, Joint Secretary, Department of Telecommunication
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Aggarwal, Joint Secretary, M/o Shipping
9. Shri S. Sreekumar, General Manager (Planning), Airport Authority of India
10. Shri Manav Kumar Saha, Director (Inland waterway Authority of India)
Representatives of Public Sector Untertakings
1. Shri S. Bhattacharya, Executive Director, North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing
Corporation Ltd., (NERAMAC)
2. Shri Dhiraj Thakuria, Managing Director (Acting), North Eastern Handicrafts and
Handlooms Development Corporation Ltd., (NEHHDC)
3. Shri B. Paul Muktieh, Chairman and Managing Director, NEDFi
Representatives of Arunachal Pradesh
1. Shri Ramesh Negi, Chief Secretary
2. Shri Sangeet Dubey, Deputy Resident Commissioner
Representative of Nagaland
Shri R. Binchilo Thong, Additional Chief Secretary & Development Commissioner

55
Representatives of Tripura
1. Shri Yashpal Singh, Chief Secretary
2. Dr. Rakesh Sarwal, Principal Resident Commissioner
Representatives of Mizoram
1. Dr. Ranbir Singh, Resident Commissioner
2. Shri Umakant, IFS, OSD, Government of Mizoram
3. Dr. Vanlalramsanga, Secretary, Planning Board
Representative of Sikkim
Shri Alok Kumar Shrivastava, Additional Chief Secretary
I. Obituary Reference
2.0 * * * *
II. Opening Remarks
2.1 The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and apprised them
with the agenda of the day i.e. to
(i) hear the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER and the Chief Secretaries of Arunachal
Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura on Action Taken in compliance
with the recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 173
rd Report on
Strengthening of the Working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region; and
(ii) * * *
3.0 The Chairman recalled that 173 rd Report was presented to the Parliament on 29 th August,
2013 and the Action Taken Note thereon was received from the Ministry of DoNER on 22 nd
September, 2014. He then drew the Members’ attention to the delay in submission of Action Taken
Note by the Ministry and also expressed his dissatisfaction with the evasive nature of Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations of the Committee as contained  in its 173
rd Report.
4.0 The Chairman, then, read out the contents of Rule 294 (1) of Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) about declaration of interests in the
context of agenda under consideration.
(On the arrival of the witnesses)
III. EXAMINATION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON 173rd REPORT
(i) Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of DoNER
5.0 The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed Secretary, Ministry of DoNER and other senior
officers representing Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura and asked them
*** Relate to other matter.

56
to apprise the Committee of the ground level improvement that has occurred in respect of every
aspect addressed by the Committee in its 173rd Report. The Chairman expressed the Committee’s
displeasure on the unsatisfactory responses of the Ministry, in its action taken note, to the
recommendations of the Committee contained in the said Report. The Chairman then asked the
Secretary, Ministry of DoNER to give a brief account on the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Committee, subsequent to which the representatives of State Governments
may give their evidence.
5.1 Initiating the discussion, the Secretary, Ministry of DoNER apologized for the unsatisfactory
Action Taken Note and assured the Committee that the Ministry was committed to take satisfactory
actions on all recommendations of the Committee. He then informed the Committee regarding the
steps taken in the last one year on strengthening the functioning of Ministry of DoNER like
advancing the timeline for project approval for expeditious implementation of projects, urging the
States and contractors to use software for preparation and vetting of DPRs for higher efficiency.
5.2  Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee highlighted various deficiencies
in action taken note of the Ministry particularly inconsistency and evasiveness in various replies.
The Members also flagged various issues pertaining to delay in project implementation, inefficiency
in preparation and vetting of DPRs, representation of States in NLCPR standing Committee etc. on
which they found the Ministry’s reply unsatisfactory. The Chairman then sought to know the
opinion of the representatives of State Governments on the various issues.
(ii) Evidence of Representatives of State Governments
5.3  The Chief Secretaries of Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh expressed their concern regarding
the delay in appraisal and retention of projects at the level of Ministry of DoNER and line Ministries
not giving priority to projects of North Eastern States which leads to inordinate delays. The
representatives of Nagaland, Manipur and Sikkim pointed out the issues like retention of projects
without sanction by the Ministry, the NLCPR and NEC schemes continuing to be the part of the
annual plan of the State in spite of Committee’s recommendation to the contrary, uncertainty of
fund flows, strengthening of technical wing of Ministry of DoNER, representation of State
Governments in NLCPR Committee etc.
5.4 Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications from Ministry of DoNER and line Ministries
on the issues highlighted by the State Governments’ representatives.
5.5 The Chairman then directed the Ministry of DoNER to furnish a revised comprehensive
Action Taken Note within 15 days.
IV . PRESENTATION OF REPORTS
6.0 The Committee nominated its Chairman and in his absence Shri D.  Raja, M.P . Rajya Sabha
and Shri Avinash Rai  Khanna, M.P. Rajya Sabha to present the 187th and 188th  Reports to the
Rajya Sabha  and Shri Raman Deka, MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shrimati Kirron Kher, MP,
Lok Sabha to lay these two reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
7.0 A Verbatim record of the Proceedings was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.47 
P.M.

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 18th December, 2015 in Committee Room
“A” Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Goel
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Kaushal Kishore
11. Shri Harish Meena
12. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
I. Opening Remarks
2.0 * * * *. The chairman then
informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and adopt the following
draft Reports:-
(i) * * * *
57
*** Relate to other matters.

58
(ii) Draft 194th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventy-Third Report on
strengthening of the working of the Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation
of policies, programmes, schemes and projects meant for the North Eastern Region;
and
(iii) * * * *
II. * * * *
3.0 * * * *
3.1 * * * *
III. Consideration and Adoption of Draft 194th Report
4.0 The Committee then took up the Draft 194th Report on Action Taken by the Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventy-Third Report on
strengthening of the working of the Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of policies,
programmes, schemes and projects meant for the North Eastern Region. After a brief discussion,
the report was adopted.
IV . * * * *
5.0 * * * *
5.1 * * * *
6.0 The Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors
and if necessary further vetting.
V. * * * *
7.0 * * * *
7.1 * * * *
8.0 * * * *
9. * * * *
10. The Committee authorized its Chairman to finalise the tour programme and obtain
permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
11. A Verbatim record of the Proceeding of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.