ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the 163rd Report on Working of Sardar 
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, 
Hyderabad
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Sravana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
172
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

37
C.S.(H.A.)-336
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 163rd Report on Working of Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy,
Hyderabad
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  5 th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  5 th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Sravana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—29
Chapter – I Recommendations/Observations  which  have been accepted by
the Government .................................................................................... 2—16
Chapter – II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................. 17—21
Chapter – III Recommendations/Observations  in respect  of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry ............. 22—27
Chapter – IV Recommend ations/Observations in respect of which  the final
replies of the Government  have not  been received by  the
Committee .............................................................................................. 28—29
5. O BSERV ATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS /CONCLUSIONS  OF  THE  C OMMITTEE  — A T A
GLANCE ...............................................................................................................................   30—32
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 33—36

COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
^2. Shri D. Raja
Â 3. Vacant
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
§ 9. Vacant
10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
@16. Vacant
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated w.e.f. 28 th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home  Affairs
in the vacancy caused by the appointment of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet.
Â Due to the resignation of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on
Home Af fairs w.e.f.  22.02.2013.
§  Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries.
@ due to the Appointment of Shrimati Santosh Chaudhary as Minister of state for Health and Family Welfare.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s 163
rd Report on Working of Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad.
2. The One Hundred and Sixty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
30
th August, 2012. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry
of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the
Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said
report to the Committee on 10
th December 2012.
3. The Committee considered the Action Taken Notes and the draft 172 nd Action Taken Report
thereon and adopted the same at its meeting held on 18 th July, 2013.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
18th July,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

ACRONYMS
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs
NPA National Police Academy
NSG National Security Guards
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
CFSL Central Forensic Science Laboratory
STW Special Tactics Wing
MCTP Mid Career Training Programme
SVPNPA Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy
LWE Left Wing Extremism
CSWT Central School of Weapons and Tactics
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research and Development
NICFS National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science
STW Special Tactics Wing
BSF Border Security Force
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force
CISF Central Industrial Security Force
ITBP Indo-Tibetan Border Police
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal
NIA National Investigation Agency
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation
LBSNAA Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training
ASCI Administrative Staff College Of India
RAW Research and Analysis Wing
NBCC National Building Construction Corporation
CAPF Central Armed Police Forces
UPSC Union Public Service Commission
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in its One Hundred and Sixty-third Report on the
working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad. The One Hundred Sixty-
third Report was presented to Rajya Sabha/laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on the 30
th August,
2012.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Para Nos 2.4.1, 2.5.10, 2.6.7, 2.8.7, 2.10.1, 2.11.2, 3.1.2, 3.2.7, 3.3.2, 3.3.3,
3.4.2, 3.3.5, 3.5.2, 3.6.5, 3.7.2, 3.9.1, 3.10.1, 3.11.3, 3.11.4, 3.11.5, 3.12.3, 3.13.4,
3.15.2, 3.15.7, 3.16.4, 3.16.5, 3.17.1, 3.18.3, 3.20 (of One Hundred and Sixty-third Report)
Total recommendations-29
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted twenty-eight
recommendations.
Chapter II:  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos 1.7.6, 1.11.6, 1.14.2, 1.15.4, 1.16.2,
2.3.4, 2.5.8, 2.8.5, 2.12.1, 3.8.1 (ibid) Total recommendations-10.
The Committee being convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry on ten
recommendations given in this chapter does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III:  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 1.6.5, 1.8.3, 1.10.3, 1.13.6, 2.8.1,
2.9.1, 2.13.2, 3.14.2, 3.19.1 (ibid) Total recommendations-9
The Committee is not convinced by the action taken on recommendations contained in this
Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action taken steps in respect
of those recommendations.
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government have not been received: Para Nos.  1.9.1, 1.12.2, 1.14.5 (ibid)  Total
recommendations-3
3. In respect of three recommendations given in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished
interim reply or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations
categorized in Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendations.
4. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in various Chapters in the succeeding chapters
and further observations/recommendations have been given wherever necessary.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
RECOMMNEDATION
FIELD VISIT
1.1 The committee is of the view that the basic training modules of the Academy must consist
of the courses keeping in view stark reality of society and the aim of the training programme
should be to impart knowledge and skill to face the ground challenges of the country. The
Committee also feels that training on management and administration should also be provided.
When the officers grow higher up the ladder, they are also required to handle administration and
finance. Training needs to be given on these aspects as well and some module may be prepared
for these aspects.
(Para 2.4.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.1.1 The present syllabus of Basic Training course of IPS probationers includes numerous
modules which have been designed to impart knowledge and skills and also requisite sensitization
keeping in view the ground realities of the society so as to prepare them to face the challenges
in the field. Field visits to acquaint them with the problems of vulnerable sections of the society
such as juveniles, marginalized communities, and weaker section of the society are organized.
1.1.2 While basic inputs on management and administration is provided during Phase-I training,
the probationers after their return from District Practical Training are given additional inputs on
aspects of supervision and financial management.
1.1.3 Furthermore, officers are given inputs on management and administration during their Mid
Career Training Programme.
1.1.4 In addition to above, the Academy has set-up a model police station which is a forum for
the officers to understand the running of the police station and the challenges being faced by the
Station House Officer. A model police station provides the experience in police station
administration, as well as public order management against crime investigation through simulation.
However the suggestion made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee has been noted.
RECOMMENDATION
MID CAREER TRAINING PROGRAMME (MCTP)
1.2 The Committee is of the opinion that exposure to best policing practices should also be
imparted at training stage, if feasible, preferably in countries with similar democratic political set
up. The Committee believes that training modules consisting of foreign collaborations having police
agencies of the country having similar political and economic condition as that of India would
immensely impact so far as their policing skill is concerned. The Academy may consider this aspect.
(Para 2.5.10 )
2

3
ACTION TAKEN
1.2.1 In the MCTPs our police officers are travelling to developed democratic countries like UK
and Australia and are exposed to modern democratic methods of policing. Now for selecting new
foreign collaboration for MCTP training their tie up with police agencies of foreign countries is
being insisted. A proposal for sending IPS probationers for foreign experience under Phase-II
training is being examined in consultation with Min. of Finance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.2.3 The Committee may be apprised of the final decision taken in regard to sending IPS
probationers for foreign experience.
RECOMMENDATION
SPECIAL TACTICS WING
1.3 The Committee notes the initiatives and activities taken by NP A in imparting special
tactical training to police officers. The Committee, however, also takes note of the fact that STW
is having its manpower on ad-hoc basis. This will not help in better functioning of the work.
Efforts may be made to put in place dedicated manpower at the earliest. Directional level tactics
course for senior officers of the rank of DIG and above be started at the earliest. Fund
requirements of NP A for developing allotted land for tactical training, separate STW building,
procurement of equipments and weapons may be looked into promptly so as to make the Special
Tactics Wing par excellence. This level of excellence may further be used for revenue generation
by imparting such training to the police officers of other countries.
(Para 2.6.7 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.3.1 Tactics course for senior police officers has been introduced after the visit of the
Committee. This course is called the ‘Management of Tactical Operations’ Course and was
conducted from 30.04.2012 to 05.05.2012. Another course in the present calendar year is
scheduled to be held from 11.12.2012 to 20.12.2012. Second course has been re-designed
keeping in view the feedback from the first course, as this is an on-going process of making
the course relevant for officers on directional level. For developing of allotted land, the initial
plans have been prepared. The Special Tactics Wing has already developed a level of competency
to run courses for Police Officers of other countries and such courses may be planned, in
future.
RECOMMENDATION
TRAINING PROGRAMMES : INDOOR VS. OUTDOOR TRAINING
1.4 Tie up with foreign police agencies would definitely give an opportunity to the trainee
officers to understand the nuances of working of police agencies in other countries. The
Committee is of the considered view that the faculty exchange programmes with other foreign
police agencies and training institutes would give an opportunity for exchange of views among the
faculty and to refresh their knowledge. The committee, therefore, recommends that tie-up with
foreign institutes for both trainees and faculty may be organized for better exposure.
(Para 2.8.7 )

4
ACTION TAKEN
1.4.1 To understand the working of police agencies of other countries till now there was tie up
with following three foreign Universities under MCTP Programme:
(i) Australia – Charles Stuart University in collaboration wit the Indian School of Business,
Hyderabad.
(ii) London, UK – Cambridge University, UK in collaboration with the OP Jindal Global
University, Gurgaon.
(iii) London, UK – London Business School - IIM, Ahmadabad in collaboration with the
London Business School, London, UK.
1.4.2  Whenever, MCTP programmes conducted abroad, two faculty members of NPA are also
deputed abroad which helps improve the ties with foreign institutes and trainees.
1.4.3  The officers of NSG/BSF/CRPF/NIA/CBI etc. are deputed to France/USA/Israel/Japan etc.
to attend various training programmes/ seminars.
RECOMMENDATION
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF POLICE STRUCTURES AND POLICE SYSTEM
1.5 The Committee feels that teaching of a comparative study of police structures and police
system over the world at NP A at the inducting stage also would enable the probationers to have a
much wider horizon and a much larger perspectives, and would further enable them to introduce small
improvement in police working on the basis of their knowledge of the overall police system and
police structures. There should be a course on comparative police systems. NP A may look into this.
(Para 2.10.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.5.1 Recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee shall be implemented for the
training of IPS probationers from 65 RR (2012) batch onwards.
RECOMMENDATION
TRAINING ON ADMINISTRATIVE, FINANCIAL AND SOCIAL ISSUES.
1.6 The Committee desires that NP A may have a relook at the present modules and incorporate
specific aspects on administrative and financial management if they are not sufficiently covered.
(Para 2.11.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.6.1 The present syllabus of Basic Training course of IPS probationers includes numerous
modules which have been designed to impart knowledge and skills and also requisite sensitization
keeping in view the ground realities of the society so as to prepare them to face the challenges
in the field. Field visits to acquaint them with the problems of vulnerable sections of the society
such as juveniles, marginalized communities, and weaker section of the society are organized.
1.6.2 While basic inputs on management and administration is provided during Phase-I training,
the probationers after their return from District Practical Training are given additional inputs on
aspects of supervision and financial management.

5
1.6.3 Furthermore, officers are given inputs on management and administration during their Mid
Career Training Programme.
1.6.4 In addition to above, the Academy has set-up a model police station which is a forum for
the officers to understand the running of the police station and the challenges being faced by the
Station House Officer. A model police station provides the experience in police station
administration, as well as public order management against crime investigation through simulation.
However the suggestion made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee has been noted.
RECOMMENDATION
LAW AND JURISPRUDENCE IN TRAINING MODULES
1.7 The Committee agrees that an in-depth understanding of jurisprudential principles would
inject legal insight to the IPS officer which would certainly help them solve the legal issues
involved in the case. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is further scope for enhancing the
module on law and jurisprudence in the training curriculum of IPS officers. Therefore, the entire
module on law and jurisprudence may be revisited involving some legal experts.
(Para 3.1.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.7.1 The Academy has initiated steps to have a committee involving legal experts to revisit entire
module on Law and Jurisprudence in the training of IPS probationers.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.7.2 The DRSC on Home Affairs may be apprised of the conclusions arrived by the
committee involving legal experts, set up to revisit training module in Law and
Jurisprudence for IPS Officers and the action proposed.
RECOMMENDATION
CASE STUDY
1.8 The Committee hopes that the introduction of integrated Training format would enable the
IPS officer to have in-depth understanding of rejoinder of crimes. The format may be thoroughly
assessed after one year.
(Para 3.2.7 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.8.1 Since integrated training method has been adopted in 2012, follow-up study in the form of
evaluation of the efficacy of the method will be undertaken in July-August, 2013. By that time 64
RR Probationers would also complete their district training as well.
RECOMMENDATION
ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES AND INTEGRATION
1.9 The Committee is of the view that since policing does have a bearing on the lives of
individuals and, therefore, Police Personnel, particularly officers should possess high moral and
ethical values so as to arrest the declining trend in quality and standard of public life. The
Committee believes that when the pursuit of social commitment and integrity is effectively imbibed
into police personnel irrespective of rank and file, the malaise and qualms of corruption could be
eradicated from public life to a large extent. Transparency and public accountability is a pre-requisite

6
for good governance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training modules prepared
for probationers and also for in-service officers must cover the lessons on ethical traits and moral
behaviour.
(Para 3.3.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.9.1 The Academy is committed to prepare leaders for Indian Police who will lead the force with
high integrity, uprightness and a strong sense of service to the people. The emphasis on ethics and
moral values is not only reflected in the inputs given on the subject during the training but also
permeates through curricular and extra- curricular activities at the Academy. The strong sense of
values, the practical dimension of courage and uprightness is imparted not only through class room
training but also through outdoor training, team activities and individual exposures. The emphasis
is laid on strengthening the inner moral compass in individual probationers so as to enable them
to withstand pressures that they might face in the field.
1.9.2 Eminent persons of impeccable integrity from all walks of life including police are invited
as expert speakers to interact with the IPS probationers and inspire them by their personal example.
In addition, field visits and experience sharing modules also help in this regard.
RECOMMENDATION
ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES AND INTEGRATION
1.10 The Committee observes that Officer is generally vested with the power which extends at
times to taking life and liberty of the people but what matters is how he exercises his power.
Therefore, emphasis should also be given as to how to use the power. The Committee is also given
to understand that in other countries like Japan training curriculum contain the constant emphasis
on ethical aspects in policing so that while doing a particular job, a set of principles has to be
adhered to. The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate emphasis should be laid in the
training programme of Officers Trainee and NP A should teach probationers good policing practice
which is practicised globally. Modules on ethical values and morality should also be included in
the MCTP programmes as it is equally required at that stage as well.
(Para 3.3.3 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.10.1  Focus of the Academy training is not only to acquaint the IPS Probationers with the
powers vested in the police by law but also on the judicious exercise of those powers. Issues of
Police Legitimacy are covered as part of exercises of power by the police in various professional
aspects. During Basic course Trainee Officers are sensitised on ethical and social aspects through
‘composite code module’ and ‘Rights based policing’ which cultivate correct ethical and social
attitudes. Researches on issues of police legitimacy and best practices being followed in other
countries are shared with the IPS Probationers.
1.10.2  Committee’s suggestion of including Modules on ethical values and morality in MCTP
course has been accepted. SVP NPA will be instructed accordingly.
RECOMMENDATION
TRAINING MODULES ON LEFT-WING EXTREMISM AND TERRORISM
1.11 The left wing extremism is spreading its tentacles across the country and a well prepared

7
module needs to be prepared for training on dealing with this. The Greyhound of Andhra Pradesh
Police has been successful in dealing with this and they can be a role model in regard to this
training. If possible, the probationers may be attached with Greyhounds for some period. NP A
should become centre of excellence in giving training on dealing with left wing extremism.
(Para 3.4.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.11.1  The basic training at the Academy takes into account the seriousness of the problem and
spread of the LWE. The Academy has adapted its training to equip the probationers with necessary
skills in Jungle Field Craft and Tactics. The Tactical Wing of the Academy provides extensive basic
inputs in this regard which are supplemented by a week-long attachment with the Greyhounds of
AP and another attachment with Central School of Weapons & Tactics (CSWT), BSF Indore.
1.11.2  The emphasis is not only in imparting skills in Field Craft and Tactics but also ‘Winning
Hearts and Minds’ of the local population. The success stories in this field are shared by the
officers who have successfully implemented these strategies on the field with demonstrable
results.
1.11.3 The Academy through its robust Special Tactics Wing is conducting a large number of In-
Service training courses to deal with the problem of Left-Wing Extremism and is striving to
become a Centre of Excellence.
RECOMMENDATION
ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES AND INTERATION
1.12 The Committee desires that the message of the Preamble to the Constitution of India, being
“Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic” should not only be read and understood by
the police personnel but should also be imprinted into their ‘hearts and minds’ to be reflected into
their actions while dealing with actual incidents. Keeping in view the fact that India is a vast
country with complex social structure i.e. multi-lingual, multi-ethnic, multi- religious, training
modules must give emphasis to these aspects. A sense of justice and sensitivity towards the people
particularly of weaker sections should be initiated by them.
(Para 3.3.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.12.1 In order to enable the probationers to imbibe the values of Democracy and Secularism
enshrined in the preamble of the Constitution, modules on National Integration and Communal
Harmony are regularly conducted at the Academy. The endeavour of the Academy is to
inculcate in the probationers the concern for Rights of the Citizens as against Authority of
the police.
RECOMMENDATION
PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILING
1.13 The Committee desires that psychological profiling may be made use of for better
counselling and de-stressing. Yoga is a good tool for de-stressing and to rein in the mind and this
may be used to the maximum extent.
(Para 3.5.2 )

8
ACTION TAKEN
1.13.1 The Academy uses technique of Psychological Profiling for individual and group counselling
of IPS probationers. The domains of measurement through psychological tests include:–
· Personality correlates of leadership
· Cognitive and problem-solving styles
· Interpersonal orientation
· Psycho-socio correlates of stress
· Conflict Management Style
· Emotional Intelligence
· Team Building Competence
· Creativity
1.13.2 On case-to-case basis, intensive individual counseling is also given.
1.13.3 Y oga is an important part of Outdoor Training curriculum. Trained Yoga Instructors impart
Yoga training not only to IPS Probationers but also to other in-service course participants.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.13.4  The Committee hopes that ‘Psychological profiling Module’ as used by NPA for
training to probationers and in-service police officer would go a long way in counseling and
de-stressing management.
RECOMMENDATION
PEOPLE-FRIENDLY POLICING
1.14 The image of Government depends more on the reaction of the rank and file of the law
enforcing agencies particularly police officers towards the common man, when the common man
approaches them in the hour of need. The Committee, therefore, feels that police being at the
cutting edge level needs to adopt courteous behaviour and friendly temperament so that people may
approach them without fear and with faith to have redressal of their grievances. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that training modules and practical training courses as imparted by NP A
must be included all behavioural and attitudinal aspect and the Academy should work on this. The
Ministry should oversee the implementation of the Mission. An early decision may be taken in this
regard.
(Para 3.6.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.14.1  As part of the training, a Model Police Station is being run at the Academy. It has a
distinct reception area to highlight to the probationers the need for courteous and empathetic
behaviour by the police while receiving complainants, victims of crime, witnesses, etc. The
simulated exercises are conducted to train the probationers in empathetic dealing with victims of
crime.
1.14.2 In order to train police officers at the cutting edge level in States for courteous and friendly
behaviour, a project is already being implemented by BPR&D under the guidance of MHA.

9
RECOMMENDATION
ACCESS OF SUB-ORDINATES TO SENIOR POLICE OFFICER
1.15 The Committee firmly believes that open access of constabulary to higher police personnel
and hassle-free communication among them would ensure higher degree of trust and faith amongst
each other which would not only lead to redressal of grievances of constabulary but would also
help in taking strategic decision, formulation of pragmatic plans based on the situation and
experience at grass root level and execution thereof to achieve set objectives. This will improve the
efficiency of the forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training modules should
invariably emphasise this. This needs to be done both in the NP A as well as the training courses
of States and District Training Centres.
(Para 3.7.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.15.1 The Academy training lays emphasis on leadership and team building both of which require
great amount of trust and faith from the constabulary which forms more than 90% of the police
human resources. To promote open access of constabulary to senior police leadership and also for
effective grievance redressal, the IPS probationers are exposed to various traditional platforms like
weekly parade, orderly room, surprise visits, Sainik Sammelan etc. In addition, forums such as
‘KhulaManch’ which introduces democratization to the officer trainees and ‘Pre-dinner talk’ which
allows free and frank discussions between officer trainees and luminaries visiting the Academy. In
addition to this, they are also exposed to modern technological tools like SMS, mobile phones,
e-mails etc for open and better access to the constabulary. The important role played by
constabulary and subordinate officers in strategy formulation, pragmatic solution and execution of
set objectives is emphasized in the training.
1.15.2 As suggested by the Committee greater emphasis shall be laid on this by the Academy in
its various training modules. For doing the same at State and District Police Training Centres, MHA
will also direct the BPR&D to issue an advisory to all the States in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.15.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by BPR&D in regard
to issuing guidelines to States and District Training centers.
RECOMMENDATION
TRAINING ON COURT PROCEDURES
1.16 Though moot court proceedings at the Academy are good and give theoretical aspect but do
not give the true picture of the courts. Dealing with court cases is an important aspect of the
policing. The actual procedure of the courts is not only complex but cumbersome also, and the
attachment of the probationers for a period of seven days does not appear sufficient. The committee,
therefore, recommends that probationers should be given sufficient actual court exposure so that
inadequacies on the part of the agencies of the Government do not become a stumbling block in the
disposal of the case. NPA should, therefore, consider to give sufficient emphasize on this.
(Para 3.9.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.16.1 In view of the recommendations made by the Committee, the Academy has enhanced the

10
duration of attachment of the IPS Probationers with the Public Prosecutor and District Court as
part of their District Practical Training with a view to give them greater exposure to the court
procedures. In addition a ‘Çourt Craft’ module has been introduced in the basic training.
1.16.2 NICFS, New Delhi conducts various joint training courses on court proceedings for police
officers, prison officers, judicial officers and prosecutors.
RECOMMENDATION
COMMUNITY POLICING
1.17 The Committee notes that one of the Police Mission set out by the Prime Minister is on
Community policing and the Ministry is considering the report of the Committee thereon. After it
is decided to implement it, NP A may take a cue from this and include it in the course. On the
basis of experience of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, NP A may prepare a manual on community policing
which can be useful for probationers of NP A and all other State’ s Police Organization. The
Committee views that community policing implies people’ s participation in local security
arrangement and, therefore, leads to much interaction between the police and people. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the mission on Community Policing should be included in
the State and District Police Training Centres of various States and literature procured at the centre
must also be disseminated.
(Para 3.10.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.17.1 Community Policing is part of the National Police Mission undertaken by BRR&D. The
Academy also provides in depth inputs into the concept of Community Policing. The trainees are
also acquainted with various community policing initiatives taken in different parts of the country.
The Academy utilizes the presence of police officers, academicians, eminent resource persons from
the different parts of world, who visit the Academy in connection with Mid-Career Training
Programmes, to interact with and share their experiences on community policing with the trainees.
As suggested by the committee, the Academy shall undertake the task of preparation of Manual on
Community Policing.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.17.2 Manual on community policing may be prepared at the earliest and circulated to the
State and District Police Training Centers.
RECOMMENDATION
DEALING WITH THE CHALLENGES OF TERRORISM
1.18 Though after reviewing the police response to Mumbai attack and finding that there was
big gap between the training imparted and the actual requirement of tactical skill to combat the
potential menace of terrorism, a separate wing called Special Tactics Wing(STW) has been set up
in NP A with the objective of imparting training to State Police and Central Armed Police Forces
to enable them to conduct tactical operation against the terrorists in jungle and urban environment,
the efforts are not complete as yet. The urban intervention training infrastructure is likely to be
completed in 2013. This may be completed as per schedule.
(Para 3.11.3 )

11
ACTION TAKEN
1.18.1 The urban interventions training infrastructure will be completed as per schedule.
RECOMMENDATION
DEALING WITH THE CHALLENGES OF TERRORISM
1.19 NP A should think and act ahead of the terrorists on the possible techniques and
technologies likely to be used by terrorists and start training in advance. Government may provide
necessary infrastructure to NP A. Training on preventive steps to prevent the possible terrorist attack
is required. Lesson from USA are required to be learnt where 9/11 incident has not been repeated.
The Committee recommends that NP A has to take initiative to make headway in training in this
regard.
(Para 3.11.4 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.19.1 Thinking ahead of terrorists on the possible techniques and technologies are part and parcel
of our Anti-terrorists training modules. To be at par with developed countries, the faculty
associated with Tactical Training has been given exposure by sending them abroad for undergoing
following tactical courses:
Sl. No. Faculty Names & Designation Course Name Course Dates
1 Shri Praveen Kumar Sinha, 1. Critical Incident and 25.09.11
Deputy Director (Tac& OD) Tactical Response Course, to
Los Angeles, California, USA 01.10.11
2 Shri Parveen Bakshi, 1. Critical Incident and 25.09.11
Assistant Director (Tac) Tactical Response conducted to
by FBI, Los Angeles, California. 01.10.11
2. ATA-9245 Post Blast 23.07.12
Investigation (PBI) at to
Moyock, North Carolina, USA 10.08.12
3 Shri Amit Choudhary 1. Explosives Incident and 04.04.11
DC(Tac) Counter measures Course to
at Moyock, North Carolina, USA 20.05.11
2. ATA-8447 Advanced Explosives 10.09.12
Incident Countermeasures to
Course (AEIC) at Moyock, North 02.10.12
Carolina, USA
4 Shri Rajiv Panwar, AC(Tac) 1. ATA-8451 Crisis Response 22.10.12
(Nominated) Team Course (CRT) at Montross, to
Virginia, USA 23.11.12
RECOMMENDATION
DEALING WITH THE CHALLENGES OF TERRORISM
1.20 The Committee is of the view that since the country is facing terrorist threats counter

12
Intelligence techniques and anti-terrorism operations need to be included in the curriculum so that
the officer who come out are well-versed in the counter-terrorism intelligence techniques.
(Para 3.11.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.20.1 During basic course, IPS Probationers are exposed to various intelligence techniques, latest
equipments and related exercises. They also remain attached with SIB, Andhra Pradesh for practical
exercises to understand intelligence operations.
RECOMMENDATION
INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
1.21 The Committee is surprised to find that although probationers are given elaborate training
on the intelligence collection and analysis but there is no dearth of intelligence failures which led
to massive incidents killing several innocent persons. Though, intelligence success is rarely reported
in the media it failure attracts immediate attention of the media besides immensely affecting the
lives of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training modules on intelligence
collection and analysis must be comprehensive and the same may be replicated at the State and
District Police Training Centre.
(Para 3.12.3 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.21.1  MHA agrees with the view of the Committee, and will take up with BPR&D to advise
states to replicate training modules on the intelligence collection and analysis at the State level
Police training centers.
1.21.2  Some of the training institutes conducting intelligence training courses are:
1. IB, Training School, 35 Sardar Patel Marg, New Delhi.
2. Maharashtra Intelligence Academy, Pune, Maharashtra.
3. G Training School, BSF, New Delhi.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.21.3 The Committee feels that intelligence collection and analysis is a significant course
of action during criminal investigation, and therefore, NPA management may think of
imparting ‘Specialized training course on intelligence collection and analysis to police
officers inclined towards criminal investigation. Due consultation in chalking out the
suitable training module can be taken from IB, CBI, NIA and BPR&D. Once the training
module is finalized, it should also be replicated at State and District Police Training Centers.
RECOMMENDATION
LAW AND ORDER
1.22 The Committee notes the doctrine of use of minimum force by the police personnel to deal
with the volatile and peaceful demonstration. However, the people in general have police-phobia
as the impression of colonial attitude of the police personnel persists in the minds of the public.
Some of the police outrages over incidents linger in the hearts of the people. The Committee,

13
therefore, strongly recommends that probationers and in-service officers should emphasize on
handling the peaceful and volatile demonstration with acute care and sympathy towards the people
because India is a democratic country and people of the nation have every right to express their
genuine demands thought peaceful demonstration within the parameters of the Constitution. The
officers when on duty required to take on the spot decision as there may not be time to consult
seniors. Therefore, emphasis should be laid in the training on dealing with such situations.
(Para 3.13.4 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.22.1 The underlying thread of training of IPS Probationers at the Academy is to instill in them
the role and responsibility of police in a democratic society. While training them in dealing with
demonstrations, the Fundamental Rights [under Article 19(1b) of Constitution] of the citizens are
emphasized. Parallel to authority-based policing, the training focuses on Rights (of citizens) based
policing. The Doctrine of minimum use of force forms the basis of training in Maintenance of
Public Peace and Order.
1.22.2 As part of the training, both probationers and in-service officers are exposed to newer less
lethal methods of crowd control. The Academy collaborates with DRDO in disseminating
information about new Less Lethal Crowd Control Technology.
RECOMMENDATION
NATIONAL SECURITY/INTERNAL SECURITY
1.23 India is a dominant player of the global economy and global politics and there are a lot
of geo-political and the national security issues which are of utmost concern, therefore training
modules covering National Security issues are indispensable. Therefore, training modules should not
only cover the course in terms of terrorism or left wing extremism but also in terms of security of
vital installations like Dams, Atomic Energy installations, Refineries and various other security
considerations with in the territory of the country.
(Para 3.15.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.23.1 Keeping in view the importance of National Security in globalized world, the curriculum of
IPS Probationers was amended in the year 2010 and a new subject titled Internal Security has been
introduced. As part of the subject, the trainees are not only given inputs on the importance of
security issues and its impact on economy but are also acquainted with the nuances of current
challenges to Internal Security especially Left Wing Extremism (LWE), Urban Terrorism, etc. The
special module is conducted to acquaint them in the important tasks of security of vital
installations.
RECOMMENDATION
NATIONAL SECURITY/INTERNAL SECURITY
1.24 The Committee is of the view that Officer Trainees should be imparted training to handle
the latest and sophisticated weapons to ensure that the police are always ahead of the criminals
in terms of handling guns and weapons. Early action may be taken to have the infrastructure for
urban intervention training.
(Para 3.15.7 )

14
ACTION TAKEN
1.24.1 The endeavour of the Academy is to acquaint the probationers with latest weaponry and
gadgetry available, to deal with the challenges of terrorism, insurgency, Left Wing Extremism etc.
The Academy procures the sophisticated weapons and gadgetry to train the probationers in their
use. The Special Tactics Wing of the Academy is constantly upgrading its capacity to impart
tactical training in jungle operations and dealing with urban terrorism including room intervention,
hostage rescue etc.
RECOMMENDATION
EMERGING AREAS OF CRIMES
1.25 In the modern world, police officers need training not only on cyber laws, but also the
nuances of hacking to decode encrypted e-mails and other messages. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that NPA should give thorough training to the police officers to deal with
computer hacking and related cyber crimes.
(Para 3.16.4 )
1.25.1 The Committee understands that a lot of sophistication is being brought into the crime, and
therefore, corresponding modification in training modules to cover changing aspects of crime are
but natural. The Committee desires that there is an urgent need to reverse the general perception
“that the police are always behind the criminals in terms of training and knowledge as well as
the use of arms and weapons”. NPA may take a lead in this regard.
(Para 3.16.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.25.2 In order to enable the Officer Trainees to face the emerging challenges of Cyber Crimes,
extensive inputs on investigation of Cyber Crimes are given. Resource Persons, both from
Government and Private IT sector, are invited to expose the officer to the latest tools and
techniques in Cyber Forensics.
1.25.3 The Cyber Forensic Lab s at the Academy have been strengthened with latest Cyber Forensic
tools. Hands-on sessions on the use of such tools to investigate Cyber Crimes are conducted for
officer trainees.
1.25.4 The Academy also conducts the In-Service courses on ‘Cyber Crimes’ at two levels. One
at the Basic level and another at the advanced level. Simulated exercises that involve seizing of
digital evidence and analyzing digital data using cyber forensic tools are conducted for the officers.
Constant updating in this regard is emphasized at the Academy in order to keep the police officers
abreast with latest advances in digital technology so as to enable them to meet the challenges
thrown by sophisticated and tech savvy criminals.
RECOMMENDATION
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF WORKING OF THE ACADEMY AND ORGANIZATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS(ODIS)
1.26 The Committee notes the key concern areas affecting the working of the academy and is
of the considered view that in order to over come key concern areas of the working of the academy,
specific Organizational, Development Interventions(ODI) are required to enable the Academy to
achieve its objectives and mission. Some of the issues such as staff/faculty, research wing and

15
foreign training have already been dealt, in detail, in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee,
however, recommends that the Ministry may consider all the issues and find solution to them so
as to strengthen the Academy. The Ministry may help NP A management undertake concerted efforts
to implement organizational development interventions to strengthen organizational structure and to
enhance the functional proficiency of the Academy.
(Para 3.17.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.26.1 The Academy has been continuously endeavouring for organizational development and
improvement. The recommendation of the DPSC for concerted efforts in Organisational
Development Intervention is welcome and the Academy is in complete agreement with the same.
The NPA shall prepare master plan for organizational development intervention and undertake efforts
in this direction.
FURTHER OBSERV ATION
1.26.2 The Committee may be apprised of ‘Master Plan’ as proposed to be prepared by NPA
for Organizational Development Intervention and steps/effort taken in that direction.
RECOMMENDATION
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NPA
1.27 The Committee hopes that the outcome of performance evaluation of NP A done by
Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad would be of immense use for
strengthening NP A and its programmes. The Committee also desires that BPR&D may conduct an
independent evaluation of the basic and MCTP Training imparted at NP A.
(Para 3.18.3 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.27.1  The BPR&D has been requested for conducting an independent evaluation of the basic and
MCTP training imparted at NPA with the help of senior retired police officers. These retired and
senior police officers will also be asked to re-visit the existing training modules in NPA and suggest
ways and means to make them more field oriented by introducing practical exercises, case studies,
simulation exercises, field visits etc so that the training becomes more relevant for the field. The
outcome of the above evaluations will be sent to MHA after receipt of the reports.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.27.2 The Committee would like to be apprised of the report on independent evaluation of
the basic and METP Training imparted at NPA when submitted by BPR&D and further action
taken thereon.
RECOMMENDATION
SWOT-ANALYSIS OF THE WORKING OF THE ACADEMY
1.28 The Committee has dealt most of the issues in preceding paras and gave its
recommendations. One area of concern for the Committee is lack of priority for training for police
in the States. This is a big challenge and needs to be addressed. The Ministry of Home Affairs

16
may start new scheme for strengthening police training in the States. On making Academy more
relevant and reducing gap between rules of law and field reality, existing modules may be revisited
with more field orientation.
(Para 3.20 )
ACTION TAKEN
1.28.1 (a) Based on the training gap analysis done by BPR&D for the various States and UTs in
2008-09 and on MHA’s recommendations, the 13
th Finance Commission has sanctioned Rs.2266
crores for strengthening the training infrastructure in various States. (b) A meeting was held with
the ADG (Trg)/IG (Trg) of all the States and UTs in BPR&D Hqrs., on 09.11.2012 wherein the
States have been requested to re-assess the training capacity gap taking into consideration the basic
training, the pre-promotional courses and the regular refresher courses for the various ranks in the
police. The above data will be analysed in BPR&D Hqrs. (c) The Government has also sanctioned
a Training Intervention Plan in which HRD studies will be carried out in 20 States/UTs and
recommendations will be made on training interventions.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.28.2 The Committee hopes that the amount of Rs. 2266 crore sanctioned by 13
th Finance
Commission would go long way for strengthening the training infrastructure in various
States. After the HRD studies are completed, a road map may be prepared for training
intervention in the State Police at the earliest.

17
17
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
RECOMMENDATION
SELECTION OF FACULTY
2.1 The Committee feels that since the nature and style of crimes are changing due to
technological development, modernization and sophistication, faculty needs to be chosen with great
care. Stringent yardsticks have to be laid down for the selection of faculty not only at the teaching
staff level but also at the level of Assistant Directors and Deputy Directors. The teaching staff
from all fields viz, law, business management, human resource management, police science, forensic
sciences, criminology, sociology, psychology, etc. must be selected with due care keeping in view
the requirement of the academy and also taking into account its role and the responsibility. The
Committee also understands that the post of the Assistant Directors, is very important and their
selection should be done through a stringent selection procedure. High caliber, integrity and
efficiency should be the criteria for selection.
(Para 1.7.6 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.1.1 As per present practice, Director of the Academy selects the faculty who meets the
essential criteria and recommend his/her name for posting to the Academy. Appointment of the
recommended officers are made on their services being made available by the State Government.
In addition, Director NPA is authorised to invite specialists from the fields of law, business
management, human resource management, police science, forensic sciences, criminology,
sociology, psychology, etc as guest faculty.
RECOMMENDATION
RESEARCH WING OF NPA
2.2 The committee is given to understand that the National Institute of Administrative Research
(NIAR) was established by LBSNAA, Mussorie in 1995 as a Training and Research Wing of the
Academy. The committee recommends that the NP A may set up an Institute for ‘Applied Police
Research’ instead of a Centre for Applied Research on the line of National Institute of
Administrative Research (NIAR). An early decision may be taken and sufficient infrastructure may
be created near the campus of the Academy for the purpose.
(Para 1.11.6 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.2.1 Proposal for creation of centre for applied Police Research at NPA is being examined in
consultation with Ministry of Finance.

18
RECOMMENDATION
RECRUITMENT TO IPS
2.3 The Committee in its 161 st  Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) made a
recommendation for exploring the possibility of conducting a separate examination for IPS where
the attitude and aptitude of the candidate must be thoroughly tested besides their mental makeup
and inclination for policing. The Committee further recommended that the Government may impress
upon UPSC to conduct a separate examination for recruiting of IPS officer and SVP NP A may
also be consulted in this regard. The Committee, reiterating the recommendation made in its 161
st
Report, desires that the Ministry may hold consultation with the DoPT and UPSC and take an early
decision for holding separate examination.
(Para 1.14.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.3.1 Conducting of a separate examination for IPS Officer is being examined in consultation with
State Governments, UPSC and DoPT.
RECOMMENDATION
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
2.4 The Committee while taking note of budgetary provision to meet the plan and non-plan
expenditure and also of the trends of actual expenditure during last five years observes that
budgetary provisions have been optimally spent. The Committee further desires that earmarked
allocation for on-going infrastructural projects would be released in time for completion of projects
without time and cost overruns. The Committee also recommends that sufficient allocations may be
made available to NPA to complete the ongoing infrastructure projects, CNE Works and other new
projects and also for strengthening publication division. Grants may also be provided for setting
up the Research Institute in case it is decided to set up the same.
(Para 1.15.4 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.4.1 Non availability of fund has not been found as a constraint to complete the ongoing
infrastructure projects.
RECOMMENDATION
AUDIT OBJECTION
2.5 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that out of 20 audit paras on non-
pan expenditure, only one para was dropped and response to the 19 paras were further objected
to. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that due care may be taken in incurring
expenditure, both plan and non-plan.
(Para 1.16.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.5.1 Recommendation is noted for future compliance.

19
RECOMMENDATION
INDOOR VS. OUTDOOR TRAINING
2.6 Though the quantum of the indoor and outdoor training cannot be fixed in terms of
percentage, however, sufficient outdoor training must be imparted to have the physical fitness of
the police personnel while indoor training should be so adequately imparted to ensure that the
police personnel possess requisite understanding of law and jurisprudential knowledge. The NPA
may have a relook at the present curriculum and reviewed with experts.
(Para 2.3.4 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.6.1 A comprehensive review of the Indoor and Outdoor training was carried out in Workshops
held in the year 2009 in the Academy in which police officers from all over India and other experts
took part. After extensive deliberations, the recommendations of the Workshop resulted in
formulation of new IPS Probationers’Final Examination Rules 2012, in which not only two more
new papers- (1) Internal Security and (2) Investigation-II were incorporated but also the weightage
of Outdoor subjects like Field Craft and Tactics was increased from 50 marks to 200 marks. The
outdoor syllabus was updated to deal with the new challenges posed by Urban Terrorism, Left-
Wing Extremism, Insurgency and other complex Law and Order problems taking place in the field.
2.6.2 The present syllabus of Outdoor Training not only takes care of the physical fitness of the
IPS probationers but is also designed to equip them with necessary skills in police tactics along
with understanding of law and jurisprudence. In addition to the above, Academy had asked ASCI
to conduct “Quality Audit” for faculty of the NPA for further improvement.
RECOMMENDATION
MID-CAREER TRAINING PROGRAMME (MCTP)
2.7 The Committee notes that the Academy is collaborating with some of the foreign universities
of reputation viz Cambridge, Charles Stuart and London School of Business for conducting its
pioneer Mid-Career Training Programme for senior Police-personnel. However, the Committee feels
that the Academy should also explore collaboration with institution in other countries having
expertise in Police Training and Development (T&D for police) with the purpose of not only
improving capabilities and skill among serving police officers to combat effectively the ever
changing wide ranging challenges of terrorism, naxalism, caste and communal conflict, drug
trafficking, accidents, natural calamities and other disasters, but also to evolve different training
modules concerning standard policing practices to make the Academy a centre of excellence. The
committee, in this regard, recommends that NP A management should prepare a comprehensive
strategy in this direction for further foreign collaboration and seek the requisite approval from the
Government for implementation. Besides different phases of MCTP programmes, need based
refresher courses may also be organized for a week at regular intervals.
(Para 2.5.8 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.7.1 (a) Besides Mid Career training Programme various other training programmes are organised
in collaboration with other countries like USA, France, Germany. During last three years 36 such
courses have been organised and 572 police officers have been trained. However further
possibilities of foreign collaboration will be explored.

20
(b) NPA is already conducting regular specialized and refresher courses at regular
intervals, as a part of senior courses.
RECOMMENDATION
FACULTY AND LINKAGES
2.8 The Committee notes that the Academy does not invite faculty or resource persons from
abroad and the main reason is lack of incentives and remunerations. However under institutions
tie up for MCTP , foreign resource persons are also involved. The Committee is of the view that
whenever any foreign experts come to India, such visits may be made use of by organizing their
sessions for both basic training and MCTP .
(Para 2.8.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.8.1 At present when foreign experts visit the Academy for MCTP their services are utilized for
Basic Course also as per their availability.
2.8.2 The courses offered by foreign agencies are organized at SVP NPA as per suggestion of
Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D). The last course offered by Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI), USA ‘Interview and Interrogation Training’ was conducted at SVP NPA
Academy, Hyderabad from April 16-20, 2012 and 35 Police officers attended this course.
RECOMMENDATION
TRAINING SCHEDULE
2.9 The Committee is not satisfied with the cryptic reply of the Ministry. The Committee is,
therefore, of the view that there needs to be some institutional safeguards to the syllabi and
curriculum. Attempt to derail the training schedule should not be allowed.
(Para 2.12.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
2.9.1 The overall working of the Academy is supervised by the Academy Board, headed by the
Union Home Secretary as Chairman and other members comprising of CPOs, State Police Chiefs,
other eminent experts from the fields of management, social science, media etc. Any change in the
syllabi of Basic Training Course can be carried out only with the approval of the Board and MHA.
Similarly, the ultimate performance of how the training has been carried out is judged through the
examinations in both indoor and outdoor subjects which are assessed by outside examiners.
Therefore, there are inbuilt safeguards to not allow derailment of training schedule of IPS
probationers.
RECOMMENDATION
PREPARATION OF CHARGE SHEET
2.10 The Committee recommends that IPS probationers as well as the in-service officers must
be imparted adequate training to enhance their supervising skill so that FIRs and charge sheets must
be prepared in a comprehensive manner. The probationers should be made fully conversant with
the procedure of preparation of charge sheet and framing charges.
(Para 3.8.1 )

21
ACTION TAKEN
2.10.1 In order to ensure better supervision of cases especially investigation and preparation of
charge sheet, the Academy conducts a number of simulated exercises comprising to criminal cases
of different nature. This effort has been further strengthened by effectively utilizing the Model
Police Station platform. As part of these simulation exercises for the probationers are given hands
on experience in preparing charge sheet. In addition, the supervisory skills are imparted through
the module on scrutiny of case files. In order to improve the quality of investigation and charge
sheet, matter will be taken up with State govts by the BPR&D so that these are incorporated in
the training of NGOs by the S tate Police Training Academies.

22
22
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
RECOMMENDATION
DIRECTOR: POWER AND FUNCTIONS
3.1 The Committee understands that Director of NP A is of a significant position in the Academy
so far as its functioning is concerned. The personality of the Director leaves a lasting impression
on the functioning of the Academy. His job profile requires him to be a good leader, motivator and
communicator. Therefore, there should be a well laid procedure for selection of the Director, NP A.
The Committee also feels that the fixed tenure of the Director would give a certain period for him
for planning and executing the set objectives. Since, the Directors of IB, CBI and RAW are given
a fixed tenure, the Director of NP A should also be given a fixed tenure on the same analogy. Since
the Ministry has agreed for careful selection with a fixed tenure, the Committee recommends that
Government may lay down an appropriate selection procedure. The Committee agrees with the
Ministry view point that the Director should be a serving officer.
(Para 1.6.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.1.1 Care is taken to see that IPS officers with appropriate skills and attitude are selected for
the post of Director SVPNPA. While there is no fixed tenure, IPS officers who have sufficient time
left for superannuation are generally selected for the post.
FURTHER RECOMMNEDATION
3.1.2 The Committee is of the considered view that the post of Director of NPA is of
pivotal position because he is at the centre of all activities of the Academy. Therefore,
selection of the Director should be done carefully to ensure that the person so selected
must be dedicated and committed. The Committee desires that the incumbents of the post
of Director should have inclination, aptitude and interest in training and this may be
ensured. Fixed tenure is necessary for the Director to leave lasting impression. The
Committee therefore reiterates its earlier recommendation that there should be fixed
tenure for the Director.
RECOMMENDATION
PAY-SCALES OF OFFICERS AND STAFF
3.2 Since the Ministry of Home Affairs has agreed for pay parity of Director, NP A with the
Chiefs of IB, CBI, BSF and CRPF, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may finalize the
proposal and sent it to appropriate Ministry for approval at the earliest.
(Para 1.8.3 )

23
ACTION TAKEN
3.2.1 The proposal for pay parity for Director, NPA with that of Chiefs of CAPF was processed
in consultation with MoF but finally it was not agreed to. However the Director NPA is entitled
for 30% teaching allowance over and above the Basic pay.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.2.3 The suggestions of the experts for pay parity of Director, NPA with the Chiefs of IB,
CBI, BSF and CRPF was duly endorsed by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the ground that
the same would facilitate interaction of Director at higher level of government officers and
would also attract the best talent for the post of Director. The Committee is now surprised
to find that the proposal has not been agreed to by the Government. The Committee would
also like to point out that the Director, NPA has been given the scale of Rs. 75,500 - 80,000
and the post of the Director, Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy, Dehradun is in the
apex scale of Rs. 80,000/-. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates that the proposal
for pay parity of Director, NPA must be taken up at the appropriate level with sufficient
justification ensuring final approval.
RECOMMENDATION
INFRASTRUCTURE
3.3 The Committee, while taking note of the basic infrastructure of the academy and future
expansion, recommends that all projects pertaining to expanding the existing infrastructure should
be completed without time and cost over-run and to achieve that end, Government should extend
requisite fund in time. The process of acquiring additional land for special tactics wing and other
purposes may be completed soon so that other works thereon may be taken up.
(Para 1.10.3 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.3.1 (i) Construction of infrastructure projects is being executed by the CPWD and NBCC.
There have been delays in the execution of the project. The matter has been taken-
up with the concerned agencies. Keeping in view the priority to be accorded to these
projects, CPWD and NBCC have been directed to post their best engineering team for
completion of the projects in a timely manner.
(ii) For timely completion of the infrastructure projects periodic reviews are done at the
level of Director, NPA, Special Secretary (IS) and Home Secretary.
(iii) A vailability of fund has not been found as a constraint for timely completion of the
projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.3.2 Delay in execution of projects is not acceptable. Projects of NPA, as executed by
CPWD and NBCC get delayed despite periodic review done at the level of Director, NPA,
Special Secretary (IS) and Home Secretary. Strict monitoring of execution of the projects
by concerned agencies may be done regularly.

24
RECOMMENDATION
COMPUTER AND IT
3.4 Since, in the contemporary electronic cyber age, success of crime investigation and
intelligence analysis is increasingly dependent upon well-equipped computer lab, it is very much
pertinent that the academy management must ensure that NP A’ s computer section is equipped with
latest technology and updated programming system. The Committee is of the view that skilled and
well trained staff should be deployed to discharge the duties and responsibilities of the computer
cell. The Committee, therefore, recommends that NP A management should take up the issue of
constraints of the manpower with MHA for early filling up of requisite staff. The Committee hopes
that the project in pipeline must be completed within the set time frame. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may take up the issue of setting up Training unit
of NIC in NP A with NIC and Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (CIT).
(Para 1.13.6 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.4.1 Efforts are being made to fill-up the existing vacancies in the Computer Section of the
Academy. For setting of the training unit of NIC in NPA the matter is being taken up with the
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.4.5 The Committee expresses its displeasure to find that the MHA has not furnished
comprehensive Action Taken Notes. The Committee observes that MHA is silent over
outcome of efforts made regarding filling up of vacancies in NPA’s computer Section. The
Committee may be apprised of the status in filling up of vacancies and regarding the setting
up of training unit of NIC at NPA.
RECOMMENDATION
FACULTY AND LINKAGES
3.5 The Committee is of the view that if the Academy feels that linkages with training
institutions of developed countries such as USA, UK, etc. would be useful, the Academy may
prepare a blueprint of the proposal and take up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs. But
the linkages should be productive, and result oriented instead of just ornamental.
(Para 2.8.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.5.1 Collaboration with the training institutes of the developed countries is done for specialised
courses at the MHA level. At present MHA has such collaboration with institutes of USA, France
and Germany such as FBI National Academy, USA and National Gendarmerie Intervention Group
(GIGN) France etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.5.2 The Committee, during its interaction with NPA Management was apprised that
although efforts were made to bring the Academy training at par with that of training
institutes of developed countries, but the Academy has no direct and dynamic linkage with

25
training institution of USA, UK and other European countries. Keeping in view such
handicaps and inadequacy, the Committee recommended for preparing a blue print of the
proposal for productive and result oriented linkages of NPA with training institutions of
developed countries for instilling the Best Policing Practices amongst Indian Police Officers.
The Committee, while reiterating its recommendation, further desires that MHA should
guide NPA Management to explore possibilities of making linkages with institutes of
European and Asian countries for wider experiences and better functioning.
RECOMMENDATION
LACK OF QUALITY TRAINING PROGRAMME
3.6 The Committee feels that there is a lack of quality training programmes for the faculty. For
better training of the police officers, the faculty should have better exposure to latest
methodologies, technologies available within the country and abroad. NP A may have a relook into
this.
(Para 2.9.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.6.1 The responsibility for improving the quality of training is with Bureau of Police Research
and Development (BPR&D). BPR&D organizes the training for trainers programme regularly.
3.6.2 Moreover, NPA trainers are also deputed to foreign courses under Anti Terrorism Assistance
(ATA)/Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), USA programmes for better exposure to the latest
methodologies, technologies available within the country and abroad.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.6.3 The Committee recommends that BPR&D should make an assessment of the quality
of the trainers and prepare a blue print on the training of the Trainers. Training may be
organized accordingly.
RECOMMENDATION
COORDINATION WITH OTHER POLICE ACADEMIES
3.7 The Committee feels that internal security is a major concern across the country and
supervision and surveillance by the Police Personnel around the country is of utmost significance.
With the sophistication and changing nature of crimes, well equipped and professional police
personnel are required all over the country. Integrated police training is, therefore the natural
corollary. The Committee recommends that NP A should act like what the NCERT does for other
training schools of States and the experience gained at the NP A must percolate to the State and
the district training schools for the benefit of the police training at the grass root level. The
Committee agrees with the suggestion of the Ministry for setting up of a common forum for all
State Police Training academies with the NP A at Apex and under it aegis. A serious thought may
be given to this suggestion.
(Para 2.13.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.7.1 This task is performed by the BPR&D, who has been entrusted with the responsibility of

26
monitoring the training needs and quality of training in States and Central Police Organizations,
assisting States in modernization of police forces and correctional administration.
3.7.2 Training Directorate of BPR&D undertakes a review of the arrangement for Police Training
from time to time. It also carries out training need analysis in this field in the light of the changing
socio-economic conditions and to introduce new scientific techniques in police training.
3.7.3 National Police Mission Directorate in BPR&D undertakes 6 micro-missions and is
functioning with participation of about 100 police officers from States/CAPFs. The 6 micro-
missions are in the field of Human Resources Development, Community Policing, Communication
& Technology, Infrastructure, New Processes, Proactive Policing and Visualizing the Future.
BPR&D thus provides the common forum for the State Training academies and help disseminate
best practices throughout the various Police training schools.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.7.4 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that the Ministry of Home
Affairs had itself suggested that a formal common forum comprising of all Police Training
Academies with NPA at the apex and under its aegis may be set up for preparing Integrated
Training Modules and dissemination of its outcome for addressing all concern of internal
security across the country. The Committee wonders that the Ministry of Home Affairs in
its Action Taken Note now replies that BPR&D is entrusted with the responsibility of
reviewing the training needs and qualities of training in States and Central Police
Organisation, assisting in modernization of Police Forces and correctional administration.
The Ministry has not indicated any practical difficulty in making NPA, the apex body. The
Committee desires that this may be given a serious thought.
RECOMMENDATION
TRAINING ON DISASTER MANAGEMENT
3.8 Within a period of twenty months, in Kolkata itself, forty-three people died when fire gutted
the fifth and sixth floors of the Stephen Court building and more than ninety people lost their lives
in Advanced Medicare and Research Institute (AMRI) Hospital. When five major fire accidents
occurred in large hospitals in London between January 2008 and February 2009, nobody died; in
fact, not a single case of “significant adverse health affect” was reported. In Northwick Park
Hospital, a large district-level health care facility, 123 patients, including the brain injured, were
safely evacuated in 23 minutes, while it took fifteen minutes to the rescuer to reach AMRI Hospital
costing several lives. The Committee feels that there needs more practical training including
simulation. Whenever any disaster takes place, they should be sent for real time experience and
training. The Committee recommends that NPA should keep in these things in mind and prepare the
requisite training modules on disaster management in the country.
(Para 3.14.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.8.1 Police being the first responder in any major disaster, the Disaster Management Module
forms a very important part of probationers’ training where inputs are given by expert speakers.
The officers who themselves have handled the major disasters like Earthquakes, Tsunamis, Floods,
etc. share their practical experiences and useful tips with the probationers. Experts from National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) give important inputs on this aspect.

27
3.8.2 The important role of different departments like Fire and Civil Defence, Municipal
Corporations, Civil Administration, Health and Emergency Services, and Town and Country
Planning, etc. and the need for coordinated approach between them is highlighted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.8.3 In addition to class room lectures, the module should also include visits to disaster
sites immediately after disaster and participate/help in disaster management activities.
Police officers are required to specialize in managing disasters. This aspect may be
considered.
RECOMMENDATION
SWOT- ANALYSIS OF THE WORKING OF THE ACADEMY
3.9 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should take note of the SWOT (Strength,
Weaknesses, Opportunity and Threats) analysis of the Academy and make strategies to overcome its
weakness and threats. The Government should also take advantages of NP A’ s strength and
opportunities in making it the world class training centre. In this regard, the Committee recommends
that the management should also evolve new training platforms and training methodologies and
make continuous revaluation, self-introspection and self-review, 3
rd Party Audit, Seminars,
Workshops, adaptations to change. The management may further formalize institutional tie ups with
the police training academies of the other countries with the purpose of learning the best practice
in training of other countries and catch up the standards achieved by the western countries.
(Para 3.19.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
3.9.1 In this regard the Academy has conducted many 1-day Seminars and brain storming
sessions as efforts for self-introspection and also has got 3
rd party audit conducted by
Administrative Staff College of India and a report was received in the year 2012.Its
recommendations are being followed.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.9.2 The Committee desires that MHA may examine the report of 3
rd party audit
conducted by Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI). Weaknesses that were observed
may be looked into and necessary action be taken. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken on the observations of 3
rd Party Audit conducted by Administrative Staff
College of India.

28
28
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
RECOMMENDATION
VACANCIES IN NPA
4.1 The Committee feels that serious efforts are required to fill up the vacant posts. The MHA
may make serious efforts for posting of IPS officers in NPA. In regard to filling up of group B
posts, advance action may be initiated and regularly pursued with UPSC. The recruitment rules for
the newly created posts may be got approved at the earliest so that the new staff are in place soon.
(Para 1.9.1 )
ACTION TAKEN
4.1.1 (i) Ef forts are made to fill up the vacancies on priority basis. At present all the posts of
the Joint Director/Deputy Director are filled up in NPA. There are 14 vacancies at the
level of Assistant Directors and the efforts are made to upgrade some of these posts
to Joint Director/Deputy Director level in consultation of Ministry of Finance to take
suitable and willing officers on deputation.
(ii) Recruitment Rules for the newly created posts are being finalized in consultation with
UPSC, DOPT and Ministry of Law.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
4.1.2 The Committee recommends that the vacant post of Assistant Director must be filled
up at the earliest and recruitment Rules for the newly created post be finalized with
concerned agencies/departments without further delay.
RECOMMENDATION
PUBLICATIONS DIVISION
4.2 The Committee understands that the Academy, being the nodal centr e of Police Training in
India, has to play a leading role in capacity building of State Police Training Institutions in the
country by way of developing and publishing training literature. To this end, it is necessary to
strengthen the Publication wing in the Academy to publish research papers, books, journals,
monographs and other training material from time to time. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Publication Division of the Academy may be appropriately strengthened. The
Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the sanctioned staff are not in place. Director, NP A
may take immediate necessary action in this regard.
(Para 1.12.2 )
ACTION TAKEN
4.2.2 Publication is an important medium for dissemination of research papers, books, journals,

29
monographs and other training material. Strengthening of the publication division will require
creation of additional posts. This is being initiated in consultation with Ministry of Finance.
RECOMMENDATION
4.2.3 The Committee notes the necessity felt by NPA for strengthening the Publication
Division of the Academy and steps which includes creation of additional posts, being taken
by the Academy in this regard. The Committee, however, observes that the Action Taken
Note is silent on filing up of the sanctioned posts. The Committee therefore reiterates that
the sanctioned staff be put in place at the earliest. Early action may be taken for creation
of additional posts.
RECOMMENDATION
RECRUITMENT TO IPS
4.3 The Committee is of the view that age relaxation under different government services is a
policy decision keeping in view various considerations. However, the suggestions of the expert may
be looked into.
(Para 1.14.5 )
ACTION TAKEN
4.3.1 The suggestion of the expert is being examined in the Ministry.

30
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
MID CAREER TRAINING PROGRAMME (MCTP)
The Committee may be apprised of the final decision taken in regard to sending IPS
probationers for foreign experience. (Para 1.2.3 )
LAW AND JURISPRUDENCE IN TRAINING MODULES
The DRSC on Home Affairs may be apprised of the conclusions arrived by the
committee involving legal experts, set up to revisit training module in Law and
Jurisprudence for IPS Officers and the action proposed. (Para 1.7.2 )
PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILING
The Committee hopes that ‘Psychological profiling Module’ as used by NPA for
training to probationers and in-service police officer would go a long way in counseling and
de-stressing management. (Para 1.13.4 )
ACCESS OF SUB-ORDINATES TO SENIOR POLICE OFFICER
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by BPR&D in regard
to issuing guidelines to States and District Training Centers. (Para 1.14.3 )
COMMUNITY POLICING
Manual on community policing may be prepared at the earliest and circulated to the
State and District Police Training Centers. (Para 1.16.2 )
INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
The Committee feels that intelligence collection and analysis is a significant course
of action during criminal investigation, and therefore, NPA management may think of
imparting ‘Specialized training course on intelligence collection and analysis to police
officers inclined towards criminal investigation. Due consultation in chalking out the
suitable training module can be taken from IB, CBI, NIA and BPR&D. Once the training
module is finalized, it should also be replicated at State and District Police Training Centers.
(Para 1.20.3 )
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF WORKING OF THE ACADEMY AND ORGANIZATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS(ODIS)
The Committee may be apprised of ‘Master Plan’ as proposed to be prepared by NPA
for Organizational Development Intervention and steps/effort taken in that direction.
(Para 1.25.2 )
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NPA
The Committee would like to be apprised of the report on independent evaluation of
the basic and METP Training imparted at NPA when submitted by BPR&D and further action
taken thereon. (Para 1.26.2 )
30

31
SWOT-ANALYSIS OF THE WORKING OF THE ACADEMY
The Committee hopes that the amount of Rs. 2266 crore sanctioned by 13 th Finance
Commission would go long way for strengthening the training infrastructure in various
States. After the HRD studies are completed, a road map may be prepared for training
intervention in the State Police at the earliest. (Para 1.27.2 )
DIRECTOR: POWER AND FUNCTIONS
The Committee is of the considered view that the post of Director of NPA is of
pivotal position because he is at the centre of all activities of the Academy. Therefore,
selection of the Director should be done carefully to ensure that the person so selected
must be dedicated and committed. The Committee desires that the incumbents of the post
of Director should have inclination, aptitude and interest in training and this may be
ensured. Fixed tenure is necessary for the Director to leave lasting impression. The
Committee therefore reiterates its earlier recommendation that there should be fixed
tenure for the Director. (Para 3.1.2 )
PAY-SCALES OF OFFICERS AND STAFF
The suggestions of the experts for pay parity of Director, NPA with the Chiefs of IB,
CBI, BSF and CRPF was duly endorsed by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the ground that
the same would facilitate interaction of Director at higher level of government officers and
would also attract the best talent for the post of Director. The Committee is now surprised
to find that the proposal has not been agreed to by the Government. The Committee would
also like to point out that the Director, NPA has been given the scale of Rs. 75,500 - 80,000
and the post of the Director, Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy, Dehradun is in the
apex scale of Rs. 80,000/-. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates that the proposal
for pay parity of Director, NPA must be taken up at the appropriate level with sufficient
justification ensuring final approval. (Para 3.2.3 )
INFRASTRUCTURE
Delay in execution of projects is not acceptable. Projects of NPA, as executed by
CPWD and NBCC get delayed despite periodic review done at the level of Director, NPA,
Special Secretary (IS) and Home Secretary. Strict monitoring of execution of the projects
by concerned agencies may be done regularly. (Para 3.3.2 )
COMPUTER AND IT
The Committee expresses its displeasure to find that the MHA has not furnished
comprehensive Action Taken Notes. The Committee observes that MHA is silent over
outcome of efforts made regarding filling up of vacancies in NPA’s computer Section. The
Committee may be apprised of the status in filling up of vacancies and regarding the setting
up of training unit of NIC at NPA. (Para 3.4.5 )
FACULTY AND LINKAGES
The Committee, during its interaction with NPA Management was apprised that
although efforts were made to bring the Academy training at par with that of training
institutes of developed countries, but the Academy has no direct and dynamic linkage with
training institution of USA, UK and other European countries. Keeping in view such
handicaps and inadequacy, the Committee recommended for preparing a blue print of the

32
proposal for productive and result oriented linkages of NPA with training institutions of
developed countries for instilling the Best Policing Practices amongst Indian Police Officers.
The Committee, while reiterating its recommendation, further desires that MHA should
guide NPA Management to explore possibilities of making linkages with institutes of
European and Asian countries for wider experiences and better functioning. (Para 3.5.2 )
LACK OF QUALITY TRAINING PROGRAMME
The Committee recommends that BPR&D should make an assessment of the quality
of the trainers and prepare a blue print on the training of the Trainers. Training may be
organized accordingly. (Para 3.6.3 )
COORDINATION WITH OTHER POLICE ACADEMIES
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that the Ministry of Home
Affairs had itself suggested that a formal common forum comprising of all Police Training
Academies with NPA at the apex and under its aegis may be set up for preparing Integrated
Training Modules and dissemination of its outcome for addressing all concern of internal
security across the country. The Committee wonders that the Ministry of Home Affairs in
its Action Taken Note now replies that BPR&D is entrusted with the responsibility of
reviewing the training needs and qualities of training in States and Central Police
Organisation, assisting in modernization of Police Forces and correctional administration.
The Ministry has not indicated any practical difficulty in making NPA, the apex body. The
Committee desires that this may be given a serious thought. (Para 3.7.4 )
TRAINING ON DISASTER MANAGEMENT
In addition to class room lectures, the module should also include visits to disaster
sites immediately after disaster and participate/help in disaster management activities.
Police officers are required to specialize in managing disasters. This aspect may be
considered. (Para 3.9.3 )
SWOT- ANALYSIS OF THE WORKING OF THE ACADEMY
The Committee desires that MHA may examine the report of 3
rd party audit
conducted by Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI). Weaknesses that were observed
may be looked into and necessary action be taken. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken on the observations of 3
rd Party Audit conducted by Administrative Staff
College of India. (Para 3.10.2 )
VACANCIES IN NPA
 The Committee recommends that the vacant post of Assistant Director must be
filled up at the earliest and recruitment Rules for the newly created post be finalized with
concerned agencies/departments without further delay. (Para 4.1.2 )
PUBLICATIONS DIVISION
The Committee notes the necessity felt by NPA for strengthening the Publication
Division of the Academy and steps which includes creation of additional posts, being taken
by the Academy in this regard. The Committee, however, observes that the Action Taken
Note is silent on filing up of the sanctioned posts. The Committee therefore reiterates that
the sanctioned staff be put in place at the earliest. Early action may be taken for creation
of additional posts. (Para 4.2.3 )

33
MINUTES

34

35
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18 th July, 2013 in Committee Room-E,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
13. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
14. Shri Lalu Prasad
15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. to (i) consider and adopt draft 172
nd Report on Action
Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 163 rd Report of the
Committee on the Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad; and
(ii) finalise views on the subject ‘Strengthening the working of the Ministry of Development of
North Eastern Region (DoNER) for effective implementation of policies, programmes, schemes and
projects meant for North Eastern Region’.
35

36
2.1 * * *
I. Adoption of 172 nd Report
3.0. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft 172 nd report for consideration. The Chairman
stated that he had gone through the report and recommendations are based on deliberations in the
Committee. The Chairman, then, read out the recommendations/observations made in the Report.
3.1 After a brief discussion, the draft report was adopted by the Committee with some changes.
The Committee thereafter authorized its Chairman to cause presentation of the Report during the
ensuing session of the Parliament.
II. ** *
4.0 * * *
4.1 * * *
4.2 * * *
4.3 * * *
4.4 * * *
Other Issues
5.0 * * *
6.0 * * *
7.0. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.