DRAFT/CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
 241 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED THIRTY NINTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) OF 
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
                                     
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON …..………NOVEMBER, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON ….…NOVEMBER, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available          
 
C.S. (H.A.)-474 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED  
THIRTY NINTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  ACRONYM  (iii-iv)  
4.  REPORT      1 -  70 
 Chapter   -   I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2 - 21 
 Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee do es not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government‟s reply 
22 - 43 
 Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
44 - 61 
 Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final repl ies of the 
Government have not been received 
62 - 71 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE-  
AT A GLANCE 
72 -82 
7. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
84 - 85 
6. ANNEXURE 87 - 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 (re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1.    Shri Brijlal    - Chairman 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
3. Shri N. R. Elango 
4. Dr. Anil Jain 
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
8. Shri Digvijaya Singh 
9. ^Shri P. Bhattacharya  
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha  
  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia  
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. #Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri  Faizal P. P. Mohammed 
20. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
21. Shri Ranjeetsingh Nimbalkar Naik 
22. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
23.  Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
24. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
26. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
28. Shri Ravneet Singh  
29. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
30. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary  
Ms. Payal Narendra Ingole, Secretariat Assistant  
 
^Shri P. Bhattacharya, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f 12th October, 2022 in place of Dr. Abhishek Manu Singh vi, 
MP, Rajya Sabha. 
# Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale , MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f.19 th October, 2022 in place of Shri Gajanan 
Chandrakant Kirtikar, MP, Lok Sabha. 
  (i)

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Forty First  Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Ninth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER). 
 
2. The Two Hundred Thirty Ninth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and l aid on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha on 14th March, 2022. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the 
Ministry of DoNER on 14th March, 2022 requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations of the Committee contain ed in the Report.  The Ministry of DoNER furnished 
the Action Taken Notes (in English and Hindi) on 8th August, 2022 on the above mentioned Two 
Hundred Thirty Ninth Report to the Committee.   
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of im plementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24 th 
September, 2004.  
 
4. The Committee considered th e draft Two Hundred Forty First  Report and adopted the 
same at its meeting held on 30th November, 2022. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
30th November, 2022 
New Delhi 
9 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)                                                                                  
Brijlal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS  
 
(iii) 
 
ASDMA Assam State Disaster management Authority  
APC Agro Processing Clusters  
BTSGs Bamboo Missions and Bamboo Technology Support Groups  
BRO Border Roads Organisation  
BTC Bodoland Territorial Council 
CCIIAC Central Capital Investment Incentive for access to credit 
CGG Centre for Good Governance  
CHQ Central Head Quarter 
CHC Community Health Centre  
CNA Central Nodal  Agency  
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  
CPSUs Central Public Sector Undertakings  
CEFPPC  Creation / Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities  
DARE Department of Agricultural Research & Education/ 
DSSS Development and Support Services for States  
DHATC Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council 
DoNER Development of North Eastern Region  
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
EAP Externally-aided Project 
EAT Expenditure Advance Transfer  
FCI Food Craft Institute 
FPCs Farmer Producer Companies 
FPOs Farmers Producers Organization 
FINER Federation of Industry & Commerce of North Eastern Region  
HADP Hill Areas Development Programme  
HPO Hydro Purchase Obligation  
HEPs Hydro Electric Projects  
IHM Institutes of Hotel Magmt 
ICAR Indian Council of Agriculture Research  
IIE Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship  
IMD Indian Meteorological Department  
ITIs Industrial Training Institutes  
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management  
JJM Jal Jeevan Mission  
KAATC Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council 
KMMTT Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport   
KCC Kisan Credit Card  
KISCEs Khelo India State centres of Excellence  
KICs Khelo India centres   
LADF Local Area Development Fund  
LHPs Large Hydro Power  
LNIPE Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education  
MDoNER Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
MOVCDNER Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region  
MFPI Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
MoEF&C Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MSME Micro, Small & Medium Enterproses 
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
MRIN Marketing Research & Informati on Network  
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority  
NESAC North Eastern Space Application Centre  
NEC North Eastern Council 
NLCPR Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources  
NBM National Bamboo Mission  
NER North Eastern Region  
NESIDS North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme  
NERPSIP North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project  
NECBDC North Eastern Cane and Bamboo Development Council  
NCOE National Centres of Excellence  
NERAMAC North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited  
NEHHDC North Eastern Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation  
NERCORMP North Eastern Region Community Resource Management Project   
NEDFi North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Limited  
NEIDS North East Industrial Development Scheme 
NEVF North East Venture Fund 
NERSDS North Eastern Road Sector Development Scheme  
NHIDCL National Highway and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited  
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NPCC National Programme Coordination Committee  
NSTC National Sports Talent Contest  
NHM National Health Mission  
NAPS National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme  
PHC Primary Health Centre  
PFMS Public Finance Management System 
PM-ABHIM Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission  
PMKVY Pradhan mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana  
PMMSY Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana  
PMUs Project Management Units  
RWH Rain Water Harvesting  
RPO Renewable Purchase Obligation  
SARDP-NE Special Accelerated Road Development Programme in North East  
SLSMC State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee  
STT Short-Term Training  
TDPS Tea Development and Promotion Scheme  
ULBs Urban Local Bodies  

 
1 
 
Report 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred 
Thirty Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry.  The 
Two Hundred Thirty Ninth Report was presented to Rajy a Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok 
Sabha, on 14th March, 2022. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Ninth Report have been categorized as 
follows: 
Chapter I:  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.1.5, 2.1.6, 3.1.7, 3.2.5, 3.3.6, 4.2.7, 4.3.3, 4.9.3, 4.12.17, 
4.16.5, 4.17.4, 4.21.4, 4.25.6, 4.25.11, 4.25.13, 4.27.3  (of Two Hundred Thirty Ninth 
Report)    
Total recommendations- 16 Accepted. 
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of t he Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.2.3, 2.2.15, 2.4.4, 
3.1.12, 3.3.7, 3.3.15, 3.3.21, 3.3.22, 3.4.4, 3.6.7, 4.1.6, 4.1.7, 4.8.2, 4.10.7, 4.13.12, 
4.13.18, 4.13.19, 4.15.2, 4.22.4, 4.22.5, 4.23.3 (ibid)  
Total recommendations - 21. Not to be pursued further.   
 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
 
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee 
is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.2.10, 2.2.14, 3.3.11, 3.5.7, 
3.7.4, 3.8.5, 4.4.4, 4.5.4, 4.6.5, 4.7.5, 4.14.5, 4.17.5, 4.23.4, 4.24.5, 4.13.11  (ibid)  
Total recommendations – 15. Not convincing replies. 
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the  non-implementation of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter -III and desires that the Ministry should furnish 
convincing action taken steps in respect of those recommendations.  
 
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final rep lies of 
the Government have not been received: Para Nos.  2.1.4, 3.5.12, 3.9.8, 3.10.7, 
3.11.11, 3.11.12, 3.12.7, 3.12.8, 4.5.3, 4.9.4, 4.12.16 (ibid)  
Total Recommendations – 11. To be pursued further. 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnis h pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of the observations/recommendations made in all 
chapters of the Report.  
 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding chapters. 

 
2 
 
CHAPTER I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
1.1 Budget at a glance 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee also notes that the funds allocated under North East Special Infrastructure 
Development Scheme (NESIDS) have also been significantly reduced to ₹ 678.79 crores in BE 
2022-23 as against the projected amount of ₹ 1100.00 crores. NESIDS, being a 100% centrally 
funded scheme, aims to ensure focused development of North East Region by providing financial 
assistance to various infrastructure projects. The Committee is of the view  that this reduced 
allocation will hinder progress of the projects taken up under this head. 
(Para 2.1.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 Recommendations of the Committee noted.  
 
1.1.3 Moreover, the BE of ₹678.79 crores under NESIDS for the financial year 2022-23 will be 
utilized for meeting committed liabilities in respect of the ongoing projects and new projects 
sanctioned under the scheme. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.1.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
1.1.5 The Committee recommends that  the Ministry of DoNER may approach the Ministry of 
Finance to give attention to the projected demands made by the Ministry for its programmes and 
make efforts to allocate the required funds for respective heads.  
(Para 2.1.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.1.6 Recommendations of the Committee noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.1.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 

 
3 
 
1.2 Schemes of North East Council 
 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee recognizes that NEC is one of the important agencies for overall 
inclusive growth of the North Eastern Region. The Committee notes the  work carried out by the 
NEC and hopes that the increased allocation of ₹ 644.42 crores in BE 2022 -23 will provide a 
much needed boost to the agency for carrying out  regional planning, developmental and welfare 
activities in a holistic manner 
(Para 3.1.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 Noted 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.2.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
1.3 Schemes of North East Council -Special Development Projects 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee notes that the Schemes of NEC –Special Development Project is being 
discontinued. The allocation for financial year 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 is only for funding of 
liabilities of ongoing projects. However, only 56% of the  budgetary allocation for 2021 -22 has 
been utilized till December, 2021. The Committee hopes that the Ministry must have been 
making efforts to clear liabilities of the ongoing projects so that they may not spill over to the 
ensuing financial year in any case. All out efforts should be made to clear liabilities by the end of 
financial year 2022-23. 
(Para 3.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 Low utilisation of allocated fund is mainly due to non -receipt of utilisation certificates 
from the states. Under the said h ead, the RE was fixed at ₹ 133.11 crores during Financial Year 
2021-22. By 31st March, 2022, entire amount provided at RE stage was released.  
 
1.3.3 All out efforts will be made to clear the balance liabilities in Schemes of NEC -Special 
Development Project by Financial Year 2022-23 as recommended by the Committee. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.3.4 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
4 
 
1.4 Central Pool of Resources for North East and Sikkim /North East Special 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the NESIDS is a Central Sector 
Scheme with financial outlay of ₹ 678.79 crores. The Committee is of the view that the funds 
allocated for NESIDS and HADP be utililized efficiently and effectively to complete the projects 
meant for socio-economic development in the region.  
(Para 3.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 Recommendations of the Committee noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.4.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
1.5 Health Infrastructure 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee considers that a strong health infrastructure is directly inter -linked with 
socio-economic development of a region. The Committee notes that every citizen should have 
access to affordable and quality healthcare. The Committee, therefor e, recommends that the 
approved projects under Centrally Sponsored Scheme must be accorded priority and necessary 
up-gradations must be taken up on an urgent basis in various District level hospitals/clinics. The 
Committee further recommends that Ministry and State Governments should consider opening 
up more National Level Institutions such as AIIMS in other North East States to bolster the 
health infrastructure in NER. The Committee observes that the NER is not very densely 
populated and habitations across  the States are far flung. Therefore, assessment of area to be 
covered, time and distance to reach hospitals/clinics by people, should be made by the M/o 
Health and Family Welfare and DoNER for creating health infrastructure. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the area covered by a PHC in terms of time and distance in reaching it, 
in the various NE States. 
(Para 4.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 Regarding District level hospitals/clinics, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  has 
informed that: 
 

 
5 
 
 Under National Health Mission (NHM), financial and technical support is provided for 
opening and upgradation/construction of Sub -centres, PHCs, CHCs, Sub -District Hospitals, 
District Hospitals based on proposals submitted by the States/UTs in their Programme 
Implementation Plans. Approvals are accorded in accordance with the gap analysis, 
population norms and caseload facilities of the State as discussed with the States Government 
in meetings of the National Programme Coordination Committee (NPCC). 
 
 Special provisions/norms under NHM for NE States are as under: 
i. A total of 33% of the Resource Envelope may be towards Infrastructure Development in NE 
States as compared to 25% for other States. 
ii. Relaxed population norms for establishment of different health facilities:  
(a) Sub-Centre (SC):- 1 per 3,000 population against 5,000 population in other States;  
(b) Primary Health Centre (PHC):- 1 per 20,000 population against 30,000 population in 
other States and  
(c) Community Health Centre (CHC): - 1 per 80,000 population  against 1,20,000 
population in other States. NE States has the flexibility to saturate the population norms 
considering time to care approach. 
 
iii. For NE States & Hilly States, the fund sharing pattern under NHM is in the ratio of 90:10 
between the Central a nd State Government while this ratio is 60:40 for the rest of the 
States. 
  
 There are also some initiatives which are being implemented by M/o Health & Family 
Welfare in order to improve health infrastructure and to ensure access to affordable and 
quality healthcare in NE Region, which are as follows:- 
 
i. Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM) is a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme which includes support for infrastructure development of 
Sub-Centres, Urban Health and Wellness Centres , Block Public Health Units (PHUs), 
Integrated District Public Health Laboratories and Crtical Care Hospital Blocks. 
 
ii. 15th Finance Commission grant also support for construction of building -less Sub - 
Centres, Primary Health Centres and Community Health Centres. 
 
 NEC is considering  State Governments‟  projects under Medical & Health Sector under the 
NEC General guidelines for “Support to Tertiary Health Care & Medical Education” for 
overall development towards affordable and quality healthcare services to t he people in this 
region. 
 
 All the ongoing projects under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (MH -3601) with 90:10 ratio 
between the NEC and State Government are in completion stage. By the end of the FY 2022 -
23, all the ongoing projects under the Health Sector are likely to be completed. 

 
6 
 
 
 The new and the ongoing projects under the Central Sector Schemes (MH -2552) where 
100% funding by the NEC is considered, as per the existing guidelines of NEC are aimed at 
providing quality and affordable healthcare services to the people of the NE Region. 
 
 At present, the construction of AIIMS in Guwahati is under progress. The targeted date of 
completion of the project in September, 2022. Further, MBBS classes commenced from 
academic year 2020-21 from a temporary campus. 
 
 Regarding National Level Institutes such as AIIMS in NE States, eligible proposals if 
received in the NEC, could be supported, provided fund is available. However, the decision 
of the concerned Ministry of the Government of India and the concerned State Gover nment 
would be final in this regard. 
 
 Research shall soon be done in consultation with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare on 
time and distance to be covered to reach nearest hospital/clinic in NER. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.5.3 The Committee notes the reply.   
1.6 Educational and Industrial training institutions 
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee takes note of various initiatives undertaken by the concerned States and 
agencies towards enhancing skill development in the NER. The Committee is of  the view that 
skill development training will prepare the workforce to participate in the holistic development 
of the region besides empowering them. The Committee feels that industry oriented skill 
development infrastructure will facilitate enhancing the  skills of the workforce and in -turn will 
generate employment opportunities for the youth in the region. The Committee recommends that 
Ministry of DoNER should coordinate with the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship and the Ministry of Labour to devise projects and programmes that will  aid the 
students to complete their courses from the Central technical institutes and get gainful 
employment. 
(Para 4.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship has taken the following initiatives 
towards enhancing skill development of youth of NER: 
 

 
7 
 
1.6.3 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is implementing a flagship 
scheme Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) for imparting short duration skill 
development training (Short -Term Training (STT) and Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL)) 
across the country including North East (NE) region. In respect of budget allocation for NE 
region under the scheme, it is stated that 10% of the total yearly budget allo cation for PMKVY 
is earmarked exclusively towards the Skill Development Training in NE region, as per extant 
provision. 
1.6.4 From 2015, PMKVY has seen 3 phases till date, with training/orientation of over 1.35 
crores candidates. Currently, the third phase  of PMKVY i.e. PMKVY 3.0 is being implemented 
which is a demand driven scheme with bottom -up approach with District level plan being the 
fundamental level of implementation. In NE region, 4.31 lakh candidates have been trained 
under STT and 7.24 lakh candi dates have been oriented under RPL. The State -wise number of 
candidates enrolled, trained/oriented, assessed, certified and placed under PMKVY (1, 2, & 3) 
are given in the table at Annexure III. 
1.6.5 Under the scheme, placement opportunities are being pro vided to candidates certified 
under STT. RPL does not mandate placement as it orients and certifies candidate with prior 
learning experience or skills. 
 
1.6.6.         Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has also implemented a 
Capacity Building (CB) Scheme for skilling of unemployed youth of North East Region. The 
scheme funds skill development activities to enhance employability and competencies and 
promote self-employment and entrepreneurship. High standards and quality of training und er 
this scheme are  being ensured by  following Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 
norms. The state-wise training status under CB Scheme is given below: 
 
State Enrolled Trained Certified 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 337 244 292 
Assam 2622 2412 1793 
Manipur 1207 1130 1018 
Meghalaya 1027 957 699 
Mizoram 972 947 502 
Nagaland 1026 914 929 
Sikkim 1042 1030 729 
Tripura 1202 969 724 
Total 9435 8603 6686 
 
 
1.6.7        The scheme has now closed with a total enrollment of 9,435 candidates, out of which 
6,686 candidates have been certified and 3,638 candidates have been reported placed with an 

 
8 
 
average salary of ₹ 8,939 (maximum salary of ₹ 20,000) at Pune, Bangalore, Chandigarh, 
Daman, Kochi, Andaman etc. 
  
1.7 Overview of Skill Development and Employment in North East India: 
 
1.7.1 In recent years, it can be observed that Government of India is  investing in North 
Eastern Region Development; and more importantly skill development of the people to empower 
them. Various programmes and schemes are launched to provide skill development training in 
various sectors; which have successfully provided training, although the employment generation 
is low which is creating hindrance in meeting the Government objectives. Moreover, taking into 
consideration the current education and job scenario, appropriate job-related skills complement 
a formal education for securing job. The job industry in Northeast India too expects the 
prospective workforce to come prepared with specialized skills.  
 
1.8 The Skill Development Mission Goal:  
1.8.1 To bridge the gap between available workforce and employable workforce, Gover nment 
has launched Skill India Mission. This mission aims to rapidly scale up skill development efforts 
in India, creating an end -to-end outcome focused implementation framework, which aligns 
demands of the employer for a well trained skilled workforce wit h aspiration of Indian citizens 
for sustainable livelihood. 
 
1.9 Implementing Skill Development Training under National Apprenticeship Promotion 
Scheme (NAPS):  
 
1.9.1 By realizing the need for apprenticeship training the Government of India has launched 
a National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme  in order to boost apprenticeship training. Under 
this scheme, the government is going to share the cost of training with the establishments under 
apprenticeship programs so apprenticeship training can be boosted.  
 
1.9.2 Key Features of NAPS are:  
 
 Sharing of 25 % of prescribed stipend subject to a maximum of ₹1500/ - per month per 
apprentice with the employers. The Stipend support would not be given during the basic 
training period for fresher apprentice. 
 Sharing of Basic training cost in respect of apprentices who come directly to apprenticeship 
training without any formal trade training. Basic training cost will be limited to ₹7500/ - for 
a maximum of 500 hours/3 months. 
 
1.10 Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE) foresight 
 
1.10.1 Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE)  is dedicated to work for development of 
Northeast region and its people and therefore takes necessary initiative to meet the 

 
9 
 
developmental goals. IIE is actively providing skill training to t he people of this region to meet 
the skilled manpower demand. IIE is recommending for adopting  National Apprenticeship 
Promotion Scheme NAPS and attracting old and new industries by collaboration and sharing 
basic training cost for Up -skilling the candidat es of the region and boosting economical 
development of the region. It aims to create employment opportunities for the native youth and 
collaborate with industries to meet their manpower requirement in real time. 
 
1.10.2 Ministry of Skill Development & Ent repreneurship is providing financial assistance for 
creation and up-gradation of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) in NER for pioneering industry 
related skilling. Although ITIs are under the administrative control of State Governments; 
establishment a nd administration of ITIs comes under the jurisdiction of State Government, 
while the policies such as setting the criterion for affiliation, conducting the examination along 
with certification and designing curriculum are the responsibilities of the Centr al Government. 
Ministry has communicated the States in NE region for NCVT affiliation which will open 
avenues for better employment opportunities by providing nation -wide recognition of 
certificates. 
 
 1.10.3 Further, Ministry of Labour and Employment has informed that six National Career 
Service Centers for SC/STs have been established at Guwahati, Kohima, Naharlagun, Imphal, 
Aizawl and Jowai in NER, with a view to enhance the employability of SC/ST jobseekers 
through counselling, coaching, guidance and co mputer training (software/hardware). Also, 
National Career Service Centres for Differently Abled at Agartala, Guwahati, Dimapur and 
Shillong are established to evaluate the capacities of Persons with Disabilities and facilitate 
them in non formal vocationa l training and assist in the process of vocational rehabilitation in 
NER. 
 
1.10.4 Coordination with Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship shall also be 
pursued for their contribution in 10% GBS which will be monitored at the level of Hon‟ble 
Minister. 
Further Recommendation/Observation [CHAPTER-I] 
1.10.5 The Committee notes the various initiatives being taken by the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship towards enhancing the skill development of the youth of 
the North East Region.  
1.11 Civil Aviation 
Recommendation 
1.11.1 The Committee notes that apart from the two existing airports in Arunachal Pradesh, a 
new greenfield airport is being constructed in Holongi, Itanagar to provide connectivity to the 
region. The Committee notes the eff orts of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and concerned State 

 
10 
 
Governments for giving impetus to the development of new airports and existing airports as well, 
in North East Region 
(Para 4.9.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11.2 Recommendations of the Committee Noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.11.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
1.12 Renewable Energy Sources 
Recommendation 
1.12.1 The Committee takes the note of various ongoing and accomplished projects in power 
sector The Committee observes that growth in pow er related infrastructure will ensure seamless 
supply of electricity. The Committee recommends that effective and efficient utilization of funds 
and necessary compliance by States for completion of projects within stipulated time under these 
sectors needs to be monitored. This will ensure socio -economic development of the entire NER, 
at a faster pace. 
(Para 4.12.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.12.2 The North East Region has a large hydropower potential. Government have taken several 
policy initiatives in the past t o give a boost to hydropower development in the country viz. 
National Electricity Policy 2005,  Hydro Power Policy 2008,  Tariff Policy 2016, National 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy (2007) and Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.  
Further, Gove rnment of India in March, 2019 has approved the following measures for 
promoting hydropower in the country and improving viability of the sector:- 
 
a. Declaring Large Hydro Power (LHPs) (>25 MW Projects) as Renewable Energy source. 
b. Hydro Purchase Obligation ( HPO) as a separate entity within Non -Solar Renewable 
Purchase Obligation (RPO). 
c. Tariff rationalization measures for bringing down hydro power tariff. 
d. Budgetary Support for Flood Moderation/Storage Hydro Electric Projects (HEPs). 
e. Budgetary Support for Cost of Enabling Infrastructure, i.e. roads/bridges 
 
i. ₹ 1.5 crores per MW for projects upto 200 MW. 
ii. ₹ 1.0 crores per MW for projects above 200 MW. 
 
1.12.3 Government of India have taken certain other measures to bring down tariff in order to 
give a boost to the development of hydro power sector like free power during the initial years, 

 
11 
 
allotting projects for longer period of 70 years, 50% reimbursement of State GST and booking of 
Local Area Development Fund (LADF) to any head other than project cost, bundling of 
hydropower with Renewable Energy (RE) etc. so as to lower the tariff in initial years. 
 
1.12.4 In order to ensure timely completion of projects, Dispute Avoidance Mechanism has been 
introduced in Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) to minimize/resol ve issues in under 
construction project at inception state itself.  Task force to develop an IT Based Monitoring 
System has been constituted at National Level to monitor the progress of development of Hydro 
Electric Projects (HEPs).  In addition, Ministry of Power has issued the guidelines for reducing 
the incidence of time and cost overrun.   
 
1.12.5 At present 7 Hydro Electric Power (HEPs) (above 25 MW) totalling to 3157 MW and two 
transmission schemes, viz., North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project 
(NERPSIP) with an estimated cost of Rs 6,700 crores and Comprehensive Scheme for 
Strengthening Power Transmission and Distribution system in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim 
with an estimated cost of ₹ 9,129 crores are under implementation for improvin g power related 
infrastructure in the North Eastern Region. Also,  on 7 th December, .2021 Ministry of Finance 
has accorded approval for setting up one manufacturing zone for Power and Renewable Energy 
Equipments with an indicative outlay of ₹ 400 crores fo r further growth of the sector in the 
region. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.12.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
1.13 Bamboo 
Recommendation 
1.13.1 The Committee takes notes of the contribution of National Bamboo Mission (NBM) in 
enhancing income of North East States through community involvement, biodiversity protection 
and sustainable development. The Committee hopes that with focused strategy of action being 
adopted, NBM will be able to tap the versatility of Bamboo and develop the value chain for  
domestic and global markets. 
(Para 4.16.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2 The Restructured National Bamboo Mission (NBM) was launched in 2018 -19 for holistic 
development of the bamboo sector through a cluster -based approach in a hub (industry) and 
spoke model t o harness the opportunities by providing backward and forward linkages among 
the stakeholders – linking farmers to markets. The Mission is streamlining its various 
interventions to enhance domestic industrial activities as well as augmenting the farmer‟s 

 
12 
 
income. The scheme is being implemented in 24 States/UTs including all the 8 States of NER 
through the respective State Bamboo Missions and Bamboo Technology Support Groups 
(BTSGs)/ R&D institutes/ National Level Agencies. 
 
1.13.3 To implement the extant sc heme deliverables, NBM has focussed on development of 
complete value chain to link growers with consumers starting from planting material, plantation 
and creation of facilities for collection, aggregation, processing, marketing and brand building 
initiative in a cluster approach mode. 
 
1.13.4 Since the launch of the scheme, ₹ 291.17 crores has been allocated and ₹ 144.03 crores 
has been released to the NER States and North Eastern Cane and Bamboo Development Council 
(NECBDC). 
 
1.13.5 Also, 162 of Bamboo Nurseries have been established and 5445 ha non-forest area has 
been planted with bamboo species in the NER. 33 bamboo treatment and preservation units, 208 
Product Development and Processing units and 37 Infrastructures for Bamboo Market were 
established in the region. Further, 5255 persons were  trained and 92 of Workshop/ seminar/ 
trade fairs/ exhibition activities were conducted. Formation of 18 Bamboo FPOs in Assam was 
done with a view to further promote the cultivation of Bamboo species. 
 
1.13.6 NBM has identified 22 Bamboo Clusters in nine S tates inter alia Assam, Nagaland and 
Tripura for making different bamboo products to cater to both domestic and international 
markets.  
 
1.13.7 Continuous deliberations were held with the other concerned Ministries like Ministry of 
Small and Medium Enterpr ises (MSME), MoDONER, MoSD, MoEF&CC for the holistic 
development of bamboo sector. A dedicated bamboo window “The Green Gold Collection” 
[https://gem.gov.in/national-bamboo-mission], has been created on the GeM portal for the 
promotion of bamboo goods and services. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.13.8 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
1.14 Technological advancements for improvement of Agricultural produce 
Recommendation 
1.14.1 The Committee notes the efforts of the Department of Agricultural Research & 
Education/Indian Council of Agriculture Research (DARE/ICAR) Institutes to educate farmers 
on relevant technologies and processes through capacity building trainings, demonstrations, 
exposure visits, Farm Schools, Field Days Kisan Mela, Animal Health Cam ps, etc. The 

 
13 
 
Committee hopes that important technologies having potential to improve the agriculture 
produce such as Integrated Farming System, Livestock based production systems, etc. will result 
in better yield and in turn help in economic wellbeing of farmers as well as in NER. 
(Para 4.17.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.14.2 Department (DARE/ICAR) developed Agricultural and allied technologies suitable for 
NER farmers/ stakeholders to improve quality and quantity of agricultural production and help 
the farmers for the economic wellbeing. Apart from skill development trainings on technologies 
for agriculture, horticulture, animal, poultry and fish productions, farmers were supported 
through input supply of seeds of improved crop varieties, pesticides for crop prote ction, piglets, 
day old as well as 06 weeks old chicks, feeds and feed additives, treatments and medicines of 
animals, improved breeding animals for breed improvement, fish production and fishing 
facilities (fish seed and feed, nets, boats and pens; water testing kits and aquarium tanks etc.), 
livestock strains and bio -product production facilities, that support improved yields with 
economic wellbeing of NER communities. 
1.14.3 Department has  developed tools, farm equipment/machines and technologies for storage, 
post-harvest processing and value addition of agricultural commodities to minimize the losses. 
Department has also provided hands - on-trainings to farmers, entrepreneurs and self -help 
groups and established agro processing centres at various locations.  
 
1.14.4 The technologies/machinery developed for NER is as under:  
 
 Bamboo frame Rain Shelter cultivation of strawberry. 
 Rain Water Harvesting (RWH) Technology.  
 Development of package of practice for Asparagus (Asparagus officinalis).  
 Development of l ow cost naturally ventilated poly house.  
 Development of package of practice for off season organic capsicum cultivation.  
 Storage structure for green gram and paddy for high moisture environment.  
 Control of Sitophilus oryze and Caliosobruchus chinensis by using visual stimuli.  
 Development of storage bin including pheromones concept, visually stimuli aspect, moisture 
absorbant and heating system by using solar panel for storage of food grains. 
 Peeling machine of Perkia specious/burghii (local Yongchak).  
 Pinea pple peeler cum slicer.  
 Pineapple quarter cutting machine.  
 Pineapple leaf fibre extraction machine.  
 Environment controlled storage structure with colour and pheromone trapping for test 
insects. 
 Areca Nut peeling tool.  

 
14 
 
 Design and development of a cold plasm a generator for microbial decontamination of some 
minor fruits of NE India. 
 Foot pedal operated meat mincer.  
 Poultry processing cum by -product collection unit.  
 Mobile pork cutting, Display Cum Selling Unit.  
 
1.14.5 These technologies have benefited agricul tural yield and its storage in NER. Farmers of 
Sikkim, Meghalaya and other NE states, where growing of crops is very difficult due to extreme 
weather conditions, have adopted technology of "Iron and bamboo framed Naturally 
Ventilated Polyhouse" (of average size of 500 m 2) for vegetable cultivation round the year and 
on rotation basis for colour capsicum, tomato, cucumber, leafy vegetables (spinach, lettuce, 
coriander etc) successfully. Farmers are getting net income of ₹ 80,000/ - to 2.00 lakh with 
Benefit: Cost ratio of 2.5-3.0 by adopting protected cultivation technologies. The Department has 
established a pilot scale plant for value added fish products production at Guijan village, 
Tinsukia district, Assam with production capacity of 200kg finished product per day. 
 
1.14.6 Also 9 Agro-processing centres (APC)  have  been  established in NER. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.14.7 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
1.15 Deforestation 
Recommendation 
1.15.1 The Committee is deeply concerned regarding man -animal conflict and subsequent loss 
of lives involved in it. The Committee observes that in recent times, there have been many cases 
of man-animal conflict. Urgent necessary steps must be taken by State Governments to avoid 
such conflicts at large. The Commit tee notes the major threats to biodiversity and recommends 
that Ministry of DoNER must coordinate with Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change (MoEF&C) and State Governments to devise a clear roadmap for preserving and 
protecting the biodiversi ty. The Committee is concerned with the fact that the forest cover has 
decreased between ISFR 2011 and ISFR 2021 and therefore, strongly recommends that urgent 
necessary action must be taken to address the issue of deforestation by carrying out major 
plantation drives and regularly monitoring the forest cover in the region. The Committee further 
recommends that various centrally sponsored initiatives must accord priority towards the 
ultimate goal of preserving and protecting the forests. 
(Para 4.21.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 

 
15 
 
1.15.2 Following steps have already been taken by Government for mitigating Man -Animal 
Conflict, for Biodiversity preservation and to address the issue of deforestation: 
 
i) The Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) provides financial 
assistance to States /UTs under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes Development of Wildlife 
Habitats, Project Tiger and Project Elephant for management of wildlife and its habitats. It 
includes the ex -gratia relief to be paid for loss of life or pr operty caused by wild animals. The 
Ministry provides funds to States/UTs for ex - gratia payment in connection with wildlife 
depredation as follows: 
 
SN Nature of damage caused by wild animals Amount of ex-gratia relief 
1 Death or permanent incapacitation to human 
beings  
₹5 lakh 
2 Grievous injury  ₹ 2 lakh 
3 Minor injury Cost of treatment up to  ₹ 25000/- 
4 Loss of property/crops  States /UTs may adhere to the cost 
norms prescribed by them 
 
State Governments also provide ex -gratia relief for depredatio n by wild animals from their own 
funds. The rate of ex- gratia payment varies from State to State. 
 
ii) Financial assistance is provided by the Ministry to States/Union Territories under the 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of „Development of Wildlife Habitats‟, „P roject Tiger‟ and 
„Project Elephant‟ for activities like creation and maintenance of water holes for wild animals in 
Protected Areas, soil and moisture conservation measures, establishment of anti -poaching 
camps, strengthening wildlife veterinary care, eradication of weeds, creation and maintenance of 
fire lines, etc.  
 
Project Tiger: The Government of India, through the National Tiger Conservation Authority, has 
advocated a 3 pronged strategy to manage human-tiger negative interactions as follows: - 
(a) Material and logistical support:  Funding support through the ongoing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger, is provided to tiger reserves for acquiring capacity in terms 
of forest staff, infrastructure and material, to deal with tigers dispersing out of source areas.   
(b) Restricting habitat interventions: In case tiger numbers are at carrying capacity levels, it 
is advised that habitat interventions should be limited so that there is no excessive spill over of 
wildlife including tigers thereby minimiz ing man -animal conflict.   Further, in buffer areas 
around tiger reserves, habitat interventions are restricted such that they are sub -optimal and 
judicious enough to facilitate dispersal to other habitat areas only. 

 
16 
 
(c) Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs):  The National Tiger Conservation Authority has 
issued SOPs to deal with human -animal conflict which  inter alia include the issue of managing 
dispersing tigers, managing livestock kills so as to reduce conflict as well as relocating tigers 
from source areas  to areas where density of tiger is low, so that conflict in rich source areas 
does not occur. 
 
Project Elephant: MoEF&CC provides financial and technical assistance to States/UTs under 
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes „Project Elephant‟ to protect elephant , their habitat and 
corridors, to address issue of man -elephant conflict and welfare of captive elephants in the 
country. Critical elephant habitats are notified as „Elephant Reserve‟ for focus and synergy in 
elephant conservation and to reduce conflict. So far 31 Elephant Reserves have been established 
in 14 major elephant States in which 10 ER's are from North -eastern States such as Assam, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland.  To reduce man -elephant conflict and to avoid 
retaliatory killing of elepha nts, compensation is being provided to local communities for loss of 
their property and life caused by wild elephants.  
 
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 and the Rules made there under also provide 
for use of the Fund for development of wildli fe habitats, establishment of animal rescue centers, 
etc. which also contribute to reduction in human-animal conflict. 
 
iii) Guidelines on eco-friendly measures to mitigate the impacts of linear infrastructure have 
been published by the Wildlife Institute of In dia to assist project agencies in designing linear 
infrastructure.  
 
Roadmap for preserving and protecting the biodiversity : Some important steps taken by the 
Government for preservation of biodiversity and resources inter alia include: survey, 
inventorization, taxonomic validation and threat assessment of floral and faunal resources; 
assessment of the forest cover to develop an accurate database for planning and monitoring; 
establishment of a Protected Area Network of National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries, 
Conservation and Community Reserves; designating Biosphere Reserves for conservation of 
representative ecosystems; undertaking of species oriented programmes, such as Project Tiger 
and Project Elephant; complemented with ex -situ conservation efforts. In ad dition, Biological 
Diversity Act 2002 has also been enacted with the aim to conserve biological resources of the 
country and regulation of access to these resources to ensure equitable sharing of benefits 
arising out of their use. 
 
For ensuring protection of flora and fauna within protected areas, Management Plans 
are prepared by State Forest Departments which inter alia include a schedule of activities to be 
taken up over a period of ten years. The Government supports conservation of some 
prioritized/threatened medicinal plants harboured in specially designated Medicinal Plants 
Conservation Areas (MPCAs) that are primarily forested areas. 
 

 
17 
 
The National Afforestation & Eco -development Board promotes afforestation, tree 
planting, ecological restoration and ec o-development activities in the country, with special 
attention to degraded areas as well as ecologically fragile areas. Green India Mission which is 
one of the eight Missions under the National Action Plan on Climate Change aims to increase 
forest/tree co ver and improve quality of forest cover, improve ecosystem services including 
biodiversity and hydrological services, increase forest based livelihood income of households 
living in and around the forests, and enhance annual CO2 sequestration. An amount of  ₹ 612.20 
crores have been released to the sixteen states and one UT for creation of plantation over an 
area of 1,17,503 Ha. From 2015 -16 to 2021-22, ₹180.95 crores has been released in Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim to carry out afforestat ion activities over the 53,379Ha 
area.  
 
iv) National Action Plan on Forest Fire: MoEF&CC has prepared a National Action Plan 
on Forest Fire in April 2018 to minimize forest fires by informing, enabling and empowering 
forest fringe communities and incentivizin g them to work in tandem with the State Forest 
Departments. Financial assistance is provided for various forest fire prevention and 
management measures such as modern tools for fire extinguishing, use of communication and 
information technology, etc creation and maintenance of fire lines in forest areas, engagement of 
fire watchers, creation of water storage structures in forest areas, strengthening of forest 
infrastructure, soil and moisture conservation works in high risk areas, awareness creation, 
incentivizing villages/communities for protection against forest fire etc. Under the Centrally 
Sponsored Forest Fire Prevention and Management Scheme, a sum of about ₹125 crores has 
been released to the States in last three years (2018-19 to 2020-21). 
  
The reco mmendation of the Committee has been forwarded to various division of the 
Ministry handling the centrally sponsored schemes so that initiatives taken under the schemes 
must accord priority towards the ultimate goal of preserving and protecting the forest. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.15.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
1.16 Development Support Services for States (DSSS) of NlTI Aayog 
Recommendation 
1.16.1 The Committee appreciates the Development and Support Services for States (DSSS) 
initiative of NITI Aayog under which studies were carried out to explore the feasibility of cable 
cars as a mode to public transport in the cities of Ganktok and Aizawl. The Committee  hopes 
that the implementation of project will be  worked out in near future and reco mmends that while 
developing framework for the project, due consideration may be given to the projects‟ cost 
effectiveness and economic viability as well as affordability by the people. 
(Para 4.25.6 ibid) 

 
18 
 
Action Taken 
1.16.2 Recommendation of the Committee Noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.16.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
1.16.4 The Committee notes that in NER -SDG Index, the performance of Meghalaya, Nagaland 
and Arunachal Pradesh have been low as compared to other NE States. It  also notes that 4 out of 
bottom 10 districts in NER District SDG Index are from Arunachal Pradesh, 5 are from 
Nagaland and 1 is from Meghalaya. The Committee has been informed that the Central 
Ministries / Departments and NE States have been requested to make interventions to improve 
SDG score in different districts. The Committee is of the view that merely issuing instructions is 
not enough and, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER may again take up with the 
concerned States to create an actio n plan with a timeline for the development of the low scoring 
districts to bring them at par with the front Runners. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 4.25.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.16.5 MDoNER has signed an MOU with the NITI Aayog on 2 nd March, 2022 for preparation 
of  2 nd Edition of the SDG Index and a dynamic Dashboard at District level at 8 NE States.  A 
total amount of ₹60.46 lakh has been sanctioned of which ₹30.23 lakh has been released to NITI 
Aayog on 17th March, 2022.   
 
1.16.6 Further, a presentation on NER SDG Index was made by NITI Aayog, underlying its use 
in policy formulation and implementation so as to improve the SDG Score of the low scoring 
districts was made on the culmination of North East Festival on 4th April, 2022. 
 
1.16.7 In March, 2022, MDoNER had already requested the State Governments and Planning 
Departments of Meghalaya, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh to take suitable intervention to 
improve SDG score of their districts and creat e an action plan with a timeline for the 
development of the low scoring districts to bring them at par with the front Runners. 
 
1.16.8 The 4 lowest SDG Districts in Arunachal Pradesh and 5 in Nagaland and 1 in 
Meghalaya will continuously be pursued and fac ilitated by MDoNER to develop time bound 
Action Plans to attempt to show progress in 2022-23 itself. 
 

 
19 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.16.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
1.16.10 The Committee notes the efforts carried out by the Minist ry in Garo hills of 
Meghalaya towards development. The Committee further notes that the percentage of households 
living in katcha houses in the State of Arunachal Pradesh is 29% which is much higher than that 
of average of rest of the India i.e. 4.2%. The Committee recommends that a focused drive should 
be carried out in the region, particularly in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, to improve the access 
to basic facilities such as housing, among the people living there. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should put in more efforts towards implementing poverty 
alleviation programmes in close coordination with the State Governments  so as to bring more 
and more people above poverty line and meet the SDG target by 2030. 
(Para 4.25.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.16.11 In pursuance of Government‟s vision of „Housing for All‟, Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is implementing Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana -Urban (PMAY-U) 
since June, 2015 to provide all -weather pucca houses with basic amenities to all eli gible urban 
households. Under the Scheme, all States/Union Territories (UTs) were mandated to carry out 
demand survey in their respective Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to assess actual demand of houses 
and saturate the entire demand of housing.  
  
1.16.12 The Scheme does not put any bar on number of beneficiaries from any State/UT 
so as to achieve the goal of „Housing for All‟. Further, States/UTs were advised to make sure 
that no eligible beneficiary as per the PMAY -U Scheme Guidelines is left out from seeking  
benefits under the Scheme. Accordingly, after demand survey projects have been prepared, 
appraised by the State/UT Governments and approved by the State Level Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) chaired by Chief Secretary of the concerned State/U T and 
forwarded to MoHUA for consideration of release of Central Assistance.   Accordingly, all 
North-Eastern States including Arunachal Pradesh also conducted demand survey and got 
approved entire demand of houses from all their ULBs under PMAY -U.  There is no proposal 
from any NE State pending with Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
 
1.16.13 The details of houses approved in North -Eastern States and percentage of urban 
population covered as on 31 st March, 2022 as against national average of 13.78% is o utlined 
below: 
 
 
  

 
20 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State No. of Houses 
Approved under 
PMAY-U 
% of Urban 
Population 
Coverage 
1 Assam 1,61,309 16.53 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 8,999 12.93 
3 Manipur 56,029 30.71 
4 Meghalaya 4,752 3.61 
5 Mizoram 40,452 33.41 
6 Nagaland 32,335 25.37 
7 Sikkim 701 2.07 
8 Tripura 94,289 44.15 
  
1.16.14 Since, all North -Eastern States have already saturated their demand for housing under 
PMAY-U, the requirement of any special drive may not be required at this juncture. 
 
1.16.15 Also the issue of 29% “Kat cha Houses” in Arunachal Pradesh will be taken up with 
State Government as well as Ministry of Rural Development. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.16.16   The Committee notes the reply. 
1.17 List of projects sanctioned as ‘untied fund’ 
Recommendation 
1.17.1 The Committee appreciates the welfare measures carried out by the Ministry for the 
management of COVID -19 pandemic, especially in the fields of livelihood generation. It also 
notes that only ₹ 78.71 crores has been released, although ₹ 110.52 crores had been earmarked 
for the financial year 2021 -22 against projects initiated for strengthening of health infrastructure 
of the North Eastern States. The Committee hopes that the balance of f unds would be 
appropriately utilized during 2021 -22 on health infrastructure. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the infrastructure created utilizing the funds allocated under this head. 
(Para 4.27.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.17.2 Recommendations of the Committee noted for compliance. Under these health projects 
financial assistance is provided for strengthening health infrastructure of the State Governments 
for combating outbreak of pandemic COVID -19, which inter alia, include hospital equipments, 
ambulances, oxygen generating plants etc. 
 
1.17.3 Some of the major infrastructures created and equipment procured are given below: 
 

 
21 
 
i. Oxygen generation plant. 
ii. Refrigerator to 149 PHSCs. 
iii. Rapid Antigen Test kits 
iv. PPE Suits. 
v. Setting up of BSL-2 Virology Laboratory. 
vi. Thermal Imager Testo. 
vii. BiPAP Machine. 
viii. Sodium Hypochloride. 
ix. Oxygen Refilling. 
x. Digital BP Monitor. 
xi. PCR Machine. 
xii. Setting up of Isolation Wards. 
xiii. Two Layer/Three Masks. 
xiv. N-95 masks. 
xv. Gloves. 
xvi. Hand sanitizers. 
xvii. Ambulances. 
xviii. Strengthening of COVID-19 Centres. 
xix. Ventilators of COVID-19 Centres. 
xx. Screening Sites etc.  
 
1.17.4 During FY 2021 -22, two more projects for strengthening health infrastructure for 
combating COVID-19 pandemic, costing ₹5.67 crores were also sanctioned. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.17.5 The Committee notes the reply. 
 

 
22 
 
CHAPTER II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the 
matter in view of the Government’s reply 
 
2.1 Utilisation of funds 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of DoNER for complete utilization of the 
funds in the financial year 2020 -21 (though in 2020 -21, the BE of ₹ 3048.73 crores was 
drastically reduced to ₹ 1860.00 crores due to COVID -19 pandemic) and maintaining a steady 
pace of utilization of funds under the overall allocation till the 3 rd quarter of the year 2021 -22. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will u tilise the allocated funds judiciously and carry 
forward the same pace of utilisation of funds in the next financial year 2022-23.  
(Para 2.2.3 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 The Ministry has utilized the funds of ₹ 2657.47 crores against the allocated budget o f ₹ 
2658 crores in 2021-22. 
 
2.1.3 Further, the Ministry has noted the recommendation for utilisation of funds in the 
current financial year 2022-23. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.1.4 The Committee notes the reply and the efforts of the Ministry f or achieving the 
optimum utilization of funds during the year 2021-22. 
Recommendation 
2.1.5 The Committee also takes note that the utilization of funds (up to 31 st December, 2021) 
under Hill Area Development Programme (HADP) is ₹ 19.85 crores, which is onl y 44.11% of 
the allocated amount of ₹ 45.00 crores for the financial year 2021 -22. The Committee observes 
that this scheme is crucial for the holistic and inclusive development of hill districts in Manipur. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry must i mpress upon the concerned State 
Government to take urgent steps for enhancing its capacity to optimally utilize the allocated 
funds. 
(Para 2.2.15 ibid) 
 

 
23 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.6 Recommendations of the Committee noted. Ministry of DoNER has been reviewing the 
progress of the projects at various levels. State Government of Manipur has also been requested 
to review the pace and progress of projects to optimize utilization of funds and timely completion 
of projects. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.1.7 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.2 Capital Section 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee observes that t here is a shortfall in the allocated amount of ₹ 659.96 
crores in BE 2022-23 in the Capital Section as against the projected demand of the Ministry of ₹ 
793.76 crores. The Committee feels that this may severely affect the implementation of several 
projects and schemes being taken up under these heads. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of DoNER should take -up this matter with the Ministry of Finan ce and 
demand additional assistance at RE stage of the financial year 2022 -23. The Ministry should 
also take up with NEC for a balanced pace of utilization of allocated funds so as to avoid cuts 
by the M/o Finance in the budgetary projections. 
(Para 2.4.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 The recommendation of the Committee to take up the short fall of Capital funds and to 
demand additional assistance with Ministry of Finance at RE Stage of the financial year 2022-23 
is noted for compliance. 
 
2.2.3 With regard to ba lanced pace of utilization of funds in FY 2022 -23, it is submitted that 
owing to implementation of revised fund flow procedure for Central Sector Schemes, funds  
could not be utilized during the first quarter as designation of Central Nodal  Agency (CNA), 
subsequent opening of Central Nodal Account, refund of unspent balance with states and the 
Implementing Agency etc. required adequate time to be finalized.  
 
2.2.4 As of now, in compliance with revised procedure for flow of funds by Ministry of 
Finance, the CNA has been designated and the relevant accounts for all the Schemes/Packages 
have been opened. Subsequently, all the State Governments and Implementing Agencies have 
been requested to comply with instruction. The Implementing Agencies which  are alread y 
onboard on the EAT module of PFMS have been requested to adhere to the revised instructions 
of  flow of funds. 

 
24 
 
2.2.5 All out efforts shall be made to ensure that the allocated funds are fully utilized during 
the remaining quarters of the financial year 2022-23. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.2.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
2.3 Schemes of North East Council 
 
Recommendation 
2.3.1 The Committee notes the role of the NEC in formulation of regional plans for integrated 
and balanced socio-economic development of the NER.  The Committee suggests that the NEC 
and the Ministry of DoNER must take necessary steps to enhance the infrastructure capacity and 
technological connectivity in the NER. The Committee also hopes that effective complia nce 
mechanism is implemented and reviewed at regular intervals for its effectiveness and wherever 
required, it is modified, so that the projects are completed in a time bound manner. 
(Para 3.1.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 NEC has been providing financial as sistance for a variety of projects including 
infrastructure projects like construction of roads, improving air connectivity, through State 
Governments. Most of the road projects are being implemented by respective State Governments. 
However, central agenci es like NHIDCL/CPWD are being engaged for inter -state projects. 
Besides, NEC has also supported infrastructure projects of Health, Agriculture, Tourism, 
Culture, Sports, Power, etc.  
 
2.3.3 From January to December, 2021, a total no. of 71 projects support ed under various 
schemes of NEC were physically inspected by officials of NEC. Review meetings with concerned 
States of NER/agencies were also held regularly. Recently, during January -February, 2022, a 
series of review meeting with all the NER States were held under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
NEC to review the ongoing projects.  
 
2.3.4 Online monitoring portal of infrastructural projects using geo -spatial tools and 
techniques on real-time basis has been launched on 04 th May, 2022 by His Excellency Presi dent 
of India. A total no. of 587 projects (NEC=550 & M/o DoNER=37) have been on boarded on the 
portal initially. Out of these, a total no. of 544 projects (NEC=510 & M/o DoNER=34) have 
been geo-tagged as on 31st March, 2022. 
 
 

 
25 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.3.5 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by NEC in respect of monitoring and 
implementing inter -state projects in the NER. It is of the view that infrastructure and 
connectivity are some of the most basic requirement for progress of any regi on and 
collaborated efforts are needed on the part of State governments and national agencies for 
better outcome in these projects. It hopes that the mechanisms adopted to achieve the 
targets will yield the desired results. 
2.4 Central Pool of Resources fo r North East and Sikkim /North East Special 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Committee further notes that funds to the extent of only 44.11% of the revised 
allocation have been utilized till the end of the third quarter o f financial year 2021 -22. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation at para 2.2.15. The Committee may also be apprised 
about the list of ongoing projects under HADP. 
(Para 3.3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 The list of ongoing projects under HADP is as under:-  
 
S. No. Project 
1 Foot path Suspension Bridge (11) 
2 Establishment of Cold Storage Chain at Tamenglong. 
3 Water Supply Scheme at Tamah, Tamei SD 
4 Tea Processing Unit at Tamenglong HQ 
5 Establishment of Bamboo Processing Centre at Tamenglong HQ 
6 Development & promotion of Eco Tourism Centres at Zeliad lake 
&Tharon Cave, Tamenglong 
7 Construction of Pack House at 24 locations 
8 Fruits and vegetables processing Plant at Tamenglong 
9 Spice processing Unit at Tamei 
10 Fruits and Vegetables Processing Plant at Azuram 
11 Transit/ Working Hostel for District Level Officers at 3 Sub Division HQ 
(TML, Tamei, Tousem) 
12 Convention Centre / Training Hall at Tamenglong 
13 Construction of Women Marketing Complex at Tamenglong DHQ 
14 Rural water supply scheme at Nungba Subdivision HQ 
15 Rural water Supply scheme for Haochong SD HQ and adjoining areas 

 
26 
 
16 Construction of Transit Quarter/Hostel at Nungba Higher secondary 
School 
17 Construction of Transit Hostel cum Quarter for Govt. 
Employee/Doctor/Teachers at Noney HQ 
18 Construction of Transit Quarter/Hostel at Khangsillung Hr. Secondary 
School, Khoupum 
19 Construction of Market shed with storage at Lukhambi 
20 Construction of Chilly/Spices processing centre at Khoupum under 
integrated horti/Agri project 
21 Construction of Pack house at 20 places under Integrated Horti /Agri 
project 
22 Construction of Bamboo shoot processing centre at Noney under 
integrated Horti/ Agri 
23 Construction of incubation centre under integrated Horti/Agri project 
24 Tea processing centre under Integrated Horti/Agri project 
25 Engaging local vibrant NGO for community mobilization and institutional 
building under Integrated Horti/Agri project 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.4.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
2.4.4 The Committee observes that projects in physical and social infrastructure taken up under 
NESIDS have 100% Central Funding. The Committee takes note of expenditure incurred till 
December 2021 in NLCPR -State and NLCPR -Central. The Committee is of the view that Non -
Lapsable Central Pool of Resources Scheme may be accorded priority for speedy development of 
infrastructure. The Committee further wishes to be appraised about the details of asset creation 
(project-wise) under the capital head. 
(Para 3.3.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.5 Under NLCPR-State scheme various projects were sanctioned across sectors viz. 
health, education, road & bridges, sports, power, water supply, tourism & culture etc.  for 
development of North Eastern Region. As on 31st March, .2022, out of 1635 sanctioned projects 
worth ₹16233.78 crores sanctioned under NLCPR -State scheme,1262 projects worth ₹ 
10315.55 crores have been completed, while 373 projects worth ₹5918.22 crores are ongoing 
and need to be funded till their completion. 

 
27 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.6 The Committee is aware that the NLCPR -State scheme has been restructured as 
North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) and committed 
liabilities under the previous scheme are being met.  The Committee notes the details of the 
sanctioned, completed and ongoing projects under this Scheme. 
Recommendation 
2.4.7 The Committee observes that no funds have been released for the State of Manipur and 
Tripura under Non Lapsable Central Poo l of Resources Scheme during the financial year 2021 -
22 (up to 31 st December, 2021). The Committee would like to know the reasons for non -release 
of funds for these two states as NLCPR -State scheme aims to fill up the gap in infrastructure 
sector of the North Eastern Region by providing financial assistance to the projects prioritized by 
the State Governments. The Committee would like to be appraised about the major projects 
being undertaken as well as prioritized under this scheme by Manipur and Tripura. 
(Para 3.3.21 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.8 Since the commencement of North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme 
(NESIDS) in 2017, funding under NLCPR -State scheme is provided for ongoing projects only, 
based on actual progress and furnishing of updated  documentation. Details of projects 
sanctioned under NLCPR-State scheme in Manipur and Tripura is as under: 
  
(Cost ₹ in crores) 
State 
Projects Sanctioned Projects Completed Projects Ongoing 
No. Cost No. Cost No. Cost 
Manipur 177 1857.13 154 1162.48 23 694.65 
Tripura 122 1874.52 97 1205.48 25 669.04 
 
2.4.9 During the financial year 2021 -22, funds amounting t o ₹5.65 crores and ₹12.68 crores 
were released to the State Governments Manipur and Tripura respectively, for ongoing 
projects under NLCPR-State Scheme.   
 
2.4.10 Major projects (Cost >₹100 crores) undertaken under NLCPR -State scheme in 
Manipur and Tripura are as under: 
 
 (₹ in crores) 
Sl. 
No 
Project Cost Status 

 
28 
 
Manipur 
1 Construction of 400 KV Line on D/C Towers initially 
charged at 132 KV from Yurembam to Thoubal via Nambol 
in Manipur 
123.15 Ongoing 
2 Construction of 400/132/33 KV SS at Thoubal in Manipur 128.24 Ongoing 
3 Loktak Downstream H.E. Project (2x33 MW) 109.59 Ongoing 
4 Laimakhong Heavy Fuel Bassed Power project. 117.61 Completed 
5 Senapati-Phaibung Road (128.90 Kms.) 167.73 Ongoing 
Tripura 
1 Government Medical College and Hospital at Agartala 104.51 Completed 
2 Upgradation of Halahali-Ambassa-Dangabari-Bel 189.09 Ongoing 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.4.11 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation 
2.4.12 The Committee notes that as per the guidelines, number of instalments for release of 
funds for sanctioned projects has been reduced to two. In such scenario, the Committee 
recommends that Ministry must devise an efficient monitoring mechanism to ensure timely 
completion of on-going projects without any cost overrun.  
(Para 3.3.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.13 To avoid cost and time overruns for the projects various measures have been taken by 
the Ministry which, include implementation of Expenditure Advance Transfer (EAT) module of 
Public Financial Management System (PFMS) and re lease of funds to implementing agencies 
through this system only; appointment of State -wise Chief Nodal Officers/Nodal Officers for 
effective implementation/monitoring of projects funded under various schemes of this Ministry; 
frequent review meetings with  the senior officers of the State Governments, and close 
coordination and communication between MDoNER and NE State Governments for project 
implementation. Issues related to projects are also discussed during the meetings of Inter -
Ministerial Committees which are co-chaired by Chief Secretaries of NE States. 
 
2.4.14 One of the bottlenecks in project implementation under the NLCPR scheme, which was 
on 90:10 funding pattern, was non -release of state share of funds. The scheme of NESIDS 
provides with 100% funding from Central Government to overcome this issue. Moreover, real-
time monitoring of infrastructural projects using geo -spatial tools and techniques is being 
launched shortly. 
 

 
29 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.4.15 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.5 North East State Road PMU (ADB Assisted) 
 
Recommendation 
2.5.1 The Committee notes that the allocation under NE State Road PMU is for committed 
liabilities of on -going projects and no new project is proposed to be taken up under this Head. 
The Committee, t herefore, recommends that the Ministry must expedite its efforts to clear 
liabilities of the on -going projects within this prescribed time. The Committee further 
recommends that an assessment of the impact of the NE States Road (ADB assisted) project may 
be made and the findings may be shared with the Committee. 
(Para 3.4.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs'  approval for project completion is upto 
August 2022. Out of 12 road projects, construction/upgradation of 11 road projects  under 
NERSDS (EAP) have been completed in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram 
and Sikkim. One sub project in Tripura is under implementation and it is expected to be 
completed by August, 2022. 
 
2.5.3 During 2021 -22, funds were kept for the re maining project and work relating to 
restoration of road after landslide in Sikkim. Besides this, small amount is kept under 
Professional Services and Office Expenses for running the Project Monitoring Unit in the 
Ministry.  
 
2.5.4 The objectives of this ADB assisted road project was as follows: 
 
i. Improved road connectivity in the NER, which would be measured in terms of the number 
of District/Block Headquarters accessible by improved State highways or District roads 
ii. Reduced travel time on the Project roads 
iii. Reduced transport cost along the Project roads, which would be measured in terms of the 
passenger fares of public transport and freight charges. 
iv. Provide connectivity to remote areas of North East thus opening new potential avenues of 
business in horticulture, forest products and tourism. 
v. Socio-economic improvement of the people of the project area in particular and the 
country as a whole. 
 

 
30 
 
2.5.5 The project serves 151 villages going through 16 Districts in 6 project States serving 
nearly 36 lakhs of people since its start. At present, no new road project is being undertaken 
under this specific project and the project aims for upgradation/renovation of the already 
existing roads. By providing improved travelling experience, the project intends to enhance 
socio-economic improvement in the region. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.5.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.6 Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) 
Recommendation 
2.6.1 The Committee notes that no expenditure was incurred during the financial year 2020 -21. 
In the current financial year also, the allocation has been reduced to ₹ 3.31 crores in RE 2021 -22 
against BE 2021-22 of ₹ 11.00 crores. The Committee also takes note of the impediments being 
faced by the Council in implementing developmental activities  and feels that nothing seems 
moving in the projects under BTC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
must work in tandem with the State Government and the Council to remove bottlenecks in the 
area of transfer of funds and the Ministry may  advise the State Government to work out 
modalities to transfer funds so that developmental activities can be carried out expeditiously and 
without delay. The Committee further recommends that effective co -ordination and regular 
interactions amongst all the stakeholders is the need of the hour that can go a long way in holistic 
socio-economic development of the area. 
(Para 3.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 Against the total package of ₹750.00 crores, 65 projects costing ₹749.64 crores were 
sanctioned and out of these, 54 projects worth ₹589.11 crores have been completed and 11 
projects worth ₹160.53 crores are ongoing, as on 31th March, 2022. Continuous effo rts are 
being made by the Ministry through regular follow -up with the senior officials of the State 
Government of Assam/Council for timely submission of all the requisite documents in respect of 
the ongoing projects so that balance funds could be released by the Ministry and project is 
completed without further delay. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.6.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 

 
31 
 
2.7 Smart City Project in NER 
Recommendation 
2.7.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry and State G overnments of 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura for optimum utilization of funds released under the Smart City 
Projects. However, the Committee notes that the remaining five states, i.e. Assam, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram have not been abl e to utilize the allocated funds 
satisfactorily. The Committee is of the view that under -utilization of funds can delay the 
completion of the infrastructure under the project in these states which may result in cost 
escalation in due course. The Committee,  therefore, recommends that these five States may be 
advised to put in sustained efforts to meet the targets envisaged by them under this scheme in a 
time bound manner. 
(Para 4.1.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.7.2 In pursuance of Government‟s vision of „Housing fo r All‟, Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is implementing Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana -Urban (PMAY-U) since 
June, 2015 to provide all -weather pucca houses with basic amenities to all eligible urban 
households. Under the Scheme, all States/Union T erritories (UTs) were mandated to carry out 
demand survey in their respective Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to assess actual demand of houses 
and saturate the entire demand of housing.  
  
2.7.3 The Scheme does not put any bar on number of beneficiaries from an y State/UT so as to 
achieve the goal of „Housing for All‟. Further, States/UTs were advised to make sure that no 
eligible beneficiary as per the PMAY -U Scheme Guidelines is left out from seeking benefits 
under the Scheme. Accordingly, after demand survey p rojects have been prepared, appraised by 
the State/UT Governments and approved by the State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee (SLSMC) chaired by Chief Secretary of the concerned State/UT and forwarded to 
MoHUA for consideration of release of Centr al Assistance.   Accordingly, all North -Eastern 
States including Arunachal Pradesh also conducted demand survey and got approved entire 
demand of houses from all their ULBs under PMAY -U.  There is no proposal from any NE State 
pending with Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
 
2.7.4 The details of houses approved in North -Eastern States and percentage of urban 
population covered as on 31 st March, 2022 as against national average of 13.78% is outlined 
below: 
  
Sl. 
No. 
State No. of Houses 
Approved under 
PMAY-U 
% of Urban 
Population 
Coverage 
1 Assam 1,61,309 16.53 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 8,999 12.93 

 
32 
 
3 Manipur 56,029 30.71 
4 Meghalaya 4,752 3.61 
5 Mizoram 40,452 33.41 
6 Nagaland 32,335 25.37 
7 Sikkim 701 2.07 
8 Tripura 94,289 44.15 
  
2.7.5 Since, all North -Eastern States have already saturated their demand for housing under 
PMAY-U, the requirement of any special drive may not be required at this juncture. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.7.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.8 Smart City Project in NER 
Recommendation 
2.8.1 The Committee also takes note of the progress made in North East Region under the 
Smart Cities Mission and is of the view that with the coordinated efforts of the Ministry along 
with all stake holders, completion of projects may be ac hieved within stipulated time frame. The 
Committee recommends that a robust mechanism must be put in place to evaluate and review the 
developmental process under this Mission and necessary steps must be taken to expedite the 
completion of projects. A revie w report in this regard may be furnished to the Committee citing 
the bottlenecks and the steps taken for their resolution by the Ministry. 
(Para 4.1.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 In pursuance of Government‟s vision of „Housing for All‟, Ministry of Housing an d 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is implementing Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana -Urban (PMAY-U) since 
June, 2015 to provide all -weather pucca houses with basic amenities to all eligible urban 
households. Under the Scheme, all States/Union Territories (UTs) were mandated  to carry out 
demand survey in their respective Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to assess actual demand of houses 
and saturate the entire demand of housing.  
  
2.8.3 The Scheme does not put any bar on number of beneficiaries from any State/UT so as to 
achieve the goal of „Housing for All‟. Further, States/UTs were advised to make sure that no 
eligible beneficiary as per the PMAY -U Scheme Guidelines is left out from seeking benefits 
under the Scheme. Accordingly, after demand survey projects have been prepared, ap praised by 
the State/UT Governments and approved by the State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee (SLSMC) chaired by Chief Secretary of the concerned State/UT and forwarded to 
MoHUA for consideration of release of Central Assistance.   Accordingly, a ll North -Eastern 
States including Arunachal Pradesh also conducted demand survey and got approved entire 

 
33 
 
demand of houses from all their ULBs under PMAY -U.  There is no proposal from any NE State 
pending with Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
 
2.8.4 The details of houses approved in North -Eastern States and percentage of urban 
population covered as on 31 st March, 2022 as against national average of 13.78% is outlined 
below: 
  
Sl. 
No. 
State No. of Houses 
Approved under 
PMAY-U 
% of Urban 
Population 
Coverage 
1 Assam 1,61,309 16.53 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 8,999 12.93 
3 Manipur 56,029 30.71 
4 Meghalaya 4,752 3.61 
5 Mizoram 40,452 33.41 
6 Nagaland 32,335 25.37 
7 Sikkim 701 2.07 
8 Tripura 94,289 44.15 
  
2.8.5 Since, all North -Eastern States have already s aturated their demand for housing under 
PMAY-U, the requirement of any special drive may not be required at this juncture. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.8.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.9 Waterways 
Recommendation 
2.9.1 The Committee notes that two permanent terminals have been setup at Pandu and Dhubri 
to facilitate vessel movement and this would improve trade activities in the region as these 
terminals can provide vast facilities of cargo handling, transit shed, open storage yard and 
administrative block, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that periodic and regular 
maintenance of these terminals must be ensured for smooth functioning of these terminals. 
(Para 4.8.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2. 9.2 In compliance with the recommendation of the C ommittee, Inland Waterways Authority 
of India (IWAI) is taking up regular operation and maintenance of both the terminals as details  
here under- 
 

 
34 
 
IWT Terminal, Pandu (Guwahati) on NW-2 (river Brahmaputra)- 
 
(a)  An amount of ₹1.54 crores approx. is paid annually to NF Railways for maintenance of 
Broad-Gauge siding to the terminal. 
 
(b)  A provision of Rs 3.06 crores is made for Operation & Maintenance of the Pandu 
terminal during FY 2022 -23 including provision for facilities to be provided to Custom Office 
at terminal. 
 
(c)  Construction of slipway (ship - repair facility) at Pandu, Guwahati at a cost of ₹ 74 
crores has been entrusted to Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Limited (a subsidiary of Cochin 
Shipyard Limited). 
 
(d)  A sub-project for widening of existing road having connectivity to Pandu terminal has 
been entrusted to State PWD, Assam for improvement of road connectivity to the terminal. 
 
Intermodal terminal at Dhubri- 
 
An amount of ₹ 1.2 crores has been provisio ned for Operation and Maintenance of the 
terminal during FY 2022 -23 including provision of safe keeping and provision for arrangement 
for conveyor belt system for loading/unloading of stone chips /other cargo.   
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.9.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.10 Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport (KMMTT) project: 
Recommendation 
2.10.1 The Committee notes that one of the JV partner of the appointed contractor has gone 
bankrupt and this has been one of the reasons for slow physica l progress of the road component 
of Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport (KMTT). The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take immediate steps to engage another entity for commencement of work. The 
Committee observes that the KMTT is a very import ant project envisaged by the Government 
and any delay in its completion would surely lead to cost escalation. It also recommends that 
necessary steps/measures may be undertaken to complete the project within the stipulated 
timeframe. 
(Para 4.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.10.2 The Road component of KMMTT includes a new Greenfield road project of 109.2 km to 
be built from Paletwa in Myanmar to Zorinpui on India -Myanmar border (Mizoram) on double -

 
35 
 
lane NH specifications.  The work was awarded to EPI -C&C JV [joint v enture of Engineers 
Project (India) Limited and C&C Construction Co. Ltd] on 17th March, 2017.  Due to slow 
progress and bankruptcy of lead partner of JV contractor for road component, contract with 
EPI-C&C JV has been terminated and new executing agency M /s Indian Railway Construction 
Limited (IRCON) has been appointed.  Agreement with IRCON has been signed on 7th March, 
2022.  All efforts are being made to complete the project at the earliest. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.10.3 The Committee note s the reply. The Committee strongly recommends that efforts 
must be directed towards the resumption of work on the road component of KMMTT at 
the earliest and should be completed within the stipulated time limit to avoid any cost 
overrun. The Committee fur ther recommends that Ministry, in coordination with 
implementing agency, must periodically review the project for its effective implementation 
and execution. 
2.11 Trade and Industrial Development 
Recommendation 
2.11.1 The Committee observes that the States of Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur have not been 
provided with any funds under this Scheme during the FY 2021 -22 (till 31 st December, 2021). 
The Committee may be apprised about the reasons for non -release of funds to these two States 
and the details of proj ects undertaken under this Scheme by the other North Eastern States.  
Considering the immense potential of this sector, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
of DoNER in coordination with concerned State Governments and agencies may work out 
modalities for the wide range expansion of this Scheme in North Easter Region. The Committee 
also observes that the shortage of storage and packing units in NER has always remained a major 
bottleneck. It recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should take up this iss ue in all earnest 
and evolve plans for marketing within the State and inter-States 
(Para 4.13.12  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.2 Manipur and Assam Governments will be facilitated with the support of consultants by 
MDoNER (if needed) to pose appropriate DPRs full utilization of PM-MSY. 
 
2.11.3 The Department of Fisheries has provided under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY), special emphasis for development of Fisheries and aquaculture in NER with 
earmarked investment targets. 
 
2.11.4 The PMMSY intends to address critical gaps in fish production and productivity, quality, 
technology, post harvest infrastructure and management, modernization and strengthening of 

 
36 
 
value chain, traceability, establishing robust fisheries management framework and fishermen‟s 
welfare. During past two financial years (2020-21 and 2021-22) the Department of Fisheries has 
approved the fisheries development proposals of NER States amounting to ₹ 537.80 crores and 
the same are under implementation. It has also taken up several initi atives for holistic 
development of fisheries sector in NER States and will be taking up more such initiatives in the 
coming 3 years to address the gaps in the fisheries value chain so as to enable the concerned 
States to exploit their fisheries potential to the optimum level.  
 
2.11.5 PMMSY envisages increasing fish production in NER through 
 Supply of quality and affordable seed and feed to fish farmers, 
 Area expansion, diversification of species, 
 Intensification of aquaculture, 
 Infusion of modern technologies like Re-circulatory aquaculture Systems, Biofloc, 
 Cage culture 
 Stocking of fingerlings in wetlands and reservoirs. 
 
2.11.6 Major Components Supported under PMMSY in NER 
 Hatcheries :41 Nos 
 Fish Seed Rearing Unit:248 ha 
 Integrated Fish Farming :892 ha 
 Installation cages in reservoir  :250 Nos 
 Re-circulatory Aquaculture System(RAS): 32 units 
 Ornamental Fisheries units: 10 Nos 
 Biofloc units :226 Nos 
 Construction of new pond:145 ha 
 Feed mills   :32 Nos 
 Brood banks  : 2 Nos 
 
2.11.7 State-wise details of proje ct approved and central fund released under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (including SPU/DPU) during 2021-22: 
(₹ in crores) 
Sl.No. State/UT Total 
Project 
Cost  
Total 
Central 
Share 
Total Funds 
released 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 27.53 14.86 0.00 
2 Assam 91.92 45.46 25.25 
3 Manipur  11.96 5.71 1.43 

 
37 
 
4 Meghalaya 12.91 6.97 1.74 
5 Mizoram 30.24 16.31 5.16 
6 Nagaland 21.64 11.69 2.92 
7 Sikkim 16.28 8.79 2.23 
8 Tripura 41.90 20.34 10.67 
Total 254.38 130.13 49.40 
 
2.11.8 Further, The Government of India in the Budget 2018 -19 announced the extension of the 
facility of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) to fisheries and animal husba ndry farmers to help them to 
meet their working capital needs. The KCC facility will help fisheries and animal husbandry 
farmers to meet their short -term credit requirements of rearing of animals, poultry birds, fish, 
shrimp, other aquatic organisms and ca pture of fish. Out of the 9657 KCC applications 
accepted, 4486 were sanctioned. 
 
2.11.9 Efforts are being made to tackle the problem of shortage of storage and packing units in 
NER through following schemes of Ministry of Food Processing Industries :- 
 
 
  A. Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC Scheme):   
 
The CEFPPC Scheme envisages financial assistance for establishing food 
processing Units in the form of Grant -in-aid @ 35% of the eligible project cost (cost  of 
plant and machinery and technical civil work) in General areas and 50% in Difficult 
areas (including North Eastern States) subject to a maximum of ₹ 5 crores.  
 
As on date, under this Scheme in North Eastern States, 48 food processing units have been 
approved. In the State of Arunachal Pradesh, 09 units have been approved with total grant-in-aid 
of ₹ 30.28 crores. Out of which, ₹ 6.69 crores grant -in-aid has already been released and 
remaining ₹ 23.59 crores grant -in-aid would be released to the units on  receipt of requisite 
documents from the implementing agencies. Similarly, in the State of Manipur, 05 units have 
been approved with total grant-in-aid of ₹ 3.36 crores. Out of which, ₹ 0.40 crores grant -in-aid 
has already been released and remaining ₹ 2.96 crores grant-in-aid would be released to the units 
on receipt of requisite documents by this Ministry. Further, under CEFPPC Scheme guidelines, 
there is no provision for financially supporting standalone storage and packing units. 
 
B. Scheme for Creation  of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters (APC Scheme):  
 

 
38 
 
 
The APC Scheme envisages financial assistance for establishing agro processing clusters 
in the form of Grant -in-aid @ 35% of the eligible project in General areas and 50% in Difficult 
areas (including North Eastern States) subject to a maximum of ₹10 crores. 
As on date, under this Scheme in North Eastern States, 08 Agro Processing Clusters 
have been approved. In the State of Arunachal Pradesh, 01 APC has been approved with total 
grant-in-aid of ₹ 5.269 crores, of which, no fund is released as the conditions for considering 
release of grant-in-aid have not been complied with by the implementing agency of that APC. 
No APC has been approved in the State of Manipur due to non -receipt of sufficient el igible 
proposals from the State. Further, under APC Scheme guidelines, there is no provision for 
financially supporting standalone storage and packing units. 
 
C. Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (Cold Chain 
Scheme):  
 
The Cold Chain Scheme envisages financial assistance in the form of grant -in-aid @ 
35% for general areas and @ 50% for North East States, Himalayan States, ITDP areas and 
subject to a maximum grant-in-aid of ₹10 crores per project for setting up integrated cold chain 
projects including irradiation facility without any break from the farm gate to the consumer in 
order to reduce post-harvest losses of non-horticulture produce, dairy, meat, poultry, and marine/ 
fish (except shrimp). 
 
As on date, under this Scheme in North Eastern States, 09 Cold Chain Projects have 
been approved. In the State of Arunachal Pradesh, 01 Cold Chain Project has been approved 
with total gra nt-in-aid of ₹ 6.46 crores, of which, Ministry had released full amount of grant-in-
aid of ₹ 6.46 crores to the project. Similarly, in the State of Manipur, 01 cold chain project has 
been approved with total grant -in-aid of ₹ 9.96 crores. of which, Ministr y had released full 
amount of grant -in-aid of ₹ 9.96 crores to the project. Further, under Cold Chain Scheme 
guidelines, there is no provision for financially supporting standalone storage and packing units. 
The details of 9 Cold Chain Project approved in the North Eastern States including Arunachal 
Pradesh and Manipur may be seen at Annexure V.  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.11.10  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry may take up 
with the State Governments of Arunachal Prad esh and Manipur for release of funds under 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The support in this regard may be 
extended to these states for enduring development of fisheries. 
2.12 Tea Sector 
Recommendation 
2.12.1 The Committee appreciates the v arious initiatives taken by the Government of India 
through Tea Board for providing financial and technical assistance to tea growers and the 

 
39 
 
industry for new plantation, re -plantation, rejuvenation, quality up -gradation, value addition and 
market promotion. 
(Para 4.13.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.2 Noted 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.12.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
2.12.4 The Committee notes that Tea Development and Promotion Scheme (TDPS) has been 
approved for implementation with a financial outlay of ₹ 967.78 crores for five years i.e. from 
2021-22 till 2025-26. Out of this ₹ 93.06 crores has specifically been allotted for implementing a 
“Sector Specific Action Plan‟ for North East, for utilizing the potential of the region, by bo osting 
tea production and exports with emphasis on organic tea.  The Committee feels that such long 
term strategies planned for development of tea production and exportation would definitely give 
fillip to this sector and expand the avenues for Indian tea market. The Committee feels that 
Assam tea is one of the finest tea flavours in the world and therefore, recommends that sustained 
efforts should be made by the concerned Ministries/agencies and stakeholders to capitalise on its 
potential for marketing the products at international level. 
(Para 4.13.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.5 The 08 tea growing North Eastern States contribute the major share of 54% to the total 
production of tea in the country. There are about 1.18 lakh small tea growers who contribute 
24% to the total production of tea in the North Eastern States. These States are eminently suited 
for production of very good quality CTC and Orthodox teas and also specialty teas like green 
tea. Assam tea is well known for its quality especially of strong l iquor and rich body, taste and 
colour.  
2.12.6 The state of Sikkim was declared fully organic in January 2016, and the teas produced at 
the Temi Tea Estate were certified as 100% Organic Tea in the year 2008. Separate logo as 
“Sikkim Organic” is developed to provide the distinctive identification.  
 
2.12.7 Tripura is the 2nd largest producer of tea after Assam in the North Eastern Region. 
Separate logo has been developed for Tripura Tea. 
 
2.12.8 Focused and sustained initiatives such as promotional brochure s, information booklets, 
sampling of teas at events, distribution of tea caddies, promotion through social media extolling 

 
40 
 
exquisite and unparalleled flavour & special attributes, screening of promotional films, webinars 
and seminars etc. are part of promo tional programmes being conducted continuously by the Tea 
Board. 
2.12.9 The Tea Development and Promotion Scheme being implemented by the Tea Board has a 
separate component „The Sector Specific Plan for the North East‟. The TDPS „inter -alia‟ 
contains activities like collectivize the small tea growers of North Eastern Region, formation of 
SHGs, FPOs and FPCs, handholding them with other MSME units, providing training towards 
good manufacturing process, documentation in obtaining various certification etc., I n order to 
promote the organic tea cultivation, financial & technical support shall be provided that will 
include the organic tea conversion to obtain certification including organic farm inputs. In order 
to exploit the geographical importance of Assam & o ther North Eastern region, separate brand 
building and its promotion is provisioned in the scheme. Incentive to the exporters is also 
provided for those exporting the teas from ICD Amingaon to boost the export potential from 
North East region. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.12.10 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.13 Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH) 
Recommendation 
2.13.1 The Committee takes note of Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States 
(HMNEH) scheme f or overall development of Horticulture in all North Eastern States. The 
Committee appreciates the various works being undertaken for integrated horticulture 
development of NE states. The Committee recommends that State Government should tap the 
horticulture potential of entire north-eastern region using modern technological intervention, and 
creating infrastructure for proper storage and transportation and purchase from the 
farmers/producers. This will encourage and generate interest among farmers to embark  upon 
production activities on a larger scale. 
(Para 4.15.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.13.2 In order to tap the horticulture potential of entire north -eastern region, assistance is 
being provided under Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States i.e . sub-scheme 
of MIDH for the following activities: 
 Setting up of nurseries, tissue culture units for production of quality seed and planting 
material. 
 Area expansion i.e. establishment of new orchards and gardens for fruits, vegetables, 
flowers and spices. 
 Rejuvenation of unproductive, old, and senile orchards. 

 
41 
 
 Protected cultivation, i.e. poly -house, green-house, etc. to improve the productivity & grow 
off season high value vegetables and flowers.  
 Creation of water sources and water harvesting structures. 
 Organic farming and certification. 
 Bee-keeping for pollination. 
 Horticulture Mechanization. 
Creation of Post Harvest Management and Marketing infrastructure. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.13.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.14 Disaster Management 
Recommendation 
2.14.1 The Committee notes that the entire North Eastern region lies under seismic Zone -V and 
the area is susceptible to severe intensity of earthquake. It exhorts the initiatives of the National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) regardi ng disaster preparedness in the region. The 
Committee observes that the eternal vigilance and preparedness is the only mechanism that will 
come handy for disaster response. The Committee believes that NDMA must be keeping a close 
monitoring of the area wit h the use of technology and the concerned departments for early 
detection of disaster in the NE Region. 
(Para 4.22.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.2 NDMA had issued revised National Disaster Management Plan in November, 2019, 
which, inter-alia, provides a framework and direction to the Government agencies for all phases 
of disaster management i.e. Prevention, Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, Rehabilitation and 
Reconstruction. The plan also contains roles and responsibilities for Central and State Agencies 
for disaster risk reduction, under different thematic areas like understanding risks, inter -agency 
coordination, investing in DRR -structural and non structural measures, capacity development 
and climate change risk management. The plan has been shared with Cen tral Ministries/ 
Departments, all States / UTs and other stakeholders to enable the States / UTs to develop their 
plans and strategies for disaster risk reduction.  
 
2.14.3 NDMA has been implementing two Schemes namely i) Implementation of the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and (ii) Strengthening of District Disaster Management 
Authorities of Hazard Prone Districts out of the 115 identified backward districts in all the 
States of North Eastern Region, inter -alia, for strengthening disaster ri sk management.  It has 
also started a Pilot Project to Improve Earthquake Resilience of masonry Life Line Structures 
and upcoming Constructions. 
  

 
42 
 
2.14.4 NDMA facilitates the conduct of State and Multi State Level Mock Exercises on various 
disasters in clos e coordination with States and UTs and various other stakeholders like First 
Responders, Early Warning Agencies, CAPFs, NDRF and Armed Forces etc. Integrated Mock 
Exercises provide an optimal, cost effective means for generating awareness about the Inciden t 
Response System – Incident Response Team construct and for building capacity of States / UTs 
to respond effectively to any disaster situation. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.14.5 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
2.14.6 The Committee also takes note of the fact that NDMA has undertaken a project for the 
Development of Urban Flood Early Warning System (FEWS) for Guwahati city which provides 
early warnings related to heavy rainfall and subsequent flood with 72 hours lead time to 
concerned authorities. The Committee hopes that this system will help in active flood 
management in the city and enable the administration to take necessary actions in the city of 
Guwahati. 
(Para 4.22.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.7 NDMA has undertaken a project for t he Development of Urban Flood Early Warning 
System for Guwahati City. The FEWS was developed in collaboration with Indian 
Meteorological Department (IMD), North Eastern Space Application Centre (NESAC) and 
Assam State Disaster management Authority (ASDMA) and it was implemented by the Energy 
and Resources Institute (TERI). The fully automated web platform provides early warnings 
related to heavy rainfall and subsequent flood with 72 hours  lead time to the concerned 
authorities to take necessary actions for flood management in the city of Guwahati. 
 
2.14.8 Further, NDMA has also undertaken the flood risk assessment for all the flood prone 
districts in India in consultation with the States. NDMA has undertaken the study to prepare 
district level flood hazard atlas which was entrusted to National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), 
Hyderabad. NRSC has prepared the Atlas on the basis of data provided by the States, CWC, 
IMD and the use of Satellite imageries over a period of time. Under this the district -wise flood 
hazard Atlas of Assam has been prepared and released. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.14.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 

 
43 
 
2.15 Shrinking and flooding of Majuli Island 
Recommendation 
2.15.1 The Committee observes that physical progress of the scheme “P rotection of Majuli 
Island from flood and erosion of river Brahmaputra”  is 96%. The Committee notes that the 
construction of a two lane bridge over Brahamputra river from Jorhat to Majuli in Assam has 
been initiated. 
(Para 4.23.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.15.2 Noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.15.3 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
44 
 
CHAPTER III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
 
3.1 Utilisation of funds 
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee takes note of the assessment of expenditure and utilization of the 
allocated funds in the financial year 2021-22 (up to 31st December, 2021). The Committee notes 
with concern that the utilization under Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Counc il (DHATC) 
for the financial year 2021 -22 has been NIL as on 31 st December, 2021. The Committee 
expresses its displeasure and feels that no expenditure till 3 rd quarter will cause halting of 
ongoing work being undertaken by DHATC. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that all 
necessary steps be taken by   the Council to see that the prioritized projects for the development 
of the region are completed. 
(Para 2.2.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 Against the DHATC package of ₹200.00 crores, 11 projects, costing ₹17 0.82 crores 
have been sanctioned against which so far ₹110.96 crores have been released by the Ministry to 
the State Government of Assam. Another, 04 projects costing ₹29.00 crores have been identified 
for sanction. 
 
3.1.3  One of the reasons for NIL expen diture under DHATC package during the financial 
year 2021 -22 was non -receipt of requisite documents from the State Government of Assam. 
Ministry of DoNER is coordinating closely with the State Government for submission of 
documents and  monitoring status o f implementation of the project. State Government has been 
requested for timely submission of requisite documents for release of funds in time to avoid 
delay in progress of implementation of the project. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.1.4 The Committee notes that a total of 15 projects costing ₹199.82 crores are either in 
the pipeline or have been identified under the DHATC package.  The Committee has not 
been provided with any information on the timelines by which the four identified projects 
would be sanctioned. The Committee asserts that the entire process of project 
implementation must be accelerated, including the identification of the projects for 
sanction, the release of funds and the subsequent, successful implementation of projects.   

 
45 
 
3.1.5 The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that the explanation of the Ministry that 
one of the reasons for NIL expenditure during the financial year 2021 -22 was non -receipt 
of requisite documents from the State Government of Assam.  The Committee, time and 
again, has been recommending close monitoring of the progress in respect of utilization of 
funds and implementation of the projects by the concerned State Government.  The 
Committee recommends that a periodic review at the level of Secretary, Ministry of 
DoNER may be undertaken and subsequent review meetings with the Chief Secretary of 
State Government of Assam may be scheduled to ensure that necessary documents, 
utilization certificate are submitted by the State Government of Assam and funds are 
adequately utilized. 
Recommendation 
3.1.6 The Committee notes that the overall utilization of funds under the capital head of North 
Eastern Council (NEC) is Nil upto the 3 rd quarter of the financial year 2021 -22.  NEC is one of 
the most important agencies under the administrative control of the Ministry of DoNER and 
provides financial assistance for a variety of projects like construction of roads, improving air 
connectivity, etc. through State Governments. It also works towards formulation of regional 
plans for integrated and balanced socio-economic development of the NER and made efforts to 
iron them out. The Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for non -utilisation of 
funds under the capital head of NER. The Committee recommends that the Ministry sh ould 
review the monitoring mechanism, as highlighted by it to the Committee, to address the 
persistent problem of under - utilisation of funds and take corrective steps whenever required. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the review and the concret e steps taken in this 
regard. 
(Para 2.2.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.1.7 Out of the total allocation of ₹ 42.00 crores under Capital Head in the Scheme of NEC, 
an amount of ₹ 8.81 crores has been utilized during financial year 2021 -22. The entire 
allocation could not be used due to delay in finalization of NEC building at Dwarka, New Delhi.  
However, the savings under NEC Capital Head has been utilized under Capital Head of 
NERSDS implemented by NEC, where additional funds were required.  
 
3.1.8 Monitoring and evaluation of implementation of the project is  undertaken through field 
inspections by officers of the NEC or by NEC appointed consultants/Regional Level Monitors 
(RLM) as well as through impact studies, and evaluations conducted by government or through 
independent agencies at the request of the NEC. Additionally, review meetings are held 
regularly to discuss and resolve issues impending in the implementation of projects by state 
governments/implementing agencies. 
 

 
46 
 
3.1.9 Also, at the end of the quarter. St ates and other implementing agencies/Departments 
report the progress in respect of each project in the Quarterly Progress Report (QPR). 
Moreover, real -time monitoring of infrastructural projects using geo -spatial tools and 
techniques is being launched shortly. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.1.10 The Committee finds it worrisome that a delay in the finalization of the NEC 
building at Dwarka could act as an obstacle for non -utilisation of the allocated funds and 
that only a meagre amount of ₹ 8.81 crores could be utilized during the financial year 2021-
22. The Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for this delay and steps that 
are being taken to avoid such delays. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not 
provided any facts about the outcomes of the review meetings.  
3.1.11 Further, the Committee notes the various levels of the monitoring mechanism that 
are being put in place by the Ministry for ensuring the proper monitoring, evaluation and 
implementation of projects. However, the Committee fails to understand that despite this 
monitoring mechanism in place, time and again there is a delay in finalization of projects. 
The Committee expresses its satisfaction with the efforts of the Ministry to introduce the 
use of geo -spatial tools and techniques for real -time monitoring of infrast ructure projects. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
3.2 Central Pool of Resources for North East and Sikkim /North East Special 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
 
Recommendation 
3.2.1 The Committee takes note of the balanced pace of expenditure in the financial year 2021 -
21 (up  31st December, 2021)  and also the  increased allocation for meeting committed liabilities 
against the ongoing projects under NLCPR -State and NLCPR -Central. The Committee 
recommends that the enhanced allocation in BE 2022 -23 may be fully utilized for meeting 
committed liabilities and new projects be identified under the scheme. 
(Para 3.3.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 NLCPR-Central Scheme: Under this Scheme construction of Agartala - Akhaura New 
Rail Link Project (Length 5.46 Km) was sanctioned for ₹ 580.00 crores on 22 nd June, 2016. 
M/o DoNER & NEC has already released its completed share of ₹ 580 crores. Overall physical 
progress of the project is 70%.  
 
3.2.3 The revised cost estimate  for Construction of Agartala -Akhaura New Rail Link Project 
has now been submitted for ₹708.73 crores for completion of the new rail link project (Length 
5.46 Km) (Indian portion). 

 
47 
 
 
3.2.4 The revised allocation of the project „Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link‟ will be utilized in FY 
2022-23. 
 
3.2.5 NLCPR-State Scheme: The erstwhile NLCPR -State scheme has since been restructured 
as North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) w.e.f. 15 th December, 2017. 
Since then funding under the NLCPR -State sch eme is provided only for ongoing projects. 
Therefore, the increased allocation for BE 2022 -23 under NLCPR -State scheme will be utilized 
only for meeting the committed liabilities against the ongoing projects 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.6 The Com mittee finds it worrisome that the revised cost estimation has shown a 
significant increase over the sanctioned project cost. It is understood that delays in project 
completion have been a cause for this cost escalation. The Committee notes the submission 
with regard to NLCPR -State Scheme and hopes that the funds would be utilized optimally 
to meet the committed liabilities, within defined time lines to avoid cost overruns in future.    
3.3 North East Road Sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) 
Recommendation 
3.3.1 The Committee notes that the physical progress of many road sector projects is either at 
zero or in single digit percent inspite of release of amount. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the reasons for such dismal show of physical progress in construction of these 
roads. The Committee is disappointed to note that no tangible progress has been made in respect 
of the projects in the State of Mizoram, as the physical progress under all of the road projects 
undergoing in this State, have not been more than 5% and only  token amount of funds have been 
released for the projects. 
(Para 3.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 Road projects in the State of Mizoram were sanctioned in the month of January and 
February, 2021. As per terms and condition of the Min istry of DoNER, the works shall be 
awarded within 6 months of the issue of the sanction by the Ministry/NEC. The EPC tender of the 
projects were finalized in the month of June and August, 2021 by the PWD, Government of 
Mizoram. 
3.3.3 After finalization of tender works has already been started by the respective contractors. 
The financial and physical details of project as on 31st March, 2022 enclosed as Annexure-I. 
3.3.4 The delay in progress of works is mainly due to Covid -19 as the villagers are not 
allowing to execute the work since most of the workers are coming from outside the state of 
Mizoram. Therefore, many protocols had to be followed to take up the work. Now the situation 

 
48 
 
has improved and work is in full swing. The official of PWD, Government of Mi zoram had 
reported the ongoing road project will be completed as per Projected Date of Completion. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.3.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and it can be seen from information 
provided in Annexure-I, that more than one year has passed since administrative approval 
was granted to the projects in Mizoram. However, the physical progress of road projects 
still remains below 10% although the effect of COVID -19 pandemic has subsided and the 
situation has reverted to normalcy. 
3.3.6 The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation in para 3.5.7 of 239 th report 
and hopes that the State, as well as Central agencies involved in road projects in Mizoram, 
show diligence towards the improvement of road connectivity in Mizoram. 
3.4 Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC) 
Recommendation 
3.4.1 The Committee observes that the allocated amount of ₹ 40.00 crores will be utilized for 
committed liabilities against the ongoing projects as well as the projects identified for sanction. 
However, it feels that with reduced allocation of ₹ 40.00 crores as agains t the projected demand 
of ₹ 70.00 crores, the progress of the ongoing as well as identified new projects will be 
hampered. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry must take up the matter of additional 
fund requirement with the Ministry of Finance at  RE stage so that the projects under KAATC 
keep running smoothly. The Committee would like to be apprised of the physical progress of 24 
pending projects along with the reasons of delay and details of cost overrun. 
(Para 3.7.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 Recommendations of the Committee noted. The implementation status of ongoing 
projects under KAATC package is at Annexure II. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.4.3 As per the information provided by the Ministry, it is seen that in respect of most of 
the projects, the information about the percentage of physical progress of KAATC projects 
is yet to be provided by the State Government. The Committee gets the impression that its 
recommendation has not been taken seriously by the state agencies with regard of 
furnishing requisite information to the Committee. The Committee expresses its discontent 
and disapproval of such practice. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
i.e. to be apprised of the physical progress of pending projects along with the reasons for 
delay and details of cost overrun. 

 
49 
 
3.5 Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council (DHATC) 
Recommendation 
3.5.1 The Committee expresses its displeasure that the State has not been able to spend funds 
earmarked for current financial year. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Ministry must continue to take up the matter with State Government for effective utilization and 
transfer of funds for timely completion of the projects. The Committee further recommends that 
synergy of State Government and the Council in effective planning and execution of the schemes 
in the area will help achieve the targets in an expeditious manner 
(Para 3.8.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 One of the reasons for NIL expenditure under DHATC package during the  financial year 
2021-22 was non -receipt of requisite documents from the State. With a view to avoid delay in 
submission of documents, Ministry of DoNER is coordinating closely with the State Government 
for monitoring status of implementation of the project . Further, State Government has been 
requested for timely submission of requisite documents for release of funds in time to avoid delay 
in progress of implementation of the project. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.5.3 The Committee notes the reply a nd reiterates its further recommendation given 
against para 2.2.10 ibid. 
 
3.6 Sports potential in NER 
Recommendation 
3.6.1 The Committee takes note of schemes and the work undertaken by the Ministry and State 
Governments in the field of sports in the NER. The Committee is of the view that thrust should 
be given to provide Sports Infrastructure in all the States of the NER region to tap the potential at 
grass root level. The Committee recommends that various stakeholders should explore more 
avenues such as I nstitutes of Excellence and Universities which will cater to specific needs and 
coaching requirements of young athletes and make them capable of competing at national and 
international levels. 
(Para 4.4.4 ibid) 
 
 

 
50 
 
Action Taken 
3.6.2 In  states of the North Eastern Regions, inter alia Sports Authority of India (SAI) is 
implementing the following Sports Promotional Schemes across the country to identify talented 
sports persons in various age groups and nurture them to excel at national and international 
levels: 
 National Centres of Excellence (NCOE) 
 SAI Training Centre (STC) 
 Extension Centre of STC 
 National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) 
(Its Sub Schemes Regular Schools, Indigenous Games & Martial Arts (IGMA) & 
Akharas)           
3.6.3 The number of SAI Centres un der the Sports Promotional Schemes in the North 
Eastern Regions may be seen in the table at Annexure IV. 
 
3.6.4 The selected athletes are provided support in the form of expert coaches, sports 
equipment, boarding and lodging, sports kit, competition exposu re, educational expenses, 
medical/insurance and stipend etc. as per the approved scheme norms. 
 
3.6.5 Under the Khelo India Scheme, 65 sports infrastructure projects of various categories 
have been sanctioned in the North Eastern region amounting to ₹ 466.23 crores.  Eight Khelo 
India State centres of Excellence (KISCEs) and 152 Khelo India centres  (KICs) have been 
sanctioned in the  North eastern region. Further, 22 sports academics have also been 
accredited and 02 Army Boys Sports Companies are being supported in the North Eastern 
region. A total of 175 Khelo India Athletes have been identified from the North Eastern Region 
for their talent development. 
 
3.6.6 Further, the National Sports University has been established in Imphal, Manipur to 
promote sports education in the fields of sports sciences, sports technology, sports 
management, and sports coaching. In addition, a North Easte rn regional centre of Lakshmibai 
National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE) is also operational since 2009 -10 in 
Guwahati, Assam. 
  
3.6.7 Besides the above, the following Sports infrastructure facilities presently exist at 
various SAI Centres in the North Eastern States:  
 
 Synthetic Athletic Track (4), Athletic Track (Clay), Athletic Track (Grassy), Hockey Field 
(Synthetic & Grassy), Football fields (5), Football Field (3 Grassy), Archery Field (4), 
Swimming Pool, Hall for Badminton & Handball Field, Weightlifting Hall, Indoor Hall for 
Table Tennis Small Halls for Boxing, Judo, Karate, Taekwondo & Weight Training, , 
Rowing Canal, Lawn Tennis Court, Basketball Court, Multipurpose Hall for Sepaktakraw 
with Mats, Multipurpose Hall for Boxing & Wushu.  

 
51 
 
 18 of Sports Hostels with around 1400 beds capacity are present at various SAI Centres.  
 
 3.6.8 SAI Infra Division is presently construction the following projects at various North 
Eastern States:  
 
 120 Bedded Hostel cum Integrated Sports Complex at NCOE, Itanagar. 
 Laying of Synthetic Athletic Track at SAI STC Tinsukia, Assam 
 Laying of Synthetic Athletic Track at SAI STC Dimapur, Nagaland 
Construction of 300 bedded Hostel at SAI NCOE Imphal, Manipur 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.6.9 The Committee notes the establishment of the National Sports University in Imphal, 
Manipur to promote sports education in the fields of sports sciences, sports technology, 
sports management and sports coaching. The Committee feels that such avenues should 
also be establishe d in other North Eastern States to cater to the needs and coaching 
requirements of young athletes. 
 
3.7 Supply of potable tap water 
Recommendation 
3.7.1 The Committee observes that the State of Assam have maximum number of rural 
households and in spite of providing potable tap water to 19.38 crores rural households, 43.97 
crores rural households still lack this basic facility. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry must provide the State of Assam with requisite financial and infrastructural support to 
meet its targets by the year of 2024 as envisaged by the State. The Committee is also of the 
considered view that mere availability/installation of tap -water infrastructure does not mitigate 
the needs of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the duration and quantity of 
water available to the households in the NER should also be ensured. 
(Para 4.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.7.2 Issue of Households in Assam without potable water is being followed up with the 
Government of Assam. 
 
3.7.3 It is clari fied by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation that the correct 
statistics in respect of State of Assam are: total 63.35 lakh rural households out of which more 
than 23.15 lakh households are having tap water connection as on 07th April, 2022. 
 
3.7.4 To ensure that water is available for recommended duration and quality ;  
 

 
52 
 
(a)10% of fund allocated under JJM is earmarked for implementation in the North Eastern 
States, including Assam. 
(b)The fund sharing pattern between Centre and State is 90:10 fo r Himalayan & North Eastern 
States.  
(c) Apart from 30% weightage for States under DDP, DPAP, HADP and special category Hill 
States in terms of rural areas, the allocation criteria includes weightage of 20% for providing 
tap water connection to the balance individual household connections. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.7.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is concerned that 
the target may not be achievable in Assam if the Ministry does not step up its efforts and 
provide all the support, financial or infrastructural, to the Government of Assam. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of some specific steps that have been taken to put 
Assam on the path of achieving the targets. 
3.7.6 The Committee would also like the Minist ry to undertake assessments and reviews 
to find out whether the availability of tap water to the existing households is permanent. 
3.8 Roadways 
Recommendation 
3.8.1 The Committee notes that schemes like NESRIP, NERSDS and SARDP -NE have been 
doing tremendous work in construction, restoration and up -gradation of intercity and inter -state 
roads throughout the North East Region. This improved road connectivity can provide better 
market access for agriculture produce and various other economic activities, expand  
opportunities for a majority of people living in remote and rural areas and may lead to a much 
better socio -economic growth of the North Eastern Region. The Committee observes that  
SARDP-NE was formulated way back in 2005 -06 and a total length of 6418 km  (including 
Arunachal Pradesh package) was identified for development with actual  length 5998 km as per 
DPR. However, out of this, 5602 km have been awarded and during the span of more than 15 
years, only 4121 km have been completed. In view of the Committ ee, this pace of development 
is not definitely satisfactory.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need to pace 
up the development of roads under the scheme so that the projects are completed without further 
cost and time overruns. 
(Para 4.6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.8.2 Out of 5998 km identified under SARDP -NE (Phase A & Arunachal Pradesh package), 
5721 km has been awarded and 4830 km has been completed as on 31st March, 2022.   
 

 
53 
 
3.8.3 Various measures have been taken to expedite the progress to ensure timely completion 
of works.  Government has set up two regional offices of Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways (at Guwahati and Itanagar) and eight regional offices of National Highways and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL ) headed by Executive Director level 
officer in each state of North East along with many Project Management Units (PMUs) and site 
offices for having better coordination with the concerned departments of the State Governments 
to expedite land acquisition, a ll required clearances, effective project monitoring and execution.  
Further, action is taken against the Contractor/Concessionaire for the delay caused on their part 
as per contractual provisions on case-to-case basis, if required. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.8.4 The Committee notes that out of 5998 km identified under SARDP -NE, 4830 KM 
has been completed as on 31 st March, 2022. The Committee strongly recommends that 
completion of the remaining work identified under SARDP -NE may be expedited by t he 
Ministry in coordination and consultation with various stakeholders and through effective 
monitoring so that the project is completed within the stipulated time frame. The 
Committee further recommends that review meetings must be held periodically to id entify 
the roadblocks to the work and find a solution for the same so that delays can be avoided. 
3.9 Railways 
Recommendation 
3.9.1 The Committee notes the initiatives of the Ministry of External Affairs towards 
construction of Agartala -Akhura Rail Link wh ich is a cross -border rail connectivity project to 
connect the existing station of Agartala in India to the Gangasagar station in Bangladesh. 
However, it is observed that the Indian portion which is being implemented through the Ministry 
of Railways with anticipated cost of ₹967.50 crores has achieved only 59% of physical progress. 
It may be presumed that it will miss the timeline of June 2022 for the completion of the project 
besides involving cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all out  efforts must 
be initiated by the concerned agencies to expedite the completion of construction of Agartala -
Akhaura Rail Link at the earliest. It further recommends that review meeting to accelerate work 
and ironing out issues should be done at frequent in tervals with all the stakeholders concerned 
for achieving the target with minimal delay 
(Para 4.7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.9.2 The Nischintapur Yard (Under Phase -1) has already been completed in 2021 and ready 
for train operations with Bangladesh.  Train ser vices between the two Nations can start 
immediately upon the completion of works in Bangladesh Site. The physical progress of the 
Viaduct, which is connecting Nischintapur Yard and Agartala main station is 75% as on 31 st 
march, 2022.   

 
54 
 
 
3.9.3 Various revie w meetings/site visit have been conducted at the level of GM/NFR and 
CMD/IRCON with appointed contractors to expedite the progress of Viaduct works. Some delay 
in the completion of viaduct works are mainly due to Covid-19 and it is expected that the Viaduct 
shall be substantially completed by September, 2022. Further, Railway Board has submitted the 
revised estimates for additional fund to the tune of ₹128.70 crores which is under process. 
 
3.9.4 Physical progress of Bangladesh portion has reached 50% upto 31st March, 2022.  
Ministry of External Affairs is in discussion with Government of Bangladesh to explore various 
options for increasing the progress and to finalize the completion of project as per schedule i.e, 
December, 2022.  A joint inspection of the project site has been conducted by Indian High 
Commissioner in Dhaka along with the Bangladesh Minister of Railways on 07 April 2022.  
Developments on project site are being closely monitored and officials from Indian Mission have 
conducted site visits on 17 February 2022 and 22 March, 2022 to review the progress. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.9.5 The Committee notes the efforts undertaken by the Ministry for the completion of 
the project. The Committee hopes that monitoring of the project from the Bangladesh side 
by the Indian Missions accelerates the pace of work on that side. It observes that the 
Ministry should not let down its guard and continue making necessary efforts for 
completion of the Viaduct by September, 2022 without any further delay a nd cost 
escalation.  
3.10 North East Industrial Development Scheme (NEIDS) 
Recommendation 
3.10.1 The Committee has taken note of the progress made under North East Industrial 
Development Scheme (NEIDS). The Committee is of the view that industrial developm ent is a 
pre-requisite for employment generation in the region which is essential for holistic socio -
economic development. The Committee recommends that Ministry and State Governments 
should engage with various stakeholders in manufacturing and service sec tor to boost 
Industrialization in NER.  
(Para 4.14.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
3.10.2 NEIDS is a scheme of Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), 
Ministry of Commerce & Industries.  A series of meetings have been held with State 
Governments and other stakeholders under the Chairmanship of MoS(C&I), Secretary, DPIIT 
and Secretary, DoNER to review the status of implementation of schemes of DPIIT including 
NEIDS for the North East Region. In the meeting  held on 23 rd March, 2022 under the 

 
55 
 
chairmanship of Hon‟ble Minister of Commerce & Industry, all the Ministers and MPs from 
NER participated.  The Federation of Industry & Commerce of North Eastern Region (FINER) 
also made a presentation for promoting industrialization in NER. 
 
3.10.3 Hon‟ble Minister of DoNER took a joint meeting on the North East Industrial 
Development Scheme (NEIDS), where Secretary DoNER and Secretary, DPIIT, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, was also present.   Hon‟ble Minister advised that while drafting the 
new NEIDS,  unique potential of all the North Eastern   States up to district level may be taken 
care of and incentivised appropriately.  Hon‟ble Minister also advised that  the views of all the 
stakeholders including ADB should be taken on board.   MDoNER is continu ously following up 
with Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade in this regard. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.10.4 The Committee is of the considered opinion that Industrial Development plays a key 
role in the robust development of the industry sector, and consequently service sector in the 
country. The Committee, hence, recommends that the Ministry should engage vigorously 
with the Ministry of Commerce and Industries and the State Governments to promote 
industrial activity in the unt apped areas/markets of NER. This will provide a fillip to 
industrialization in NER and will boost  employment opportunities in the region. The 
Committee also recommends that periodic meetings amongst senior officers of the 
concerned agencies should be held  for regular monitoring of pace of the ongoing projects 
under this scheme. 
 
3.11 Technological advancements for improvement of Agricultural produce 
Recommendation 
3.11.1 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should develop a 
mechanism for identifying markets for the produce by the farmers. Lack of knowledge of 
markets, lack of ability to transport their produce to the markets and appropriate price returns on 
their products, act as a deterrent to the farmers from increasing productio n activities. The 
Committee may be apprised about the initiatives - existing and planned by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
(Para 4.17.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.11.2 Agricultural marketing, as “Market and Fare”, is a State subject therefore, States‟ under 
network of  6,946 Wholesale markets (as on geographical area, production pattern, marketable 
surplus and progressiveness of the concerned State, market density significantly varies from one 
market serving 11215 sq Km area (Meghalaya) to one market serving 117 sq Km (Punjab) 
against the recommended norm of average 80 sq Km per market (NCF report, 2006).                                             

 
56 
 
3.11.3 In order to address  aforesaid constraints and to be in sync with Committee 
recommendation, the Department of Agr iculture and Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) has taken 
various measures and  initiatives in this regard, namely:- 
 
 3.11.4  The DA&FW has already been implementing National Agriculture Market (e -NAM) 
since April, 2016, which is a virtual market (platform) integrati ng APMC market across the 
States. This expands farmer‟s accessibility and choice to multiple competitive markets and 
buyers. The measure also facilitates Farmer Producer Organization (FPOs) and farmers to 
sell their produce from aggregation point/farm gate  itself, requiring no transportation of 
their produce; and resultantly helps better price discovery and net price realization to 
farmers through competitive and transparent auctioning. Under the measure, till 11 th July, 
2022, 1000 markets have already been  integrated with the e -NAM platform and another 1000 
markets are in the process of integration.  
3.11.5 The Department has also been implementing a flagship scheme of Formation and 
promotion of 10,000 FPOs since February, 2020. As far as Formation of 10,00 0 FPO 
schemes as measure to address the issue raised by committee is concerned, this is to 
underline that schemes is focused, inter alia on providing market linkages to the farmers. 
Under this schemes, FPOs can not only directly sell their raw produce  to corporate, 
organized retailers, processor and exporters; and also can sell their produce after adding 
value to it and get price commensurate to the value added to the produce, thus, the 
facilitating expansion of markets and choices to the farmers.  
3.11.6 Marketing Knowledge helps the farmers take appropriate production and marketing 
decisions and also  identify markets and marketing channel. DA&FW has launched an ICT 
based scheme of Marketing Research & Information Network (MRIN) since 2000. The 
prevailing prices and other such information in the mandis maintained under the said 
measure guide the farmers appropriately, leading to better price realization.  
3.11.7 In order to help farmers to identify competitive markets, the Department has been 
actively engage d to reform the marketing laws and policy. The measure has resulted the 
emergence of more than 105 private markets across the country along with issuance of more 
than 3000 direct marketing licenses, whereby farmers can sell their produce directly to 
processors,  organized retailers, exporters, etc. without involvement of middlemen, leading to 
better net price realization.  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.11.8 The Committee has noted the various initiatives that have been taken in the 
agriculture sector and acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry to remove impediments in 
agri sector for its holistic growth in NER. The Committee feels that technological 
intervention in this sector will go a long way in enabling farmers to increase not only their 
produce but their income as well. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
review its export infrastructure creation efforts. The Committee feels that necessary 

 
57 
 
assistance may be extended to the farmers’ organisations in the NE states to further 
promote export from the region. The Committee, further, recommends that remaining 
1000 markets may be integrated with the e-Nam portal at the earliest. 
 
3.12 Shrinking and flooding of Majuli Island 
Recommendation 
3.12.1 The Committee is of the view that it is impo rtant to preserve the natural and cultural 
heritage of the Majuli island, which has been affected by the massive erosion in the past few 
years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with 
concerned Ministries/ Departments to complete the ongoing projects for conservation of Majuli 
island and take pro-active measures to prevent further erosion through periodic assessments with 
the help of environmental experts. 
(Para 4.23.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.12.2 Out of total area of 523. 29 sq.km, an area of 319.21 sq.km will be benefitted from the 
project “Protection of Majuli Island from Flood and Erosion of River Brahmaputra”. The 
project is nearing completion as stated in para 4.23.3.  The physical progress is 96%. The 
remaining portio n of the area may be covered if eligible proposal is received subject to the 
availability of fund. However, the decision of the concerned Ministry of Government of India and 
the concerned State Government would be final in this matter. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.12.3 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Ministry needs to revisit and 
assess why there is a lack of eligible proposal for the work relating to the remaining portion 
of the area. It recommends that a meeting with concerne d Ministry of Government of 
India, the concerned State Governments and the stakeholders may be held to assess the 
reasons for lack of eligible proposals and the alternatives that are available to close the 
gaps. 
3.13 Tourism Sector 
Recommendation 
3.13.1 The Committee is of the view that with wide variety of wildlife species, flora and fauna, 
lush green pristine beauty, its food and rich culture, North East Region has a lot of potential to 
showcase in tourism sector. The Committee notes that various Projects  under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme have completed or are nearing completion barring the projects in Tripura and Mizoram 

 
58 
 
which is showing slow progress. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of DoNER 
should take -up the issue of slow progress of the projects  in Tripura and Mizoram, with the 
Ministry of Tourism and the State Governments and sort out the reasons therefore at the earliest. 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may take up with the State Governments of 
North East to identify more such sites for development of tourism related infrastructure. 
(Para 4.24.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.13.2 The Ministry of Tourism under its scheme of Swadesh Darshan has sanctioned 02 
projects each in Tripura and Mizoram respectively, the details of which may be seen  at 
Annexure VI. 
3.13.3 The implementing agency of these projects is the respective State Government. 
The State wise project details are as under: 
 
(a)        Tripura: 
 
Project 1 (Sl. No. 1 in above table below Tripura) 
Reason for delay : The works have bee n halted at Border Ceremony Facility at Akaura (70% 
complete) since June 2021 due to pending permission from Border Guards Bangladesh. Letter 
was issued by Secretary, Tourism on 24 th January, 2022, letter from the AS (T) to the JS(BM), 
MoHA was issued on 1 7th January, 2022 for intervention in resumption of suspended works. 
State Vide letter number 1315/19 dt 28/3/22 requested the extension of timeline for Light and 
Sound Show at Ujjyanta Palace and log huts at Narkel Kunja till October 2022 because of 
delayed works due to Covid 19 pandemic. 
 
Project 2 (Sl. No. 2 in above table below Tripura) 
 
Reason for delay: The project is to be completed by 31 st December, 2022. In the review meeting 
held in November 2021, State had informed that works are in progress at v arious sites. A Letter 
from Secretary Tourism to the Chief Secretary, State was issued on 14 th January, 2022 to 
expedite the works as per Target Completion timeline. Ministry requested the State to expedite 
works at various destinations vide email dated 17 th January, 2022. State informed that the works 
are in progress and on track for completion. 
 
(b)       Mizoram: 
 
Project 1 (Sl. No. 1 in above table below Mizoram) 
The project is 100% Physically Complete. 
 
Project 1 (Sl. No. 2 in above table below Mizoram) 
 

 
59 
 
Reason for delay : In the review meeting of October 2021, the State informed about the dispute 
with the contractor and assured to resolve the same. Ministry vide its emails dated 10 th 
November, 2021 &14 th November, 2022 requested the State to take necess ary action and share 
progress update. State responded that they are trying to resolve the matter with the contractor 
through arbitration and expected to resolve by February/March 2022. Letter from Secretary, 
Tourism to Chief Secretary, State was issued on 14th January, 2022 to expedite the works as per 
Target Completion timeline of December, 2022. Ministry again sent a reminder vide email dated 
14th February, 2022 to expedite resolution. As per the information from the State, the matter is 
under arbitration  and would take time to get resolved and there has been no progress in the 
project since last 2 years. It is unlikely that the project issue is resolved in the next 2-3 months. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.13.4 The Committee is displeased with th e slow pace of project implementation in the 
states of Tripura and Mizoram and recommends that all necessary steps must be taken by 
the Ministry of DoNER in consultation with State Governments to remove the unending 
bottlenecks which are impeding the progr ess of the projects and resulting in loss of 
numerous tourism -related opportunities in these states. The Committee notes that the 
Ministry of Tourism has to closely monitor and make all efforts to urge the State 
Government of Mizoram in bringing a resoluti on to the Second Project which has run into 
rough weather. 
 
 
 
3.14 Trade and Industrial Development 
Recommendation 
3.14.1 The Committee notes that a total project cost of ₹  169.27 crores have been approved 
under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY ) with a Central Share of ₹  84.71 
crores during the year 2021 -22. Out of the Central share, an amount of ₹  75.08 crores has been 
released by the Department of Fisheries in the North Eastern States. The PMMSY is a flagship 
Scheme for the holistic developm ent of Fisheries, which aims for economically viable and 
socially inclusive growth that provides the economic prosperity and wellbeing of fishermen and 
also contributes to direct and indirect employment opportunities in fisheries sector. 
(Para 4.13.11 ibid) 
 
 

 
60 
 
Action Taken 
3.14.2 The Department of Fisheries has provided under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY), special emphasis for development of Fisheries and aquaculture in NER with 
earmarked investment targets. 
 
3.14.3 The PMMSY intends to address  critical gaps in fish production and productivity, quality, 
technology, post harvest infrastructure and management, modernization and strengthening of 
value chain, traceability, establishing robust fisheries management framework and fishermen‟s 
welfare. During past two financial years (2020-21 and 2021-22) the Department of Fisheries has 
approved the fisheries development proposals of NER States amounting to ₹ 537.80 crores and 
the same are under implementation. It has also taken up several initiatives for  holistic 
development of fisheries sector in NER States and will be taking up more such initiatives in the 
coming 3 years to address the gaps in the fisheries value chain so as to enable the concerned 
States to exploit their fisheries potential to the optimum level.  
 
3.14.4 PMMSY envisages increasing fish production in NER through 
 Supply of quality and affordable seed and feed to fish farmers, 
 Area expansion, diversification of species, 
 Intensification of aquaculture, 
 Infusion of modern technologies like Re-circulatory aquaculture Systems, Biofloc, 
 Cage culture 
 Stocking of fingerlings in wetlands and reservoirs. 
 
3.14.5 Major Components Supported under PMMSY in NER 
 Hatcheries :41 Nos 
 Fish Seed Rearing Unit:248 ha 
 Integrated Fish Farming :892 ha 
 Installation cages in reservoir  :250 Nos 
 Re-circulatory Aquaculture System(RAS): 32 units 
 Ornamental Fisheries units: 10 Nos 
 Biofloc units :226 Nos 
 Construction of new pond:145 ha 
 Feed mills   :32 Nos 
 Brood banks  : 2 Nos 
 
3.14.6 State-wise details of project approve d and central fund released under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (including SPU/DPU) during 2021-22: 
(₹ in crores) 
Sl.No. State/UT Total 
Project 
Total 
Central 
Total Funds 

 
61 
 
Cost  Share released 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 27.53 14.86 0.00 
2 Assam 91.92 45.46 25.25 
3 Manipur  11.96 5.71 1.43 
4 Meghalaya 12.91 6.97 1.74 
5 Mizoram 30.24 16.31 5.16 
6 Nagaland 21.64 11.69 2.92 
7 Sikkim 16.28 8.79 2.23 
8 Tripura 41.90 20.34 10.67 
Total 254.38 130.13 49.40 
 
3.14.7 Further, The Government of India in the Budget 2018 -19 announced the extension of the 
facility of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) to fisheries and animal husba ndry farmers to help them to 
meet their working capital needs. The KCC facility will help fisheries and animal husbandry 
farmers to meet their short -term credit requirements of rearing of animals, poultry birds, fish, 
shrimp, other aquatic organisms and ca pture of fish. Out of the 9657 KCC applications 
accepted, 4486 were sanctioned. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.14.8 The Committee is not satisfied with the total funds released during the year 2021 -22 
under PMMSY as against the total project cost. The Committee feels that this delay in the 
release of funds will hinder the pace of development of the fisheries sector in NER. The 
Committee strongly recommends that timely release of funds is pre -requisite for 
development and will help in completion of projects in time bound manner. The Committee 
recommends that Ministry of DoNER should work with Dept. of Fisheries, GoI for holistic 
development of fisheries sector in NER. 
 

 
62 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of the Government have not 
been received 
 
4.1 Budget at a glance 
Recommendation 
4.1.1 The Committee observes that the projected outlays for the financial year 2022 -23 in the 
schemes of Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), Karbi -Anglong Autonomous Territorial 
Council (KAATC) and Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council (DHATC) were 
significantly higher than the allocated amount in BE 2022 -23. The projects under the head of 
BTC, KAATC and DHATC are focused on creation of infrastructure and development of these 
areas.  The Committee feels that the allocation may not be sufficient to meet the committed 
liabilities of these Special Development Packages. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
priority should be given to the completion of ongoing projects and additional f und requests may 
be made at the RE stage to focus on other prioritized projects under these schemes. 
(Para 2.1.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.1.2 Recommendations of the Committee noted for compliance.  
4.1.3 Continuous efforts are being made by the Ministry for ti mely implementation of the 
projects, which, inter alia, include review of ongoing projects under special packages of Assam 
(BTC, DHATC & KAATC) with the senior officers of the State Government of Assam/Councils, 
visits of senior officers to the State of Assam to review the status of implementation of project etc.  
Developmental packages of Autonomous Councils shall also be reviewed at the highest levels 
soon. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.1.4 The Committee finds that the Ministry’s course of action is merely contemplative. 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be appraised about the outcome of the 
review of developmental packages of autonomous councils at the highest levels. 
4.2 North East Road Sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) 
 
Recommendation 
4.2.1 The Committee notes that the amount of ₹ 60.00 crores in BE 2022 -23 under NERSDS 
(EAP Component) scheme is for meeting the liabilities towards completion of ongoing projects. 
11 out of the 12 projects under this head have already been completed. Only 1 project in the 

 
63 
 
State of Tripura is ongoing and is expected to be completed by March, 2022. The Committee 
hopes that the remaining one project will be completed within the stipulated time frame. 
(Para 3.5.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.2.2 A number of revie w meetings with Tripura PWD, the implementing agency, including 
meetings chaired by Secretary, DoNER have been held to expedite the road project from 
Melaghar to Udaipur.  Secretary, PWD, Government of Tripura was requested to monitor the 
progress of the work on weekly basis and get the road completed at the earliest. As per the last 
report, Secretary, PWD, Government of Tripura informed that work is likely to be completed by 
August, 2022 as it got delayed again due to various factors including non -receipt of material 
and monsoon. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.2.3 The Committee notes that the road project in Tripura was to be completed by 
March, 2022. Later on, it was likely to be completed by August, 2022 but it got delayed 
again due to various fac tors. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the 
said road project. 
 
4.3    North East Enterprise Development Scheme (NEEDS) erstwhile loan to North East 
Development Finance Corporation (NEDFi) 
 
Recommendation 
4.3.1 The Committee notes the activities and projects undertaken by NEEDS for promotion and 
development of MSME and extending micro -finance in various economic sectors in the Region 
for giving support, thrust and force to young generation entrepreneurs, who are in need of 
finance. The Committee hopes that effective utilization of funds towards the building of various 
sectors will help create effective eco-system for young and local enterprising generation. 
(Para 3.9.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.3.2 In order to provide credit linkage to the MSME & Micro Finance sectors in the North 
Eastern Region, the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (MDoNER), has been 
providing interest free loan to NEDFi since 2002 -03.The fund is being fully utilised in providing 
financial assistance to Micro & Small Enterprises in the unserved & underserved areas and has 
become the key driver of equitable economic development and inclusive growth in the region.  
 
4.3.3 Various emerging sectors where first generation local entrepreneurs are provided 
financial support are tiny industries in manufacturing & services sectors, tourism & hospitality, 

 
64 
 
education, agro-food processing, healthcare, bamboo, tea, handloom & handicraft etc. Besides, 
the scheme has also helped in micro -financing and empowering the women ent repreneurs in the 
region.  
 
4.3.4 Over the years, the fund has helped NEDFi to extend financial assistance of about ₹6300 
crores to more than 8500 projects, generating direct employment of about 5 lakh in the region. 
In addition, NEDFi has facilitated gene ration of indirect employment, of more than 8.50 lakh, 
through the units assisted under the Microfinance scheme. 
 
4.3.5 The performance of fund for last five years is given below:  
 
(A) Financial Performance : The fund received and utilised during the last six years is given 
below. The excess disbursed amount has been contributed from NEDFi‟s own resources. 
(₹ in crores) 
Year Fund  
Received 
Fund  
Disbursed 
NEDFi ‘s 
Contribution 
2016-17 30 61.76 31.76 
2017-18 30 50.02 20.02 
2018-19 30 67.39 37.39 
2019-20 30 50.95 20.95 
2020-21 30 57.80 27.80 
2021-22 40 82.55 42.55 
 
(B)Non Financial Performance: In order to create an effective eco -system for young and local 
entrepreneurs, the Scheme also undertake various promotional & developmental services in the 
segment. Some of the activities undertaken during last five years and the current year is given 
below:- 
 
1. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER): 
NEDFi was designated as the Nodal Agency for disbursement of subsidy under 
Component B of MOVCDNER Scheme and NEDFi‟s role as a subsidy disbursing agency started 
since November 2017 as per the operational guidelines of MOVCDNER. During past 5 years, 
NEDFi has provided subsidy, under the Scheme, for ₹26.07 crores to 21 beneficiaries 
(entrepreneurs, farmer producer companies etc.) to process the organic crops. 
 
2. Techno-Economic Development Fund: 
NEDFi conducts various Techno -economic feasibility studies for industry and 
infrastructure best suited to the region. During past 5 years, a tot al of 28 studies was completed 
under TEDF. Some of the Studies covered are: Competitive advantages of the North Eastern 
States and identification of thrust areas for growth and development in the region; Preparation 
of Action Plan for Promotion of Bamboo in NER; Preparation of Developmental Action Plan for 
promotion of Oil Palm in NER; Preparation of Action Plan on Value Chain Development of 

 
65 
 
Horticulture- Fruits & Vegetables sector in NER; Scope of industrial development in Barak 
valley due to completion of BG rail link & coming up of East West Corridor, etc. 
 
3. Business Meet: 
The Corporation conducts Business Meets every year in all over the North Eastern 
Region for dissemination of information on schemes and programmes of the Corporation, with 
the objective to develop a variety of skills and attributes such as the ability to think creatively, 
work in a team and to manage various risks etc. During the period under review, NEDFi 
conducted a total number of 83 Business Meets with a participation of 3633 prospective 
entrepreneurs. 
 
4. Business Facilitation Centre: 
Mentoring assistance is extended primarily to the first generation entrepreneurs on 
Managerial, Technical, Financial, Commercial & Marketing, Preparation of project reports 
and credit linkages through Business Facilitation Centers of the Corporation in each of the NER 
states.  
During the period under review, a total of 3138 entrepreneurs were nurtured, out of which 
credit linkage was extended to 765 entrepreneurs for an amount of ₹85.41 crores. 
 
5. Capacity building training to NGOs/ MFIs in Microfinance: 
In microfinance, capacity building is a continuous exercise and fu nctionaries and staff of 
NGOs/MFIs need to continuously upgrade their knowledge and skill to cope up with the 
changes and development in the Sector. NEDFi conducted capacity building programmes of 
Microfinance Institutions/ NGOs for wider microfinance outr each in the underserved and 
unserved areas in the North Eastern Region. During the period under review, 796 participants 
benefitted in the region through capacity building programmes. 
 
6. Marketing Support: 
NEDFi is also facilitating marketing support to the a rtisans of NER through exhibitions 
and its various showrooms. During the period under review, a total of 4734  artisans were 
provided platforms in various exhibition/ outlets. 
NEDFi, has not only helped businesses and individuals make real progress in their  lives 
particularly promoting, nurturing and hand -holding local entrepreneurs in their effort to earn a 
livelihood but its contribution towards the society has also  had a deeper impact beyond 
economic growth of the region. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.3.6 The Committee notes that, on an average, subsidy of more than ₹ 1 crore per 
beneficiary has been provided during the last 5 yrs to process the organic crops. The 
Committee would like to have details of these beneficiaries. 
 

 
66 
 
4.4 Social and Infrastructure Development Fund (SIDF) 
Recommendation 
4.4.1 The Committee notes the various monitoring mechanism initiated by the Ministry for 
effective implementation of projects. It takes note of physical progress of the projects identified 
under the SIDF schem es specially the projects in Assam and sanctioned from March, 2017 to 
March, 2018. The Committee, however, feels that physical progress of the projects still lack the 
pace that is required. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry in coordination with 
the implementing agencies must work out modalities to ensure efficient and timely completion of 
projects. The Committee further recommends that Ministry should take up the matter of 
implementation of PFMS module with State Government of Assam so that impediments related 
to implementation of projects can be resolved and projects are completed without any further 
delay. 
(Para 3.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.4.2 Ministry of DoNER has been pressing for timely completion of the ongoing projects 
under SIDF at various levels and during SLEC & IMC meetings. Under SIDF, there are only 12 
ongoing projects as on 31 st March, 2022. These are at the advanced stage of completion and all 
ongoing projects are likely to be completed in financial year 2022-23. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.4.3 The Committee notes the reply and wishes to be apprised about the status of these 
twelve ongoing projects. 
4.5 North East Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation (NERAMAC) 
Recommendation 
4.5.1 The Committee notes that agricul ture and horticulture are one of the primary sources of 
livelihood in the NER. The Ministry has already mentioned that one of the major hindrance is 
shortage of storage facility, warehousing, etc. The Committee therefore fails to understand the 
paltry allo cation under this head. It recommends that the Ministry should revisit its focus on 
improving the infrastructure facilities for the agriculture sector by creating more number of 
storage facilities, housing, sorting-grading-packaging unit. 
(Para 3.11.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.5.2 In order to improve the infrastructure facilities for agriculture sector, a proposal for 
"Development of Agri -Horti Sector in North -Eastern Region" was prepared based on the 
NEDFi's report on "Action Plan on Value Chain Development of  Horticultural - Fruits & 

 
67 
 
Vegetables in NER".  The said proposal has been forwarded to Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmer's Welfare requesting them to consider the proposal for allocation of funds. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.5.3 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised about the stand taken 
by the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare on the said proposal. 
Recommendation 
4.5.4 The Committee notes the pivotal role being played by NERAMAC in the North -Eastern 
Region by providing crucial support to the farmers and Agri -Horticulturists during the COVID -
19 pandemic so that they do not face the brunt of economic problems. The Committee has taken 
cognizance of the measures taken by NERAMAC to provide boost to agriculture. The 
Committee also appreciates various initiatives undertaken by NERAMAC for developing 
Horticulture and Floriculture activities in NER and suggests that holistic development of Agri -
Horti in NER would open up sea of opportunities for farmers/producers.  The Commit tee has 
taken note of the challenges being faced by NERAMAC and recommends that all stakeholders 
must work in synergy to remove bottlenecks and coordinated efforts must be undertaken so that 
NERAMAC can deliver its goals of agricultural marketing, procurem ent and processing of Agri-
Horti producers in the North-eastern Region in a profitable manner. 
(Para 3.11.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.5.5 The recommendations of the Committee are noted.  
 
4.5.6 Following the joint review of the agriculture sector in the North East Region (NER) 
conducted by the Hon‟ble Minister of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
(DoNER) and Hon‟ble Minister of Agriculture & Farmer‟s Welfare, a task force on agriculture 
was constituted to steer the growth of Agriculture Sector in North Eastern Region and will soon 
give its report inter alia on:  
 Multiplicity of Schemes 
 Multiplicity of Agencies 
 10% GBS unutilized: Mandatory allocation but poor utilization 
 Poor absorption capacity of NER States 
 Lack of entire value chain approach: Gaps & bottlenecks. 
 Connectivity & logistics- first-mile connectivity, natural calamities like landslide & flood 
 Weak market/ forward linkage 
 Lack of adequate investment in agribusiness, cold chains. 
 

 
68 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.5.7 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised about the details of the 
report. 
4.6 North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development Corporation Limited 
(NEHHDC) 
Recommendation 
4.6.1 The Committee takes note of the crucial and pivotal role of North Easter n Handicrafts 
and Handlooms Development Corporation (NEHHDC) in providing the necessary support to the 
artisans, weavers and Self-Help Groups of the region. NEHHDC is in urgent need of revival plan 
and the Committee has taken note of the business plan for NEHHDC formulated by NEDFi and 
M/s NH Consulting Services Pvt. Ltd. 
(Para 3.12.7 ibid) 
Recommendation 
4.6.2 It recommends that the Ministry should expedite the examination of the revival plan put 
forth by NEDFi and M/s NH Consulting Services Pvt. Ltd. so t hat NEHHDC can get a boost in 
pursuance of its goals of providing marketing support to the artisans and weavers of the region 
and thereby accelerating the holistic development of handicrafts and handlooms industry of the 
NER. 
(Para 3.12.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.6.3 Recommendations of the Committee noted. 
 
4.6.4 NEHHDC was asked prepare an Action Oriented Business Plan for NEHHDC, which it 
did by engaging M/s NH Consulting Services Pvt. Ltd. The plan, based on non -fund support  has 
been adopted and its recomme ndations are under implementation by NEHHDC. The 
Corporation has accordingly drawn up plans for short term and long term interventions and has 
increased its revenue through multiple platforms, which otherwise was restricted to sales 
through emporiums only. This has also greatly increased the market reach of the artisans. 
 
4.6.5 NEHHDC has also signed MoUs with Indian Institute of Management, Shillong, Indian 
Institute of Public Management, Delhi, National Institute of Design, Jorhat, TRIFED, Rashtriya 
Gramin Vikas Nidhi, Guwahati, CCIC, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati. More MoUs 
are in the process of signing with similar other institutions/agencies/CPSEs of national and 
international repute. 
 

 
69 
 
4.6.6 NEHHDC has also implemented various cost -cutting me asures such as closing down 
loss-making showrooms, terminating services of certain category of employees etc. 
 
4.6.7 In a recent review meeting of NEHHDC by the Hon‟ble Minister of DoNER, it was 
decided that the primary role of a government agency such as NEHHDC should be that of a 
facilitator to the artisan communities of NER by generating demand in both the domestic and 
international markets and provide all necessary support to the artisans in resolving the issues 
related to raw material availability, lac k of market intelligence and skilling and upskilling them. 
Action plan accordingly will be made and implemented. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.6.8 The Committee notes that North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development 
Corporation (NEHHDC) is the facilitator to provide all necessary support to the artisans in 
resolving the issues related to raw material availability, lack of market intelligence  and 
skilling and upskilling them. The Committee also notes that an action plan will be made 
and implemented by NEHHDC . The Committee may be apprised about the details of the 
action plan initiated in this regard. 
4.7 Supply of potable tap water: 
Recommendation 
4.7.1 The Committee takes note of progress being made by various North East States under Jal 
Jeevan Mission (JJM) to make provision for supply of potable tap water supply to rural 
households. Availability of safe drinking water is foremost for good health as its absence can 
lead to serious health repercussions. Therefore, the Committee recommends that  States must 
expedite work under JJM and achieve the targets of supplying potable tap water to every 
household by the year of saturation as planned by them. 
(Para 4.5.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.7.2 In order to expedite work in States under Jal Jeevan Mission ( JJM) and achieve the 
targets of supplying potable tap water to every household, several meetings including 
conference, workshops, review meetings through video conferences, etc. at highest levels are 
being held from time to time with the State govt. offici als. Joint review meetings of Union 
Minister, Jal Shakti with Chief Ministers/ LGs of various States/ UTs were convened for 
reviewing the implementation of JJM. Secretary, DWS and AS&MD, NJJM have also taken 
review meetings with Chief Secretaries as well a s senior officers in -charge of Rural Water 
Supply Departments of all States/ UTs. To review the implementation of the Mission at ground 
level regular field visits are also made from time to time. 
 

 
70 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.7.3 The Committee take s cognizance of various steps taken by the Government to 
expedite the work under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) in North East States to achieve the 
target of supplying potable water to every household. The Committee would further like to 
be apprised about the St ate-wise details on the status of implementation of the Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM) in the North East Region. 
4.8 Civil Aviation 
Recommendation 
4.8.1 The Committee is of the view that M/o DoNER in consultation with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and State Governments should work in the direction of expeditious completion of under 
construction projects. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should 
undertake feasibility assessment along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to identify more such 
Green field projects in other North East States which will further improve air connectivity in the 
region. 
(Para 4.9.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.8.2 The direction of the Committee to expedite the project has been noted for compliance. 
4.8.3 The Greenfield Airport at Ho llongi, Papumpare is being set up with 
Sanctioned/Projected cost of ₹ 645 crores. As on 5 th May, 2022 approximately 72% work has 
been completed.  
4.8.4 Further, monthly review of Project is being held by Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
with stakehold ers.  It is expected that the airport will be operationalized by August, 2022 in 
coordination with the State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh and Assam.   
4.8.5 Moreover, Government of India has formulated a Greenfield Airport Policy, 2008 which 
provides guidelines, procedure and conditions for establishment of new Greenfield Airports in 
the country.  As per the Policy, an airport developer or the respective State Government willing 
to establish an airport is required to send a proposal to the Ministry of C ivil Aviation in the 
prescribed format available at www.civilaviation.gov.in  There is a 2 stage process for approval 
of the proposal i.e., „Site Clearance‟ followed by „In -Principle‟ approval in accordance with this 
policy.  Ministry of Civil Aviation receives proposals from the State Governments or Airport 
Developers from time to time for establishment of airports.  After due examination, the approval 
for development of a new Greenfield Airport is granted.  Th e responsibility for project 
implementation steps such as land acquisition, project funding, obtaining other mandatory 
clearances, etc.  lies with concerned airport developer or the State Government as the case may 
be. 

 
71 
 
4.8.6 Further consultations with the State Governments will be held to propose more 
Greenfield airports. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.8.7 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation receives proposals from the 
State Governments or Airport Developers from time to time for the establishment of 
airports. The Committee would like to be apprised about the proposals that have been 
received by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to develop Greenfield airports in respect of 
North Eastern States. The Committee would also like to be appr ised about the viability of 
the proposals and the possibility of these reaching the implementation stage. 
4.9 Renewable Energy Sources 
Recommendation 
4.9.1 The Committee takes note of the various ongoing projects under PM -KUSUM (Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Urja S uraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan) Scheme, Grid Connectivity Rooftop 
Solar (RTS) Programme, Solar Parks, etc. The Committee also notes that against the total 
potential of 3261.49 MW in NER for Small Hydro Power, 338.45 MW capacity has been 
installed as on 31 st December, 2021. The Committee, recommends that the Ministry should 
periodically monitor the progress of these projects particularly of the Small Hydro Power and 
take up with the State Governments to encourage and facilitate private players for developme nt 
of Renewable Energy Sources in NE States. This will give a much needed boost to the renewable 
energy sector in North –Eastern Region. 
(Para 4.12.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.9.2 The suggestion of the committee has been noted for compliance. Further, it is in formed 
that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) Note on 'Small Hydro Power 
Development Scheme for 2022 -23 to 2025 -26 is being circulated for inter -Ministerial 
consultation by Ministry of New and Renewal Energy. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.9.3 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to be informed about the 
outcome of the Small Hydro Power Development Scheme so far and about the new projects 
that are being identified under this Scheme in North East States.   
 
***** 

 
72 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
Budget at a glance 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.1.4) 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.1.7) 
Schemes of North East Council 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.2.3)  
Schemes of North East Council -Special Development Projects 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.3.4) 
Central Pool of Resources for North East and Sikkim /North East Special Infrastructure 
Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.4.3) 
Health Infrastructure 
 The Committee notes the reply.   
(Para 1.5.3) 
Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE) foresight 
 
 The Committee notes the various initiatives being taken by the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship towards enhancing the skill development of the youth of 
the North East Region.  
(Para 1.10.5) 
 
Civil Aviation 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.11.3) 

 
73 
 
Renewable Energy Sources 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.12.6) 
Bamboo 
The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 1.13.8) 
Technological advancements for improvement of Agricultural produce 
The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.14.7) 
Deforestation 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.15.3) 
Development Support Services for States (DSSS) of NlTI Aayog 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.16.3) 
The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.16.9) 
The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.16.16 ) 
List of projects sanctioned as ‘untied fund’ 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.17.5) 
Utilisation of funds 
 The Committee notes the re ply and the efforts of the Ministry for achieving the 
optimum utilization of funds during the year 2021-22. 
(Para 2.1.4) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.1.7) 

 
74 
 
 
Capital Section 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.2.6) 
Schemes of North East Council 
 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by NEC in respect of monitoring and 
implementing inter -state projects in the NER. It is of the view that infrastructure and 
connectivity are some of the most basic requirement for progress of any  region and 
collaborated efforts are needed on the part of State governments and national agencies for 
better outcome in these projects. It hopes that the mechanisms adopted to achieve the 
targets will yield the desired results. 
(Para 2.3.5) 
Central Pool o f Resources for North East and Sikkim /North East Special Infrastructure 
Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.4.3) 
 The Committee is aware that the NLCPR -State scheme has been restructured as 
North East Specia l Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) and committed 
liabilities under the previous scheme are being met.  The Committee notes the details of the 
sanctioned, completed and ongoing projects under this Scheme. 
(Para 2.4.6) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.4.11) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.4.15) 
 
North East State Road PMU (ADB Assisted) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.5.6) 
Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
75 
 
(Para 2.6.3) 
Smart City Project in NER 
  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.7.6) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.8.6) 
Waterways 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.9.3) 
Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport (KMMTT) project 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee strongly recommends that efforts 
must be directed towards the resumption of work on the road component of KMMTT at 
the earliest and should be completed within the stipulated time limit to avoid any cost 
overrun. The Committee further recommends that Ministry, in co ordination with 
implementing agency, must periodically review the project for its effective implementation 
and execution. 
(Para 2.10.3) 
Trade and Industrial Development 
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry may take up with 
the Sta te Governments of Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur for release of funds under 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The support in this regard may be 
extended to these states for enduring development of fisheries. 
(Para 2.11.10) 
Tea Sector 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.12.3) 
The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.12.10) 
 
Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
76 
 
(Para 2.13.3) 
Disaster Management 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.14.5) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.14.9) 
Shrinking and flooding of Majuli Island 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 2.15.3) 
Utilisation of funds 
 The Committee notes that a total of 15 proje cts costing ₹199.82 crores are either in 
the pipeline or have been identified under the DHATC package.  The Committee has not 
been provided with any information on the timelines by which the four identified projects 
would be sanctioned. The Committee asser ts that the entire process of project 
implementation must be accelerated, including the identification of the projects for 
sanction, the release of funds and the subsequent, successful implementation of projects.   
(Para 3.1.4) 
 The Committee notes with di ssatisfaction that the explanation of the Ministry that 
one of the reasons for NIL expenditure during the financial year 2021 -22 was non -receipt 
of requisite documents from the State Government of Assam.  The Committee, time and 
again, has been recommendin g close monitoring of the progress in respect of utilization of 
funds and implementation of the projects by the concerned State Government.  The 
Committee recommends that a periodic review at the level of Secretary, Ministry of 
DoNER may be undertaken and subsequent review meetings with the Chief Secretary of 
State Government of Assam may be scheduled to ensure that necessary documents, 
utilization certificate are submitted by the State Government of Assam and funds are 
adequately utilized. 
(Para 3.1.5) 
 The Committee finds it worrisome that a delay in the finalization of the NEC 
building at Dwarka could act as an obstacle for non -utilisation of the allocated funds and 
that only a meagre amount of ₹ 8.81 crores could be utilized during the financial year 2021-
22. The Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for this delay and steps that 
are being taken to avoid such delays. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not 
provided any facts about the outcomes of the review meetings.  
(Para 3.1.10) 

 
77 
 
 Further, the Committee notes the various levels of the monitoring mechanism that 
are being put in place by the Ministry for ensuring the proper monitoring, evaluation and 
implementation of projects. However, the Committee fails to understand that despite t his 
monitoring mechanism in place, time and again there is a delay in finalization of projects. 
The Committee expresses its satisfaction with the efforts of the Ministry to introduce the 
use of geo -spatial tools and techniques for real -time monitoring of i nfrastructure projects. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 3.1.11) 
 
Central Pool of Resources for North East and Sikkim /North East Special Infrastructure 
Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
 
 The Committee finds it worrisome that the revised cost estimation has shown a 
significant increase over the sanctioned project cost. It is understood that delays in project 
completion have been a cause for this cost escalation. The Committee notes the submission 
with regard to N LCPR-State Scheme and hopes that the funds would be utilized optimally 
to meet the committed liabilities, within defined time lines to avoid cost overruns in future.  
(Para 3.2.6) 
North East Road Sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and it can be seen from information 
provided in Annexure-I, that more than one year has passed since administrative approval 
was granted to the projects in Mizoram. However, the physical progress of road projects 
still remains below 1 0% although the effect of COVID -19 pandemic has subsided and the 
situation has reverted to normalcy. 
(Para 3.3.5) 
 The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation in para 3.5.7 of 239 th report 
and hopes that the State, as well as Central agencies invo lved in road projects in Mizoram, 
show diligence towards the improvement of road connectivity in Mizoram. 
(Para 3.3.6) 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC) 
 As per the information provided by the Ministry, it is seen that in respect of most  of 
the projects, the information about the percentage of physical progress of KAATC projects 
is yet to be provided by the State Government. The Committee gets the impression that its 
recommendation has not been taken seriously by the state agencies with r egard of 
furnishing requisite information to the Committee. The Committee expresses its discontent 
and disapproval of such practice. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
i.e. to be apprised of the physical progress of pending projects al ong with the reasons for 
delay and details of cost overrun. 
(Para 3.4.3) 

 
78 
 
 
 
Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council (DHATC) 
 The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its further recommendation given 
against para 2.2.10 ibid. 
(Para 3.5.3) 
Sports potential in NER 
 The Committee notes the establishment of the National Sports University in Imphal, 
Manipur to promote sports education in the fields of sports sciences, sports technology, 
sports management and sports coaching. The Committee feels that such ave nues should 
also be established in other North Eastern States to cater to the needs and coaching 
requirements of young athletes. 
(Para 3.6.9) 
Supply of potable tap water 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is concerned that 
the target may not be achievable in Assam if the Ministry does not step up its efforts and 
provide all the support, financial or infrastructural, to the Government of Assam. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of some specific steps that have been taken to p ut 
Assam on the path of achieving the targets. 
(Para 3.7.5) 
 The Committee would also like the Ministry to undertake assessments and reviews 
to find out whether the availability of tap water to the existing households is permanent. 
(Para 3.7.6) 
Roadways 
 The Committee notes that out of 5998 km identified under SARDP -NE, 4830 KM 
has been completed as on 31 st March, 2022. The Committee strongly recommends that 
completion of the remaining work identified under SARDP -NE may be expedited by the 
Ministry in coordination and consultation with various stakeholders and through effective 
monitoring so that the project is completed within the stipulated time frame. The 
Committee further recommends that review meetings must be held periodically to identify 
the roadblocks to the work and find a solution for the same so that delays can be avoided. 
(Para 3.8.4) 
 
Railways 

 
79 
 
 The Committee notes the efforts undertaken by the Ministry for the completion of 
the project. The Committee hopes that monitoring of the project from the Bangladesh side 
by the Indian Missions accelerates the pace of work on that side. It observes that the 
Ministry should not let down its guard and continue making necessary efforts for 
completion of the Viaduct by September, 2022 without any further delay a nd cost 
escalation.  
(Para 3.9.5) 
North East Industrial Development Scheme (NEIDS) 
 The Committee is of the considered opinion that Industrial Development plays a key 
role in the robust development of the industry sector, and consequently service sector in the 
country. The Committee, hence, recommends that the Ministry should engage vigorously 
with the Ministry of Commerce and Industries and the State Governments to promote 
industrial activity in the untapped areas/markets of NER. This will provide a fillip  to 
industrialization in NER and will boost  employment opportunities in the region. The 
Committee also recommends that periodic meetings amongst senior officers of the 
concerned agencies should be held for regular monitoring of pace of the ongoing project s 
under this scheme.  
(Para 3.10.4) 
Technological advancements for improvement of Agricultural produce 
 The Committee has noted the various initiatives that have been taken in the 
agriculture sector and acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry to remove im pediments in 
agri sector for its holistic growth in NER. The Committee feels that technological 
intervention in this sector will go a long way in enabling farmers to increase not only their 
produce but their income as well. The Committee recommends that th e Ministry should 
review its export infrastructure creation efforts. The Committee feels that necessary 
assistance may be extended to the farmers’ organisations in the NE states to further 
promote export from the region. The Committee, further, recommends that remaining 
1000 markets may be integrated with the e-Nam portal at the earliest. 
(Para 3.11.8) 
 
Shrinking and flooding of Majuli Island 
 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Ministry needs to revisit and 
assess why there is a lack of eligible proposal for the work relating to the remaining portion 
of the area. It recommends that a meeting with concerned Ministry of Government of 
India, the concerned State Governments and the stakeholders may be held to assess the 
reasons for lack of eligi ble proposals and the alternatives that are available to close the 
gaps. 
(Para 3.12.3) 
Tourism Sector 

 
80 
 
 The Committee is displeased with the slow pace of project implementation in the 
states of Tripura and Mizoram and recommends that all necessary steps mus t be taken by 
the Ministry of DoNER in consultation with State Governments to remove the unending 
bottlenecks which are impeding the progress of the projects and resulting in loss of 
numerous tourism -related opportunities in these states. The Committee not es that the 
Ministry of Tourism has to closely monitor and make all efforts to urge the State 
Government of Mizoram in bringing a resolution to the Second Project which has run into 
rough weather. 
(Para 3.13.4) 
Trade and Industrial Development 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the total funds released during the year 2021 -22 
under PMMSY as against the total project cost. The Committee feels that this delay in the 
release of funds will hinder the pace of development of the fisheries sector in NER. The 
Committee strongly recommends that timely release of funds is pre -requisite for 
development and will help in completion of projects in time bound manner. The Committee 
recommends that Ministry of DoNER should work with Dept. of Fisheries, GoI for holistic 
development of fisheries sector in NER. 
(Para 3.14.8) 
Budget at a glance 
 The Committee finds that the Ministry’s course of action is merely contemplative. 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be appraised about the outcome of the 
review of developmental packages of autonomous councils at the highest levels. 
(Para 4.1.4) 
North East Road Sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) 
 The Committee notes that the road project in Tripura was to be completed by 
March, 2022. Later on, it was likely to be completed by August, 2022 but it got delayed 
again due to various factors. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the 
said road project. 
(Para 4.2.3) 
 
 
 
 
North East Enterprise Development Scheme (NEEDS) erstwhile loan to North East 
Development Finance Corporation (NEDFi) 
 
 The Committee notes that, on an average, subsidy of more than ₹ 1 crore per 
beneficiary has been provided during the last 5 yrs to process the organic crops. The 
Committee would like to have details of these beneficiaries. 

 
81 
 
(Para 4.3.6) 
 
Social and Infrastructure Development Fund (SIDF) 
 The Committee notes the reply and wishes to be apprised about the status of these 
twelve ongoing projects. 
(Para 4.4.3) 
 
North East Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation (NERAMAC) 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised about the stand taken 
by the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare on the said proposal. 
(Para 4.5.3) 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised about the details of the 
report. 
(Para 4.5.7) 
North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development Corporation Limited (NEHHDC) 
 The Committee notes that North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development 
Corporation (NEHHDC) is the facilitator to provide all necessary support to the artisans in 
resolving the issues related to raw material availability, lack of market intelligence  and 
skilling and upskilling them. The Committee also notes that an action plan will be made 
and implemented by NEHHDC . The Committee may be apprised about the details o f the 
action plan initiated in this regard. 
(Para 4.6.8) 
Supply of potable tap water 
 The Committee takes cognizance of various steps taken by the Government to 
expedite the work under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) in North East States to achieve the 
target of supplying potable water to every household. The Committee would further like to 
be apprised about the State -wise details on the status of implementation of the Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM) in the North East Region. 
(Para 4.7.3) 
Civil Aviation 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation receives proposals from the 
State Governments or Airport Developers from time to time for the establishment of 
airports. The Committee would like to be apprised about the proposals that have been 
received by the Min istry of Civil Aviation to develop Greenfield airports in respect of 

 
82 
 
North Eastern States. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the viability of 
the proposals and the possibility of these reaching the implementation stage. 
(Para 4.8.7) 
Renewable Energy Sources 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to be informed about the 
outcome of the Small Hydro Power Development Scheme so far and about the new projects 
that are being identified under this Scheme in North East States.   
(Para 4.9.3) 
***** 

 
83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
84 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 30 th November, 2022 in Committee 
Room „C‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brijlal   - Chairman 
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Anil Jain  
3. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
11. Shri Ravneet Singh 
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
1. Shri Dharmendra Singh Gangwar, Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Ashish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri C. G. Rajinikaanthan, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) 
 
1. Shri Anish Dayal Singh, Director-General 

 
85 
 
2. Smt. B. Radhika, Addl. Director-General 
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar Gupta, Inspector-General 
4. Dr. Paresh Saxena, Inspector-General 
5. Shri Tsewang Namgyal, Inspector-General 
6. Shri R. K. Bhumbla, Inspector-General 
7. Shri Amrendra Kumar Sengar, Inspector-General 
8. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Inspector-General (Prov.) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
The Committee considered the draft 240 th and 241 st Reports and adopted them without any 
change. The Committee authoriz ed the Chairman to carry out corrections of any 
typographical/factual errors, if necessary. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to decide 
the date and nominate Members for presentation of the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3.  xxx    xxx    xxx 
 
4.  xxx    xxx    xxx 
5.  xxx    xxx    xxx  
6.  xxx    xxx    xxx 
7.      xxx    xxx    xxx  
 (Witnesses then withdrew) 
8. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.  The meeting adjourned at 01:11 p.m. 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
xxx      Relates to other matter 

 
86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

 
87 
 
 
Annexure-I 
STATUS OF PROJECT IN MIZORAM AS ON 31st March, 2022 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Total 
Length 
in Km 
Administrative 
Approval 
Contract Amount & 
Date 
 
Amount 
Release    
as on 
Date 
Physical 
Progress    
in % Date Amount Amount Date 
1 Upgradation and 
improvement of 
Saiha-Lungbun-
Tluangram-Haka  
Road (Lungbun to 
R.Kolodyne 
Mizoram) 
13.00 29-01-2021 50.21 43.08 05-08-2021 20.08 
7.1 
2 Upgradation and 
improvement of  
Hnahlan-Hmunlui-
Tuimang-Singngei  
Road (Hnahlan to 
river Tiau; 
Mizoram 
12.00 29-01-2021 44.17 32.77 24-06-2021 17.66 
9.7 
3 Upgradation  of  
Zote-Farthlang-
Bunali-Tuipui-
Tawnzang Road 
8.00 29-01-2021 29.26 21.98 24-06-2021 11.70 
5.9 
4 Upgradation and 
Improvement of 
Sangau-
Saisihchhuah-
Siallam Road 
(Sangau-
Saisihchhuah: 
Mizoram) 
22.50 12-02-2021 66.08   0.00 0.0 
  TOTAL    123.64 97.83   49.44   
 
 
 
 

 
88 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Status of Ongoing project under Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC) 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. No. Project Cost Physical Progress (%) 
1 Project Development of Diphu Town Lake for 
Recreation 
15.60 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
2 Construction of Road from NH -39 to BBDC Road 
via Langmili, L 10.70 Km  
12.05 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
3 Greater Umswai Water Supply Scheme  17.15 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
4 Establishment of clean meat selling booths with 
slaughtering facilities for pork, mutton/chevon & 
chicken at different markets of Karbi Anglong 
4.50 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
5 M & BT and Construction from Umkhirmi to 
Somaton Mukroh 
7.34 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
6 Construction of road with M & BT from Chek Artu 
to Belending to Dera-Arlok, l 9.35km 
7.56 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
7 Construction of road with Metalling and Black 
Topping from Era Gaon to Tikoklangso towards 
Langchitung (Length12.40 km)  
15.12 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
8 Construction of Road with Mealling and Black 
Topping from NH -36 at Disobai to Batlok towards 
Thekarajan (Length 12 km)  
15.00 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
9 Construction of RCC Bridge No.2/4 over 
Bornewria river at Men Teron  
3.45 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
10 Construction of Deori Tiniali to Deramukam road 
from 2nd km to 7th km under Clause 9.4 Mos 
signed between Govt. of India, Govt. of Assam and 
UPDS for the year 2017-18  
4.38 69 
11 Construction of RCC Bridge over Deopani river at 
Bahakangtui upper Deopani, Karbi Anglong under 
clause 9.2 of MoS signed between Govt. of India, 
Govt. of Assam & UPDS for the year 2017-18  
4.10 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
12 Construction of RCC Br. No.6/1 over Numbor river 
from BBDC to Rongkimi Road under Clause 9.2 of 
MoS signed between Govt. of India, Govt. of 
Assam & UPDS for the year 2017-18.  
3.83 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 

 
89 
 
13 Construction of Umpoo to Deori Tiniali Road via 
Longle Ethan upto  Mulahin with cross drainage 
structure under clause 9.4 MoS signed between 
Govt. of India, Govt. of Assam and UPDS for the 
year 2017- 18  
11.56 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
14 Greater Sildharampur - Buragohain PWSS (under 
special economic packag e as per Mos) Karbi 
Anglong, Assam  
15.07 70 
15 Construction of Road from DillaiBazar to Mon 
Bahadur Tamang -Koilajan, Longvoku Model 
Village, Vokekaj to Manja at NH-36 (L30 km)  
32.40 65 
16 Construction of Road from Birla (Taranglaso) to 
Ronkimi near NH -36 including RCC Bridge No. 
24/1 (L25.00 km) in Assam 
44.15 55 
17 Improvement of Kollanga Sildibi Road from 7th 
km to 10th km (L3.25 km) with Construction of 
RCC Bridge No. 8/2 over river Dera)  
3.59 82 
18 Improvement and M & BT of Road from 
Donkamokam ( Artukelang Charali) to 
Fangtrengfang upto PMGSY Road (Portion from 
ch. 3803.00 m to 5510.00 m & 6010.00 m to 
8303.00 m, length 4.00 km)  
3.29 100 
19 Improvement of Kheroni Rongpongbong Road 
from 37.10th Km to 46.10 th Km(Widening, 
Lowering and strengtheni ng of existing hard crust 
and Providing H.P. Culvert) 
3.20 Yet to be provided by 
State Government 
20 Improvement of Road from Amsoi Tiniali to Sinani 
Bridge via Borgaon, Morten (From 0.00 Km to 
17th Km). 
7.10 90 
21 Improvement including Metalling & Black Topping 
at Chaitsema -Rongmandu Road from Monjuli to 
Longpai (ch. From 0.00m to 3900.00m)  
3.57 100 
22 Construction of RCC Bridge No.1/5(L18.00m) and 
5/3 (L26.00m) over river Telehor and Dera 
respectively on Deori Tiniali to Deramokam Road  
4.10 95 
23 Improvement / Upgradation by M&BT of Road 
from Kathalguri village to Wirwar via Parkup 
Pahar from Ch.2500.00m to 9000.00m  
3.50 88 
24 Improvement of Road from Joysingh Doloi 
Auditorium Hall to Bijoy Teron Village approach 
road via Cotton Ginning Mill by wid ening of road 
3.60 100 

 
90 
 
formation including construction of RCC Bridge 
No.1/1  
 

 
91 
 
 
Annexure III 
State-wise details of  Candidates Enrolled, Trained/ Oriented, Assessed, Certified and Planed 
under PMKVY (1,2 & 3) 
    No. of Centres   No. of Athletes 
S. 
No 
State       NSTC   Residential Non-
Residential 
    NC
OE 
ST
C 
Ext. 
Centres 
Reg.Sch. IGM
A 
Akharas TOTA
L Boys Girl
s 
Tota
l Boys Girl
s 
Tota
l 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
1 1 0 0 0 0 2 85 55 140 8 3 11 
2 Assam 1 4 4 1 1 1 12 185 234 419 130 82 212 
3 Manipur 1 2 1 1 2 0 7 261 167 428 77 61 138 
4 Meghalaya 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 71 44 115 16 12 28 
5 Mizoram 0 1 2 0 0 0 3 36 26 62 22 33 55 
6 Nagaland 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 51 0 51 0 0 0 
7 Sikkim 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 22 0 22 4 15 19 
8 Tripura 0 1 0 1 0 0 2 29 6 35 28 10 38 
  GRAND 
TOTAL: 
3 12 7 3 3 1 29 740 532 1272 285 216 501 

 
92 
 
Annexure IV 
Number of SAI Centres under the Sports Promotional Schemes in the North Eastern Regions 
Training 
type State/UT Sum 
of Enrolled 
Sum 
of Trained / 
Oriented 
Sum 
of Assessed 
Sum 
of Certified 
Sum 
of Reported 
Placed 
 
STT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 40,797 37,363 33,065 28,078 11,598 
Assam 2,13,203 1,97,417 1,77,028 1,41,692 62,103 
Manipur 51,244 48,185 43,744 38,181 15,554 
Meghalaya 33,246 31,298 28,248 23,717 11,671 
Mizoram 28,450 25,533 21,590 18,667 9,566 
Nagaland 25,724 24,086 20,917 18,027 5,805 
Sikkim 12,804 11,522 10,398 8,705 3,777 
Tripura 57,718 55,226 51,234 42,313 17,309 
STT Total 4,63,186 4,30,630 3,86,224 3,19,380 1,37,383 
 
 
RPL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 46,016 45,796 36,562 34,624 NA 
Assam 5,24,027 5,14,642 4,04,888 3,77,460 NA 
Manipur 45,374 41,056 34,307 33,700 NA 
Meghalaya 15,864 15,462 14,182 13,024 NA 
Mizoram 5,701 5,601 4,333 4,060 NA 
Nagaland 17,262 16,453 12,213 12,019 NA 
Sikkim 1,900 1,900 1,709 1,657 NA 
Tripura 84,914 82,910 62,752 58,775 NA 
RPL Total 7,41,058 7,23,820 5,70,946 5,35,319 NA 
Grand Total 12,04,244 11,54,450 9,57,170 8,54,699 1,37,383 
 
 
 

 
93 
 
Annexure V 
List of Cold Chain Projects approved in NER under Cold Chain Scheme 
S.No. Project  District  State Date of 
Approval  
Project 
cost 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Approved 
amount of 
grant-in-
aid 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Amount 
of grant 
released 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Balance 
GIA to 
be 
released 
Physical 
Progress 
1 Gangri Food 
Products 
Tawang Arunachal 
Pradesh 
17.04.2017 15.32 6.46 6.46 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
2 Global 
Entrade 
Guwahati Assam 06.08.2012 24.28 9.09 9.09 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
3 E-
appliances 
Guwahati Assam 24.12.2013 14.00 8.28 8.28 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
4 Associate 
Action for 
Progressive 
Dev. 
Society 
Senapati Manipur 26.05.2011 18.49 9.96 9.96 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
5 Mizofa Fish 
Seed Farm 
Aizawal Mizoram 11.11.2011 5.20 3.03 3.03 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
6 Zoram Fish 
Seeds 
Production 
Centre 
Aizawal Mizoram 30.07.2012 17.26 9.74 9.74 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
7 Nagaland 
Integrated 
Cold Chain 
Dimapur Nagaland 17.04.2017 18.59 6.98 6.98 0.00 Commercial 
Production 
Started 
8 T J Foods Dimapur Nagaland 08.01.2021 12.80 5.50 1.41 4.09 25% 
progress 

 
94 
 
9 Mountain 
Fruits and 
Vegetables 
Dimapur Nagaland 31.03.2021 15.72 9.91 0.00 9.91 Reported 
25% 
progress 
    Total 141.66 68.95 54.95 14  
 

 
95 
 
Annexure VI                                                                                                                                                       
Projects under Swadesh Darshan 
Sl. 
 No. 
Theme Year of 
Sanction 
Name of the project Sanctioned 
amt. 
Release 
amt. 
Physical 
Status 
Tripura 
1 North 
East 
Circuit 
2015-16 Development of North East 
Circuit: Agartala – Sipahijala 
– Melaghar – Udaipur – 
Amarpur – Tirthamukh – 
Mandirghat – Dumboor – 
Narikel Kunja – Gandachara – 
Ambassa 
 
82.85 68.58 Ongoing 
2 North 
East 
Circuit 
2018-19 Development of Surma 
Cherra – Unakoti – Jampui 
Hills – Gunabati – 
Bhunaneshwari – Matabari – 
Neermahal – Boxanagar – 
Pilak – Avangchaarra 
 
65.00 10.1 Ongoing 
Mizoram 
 
1 North 
East 
Circuit 
2015-16 Integrated Development of 
Thenzawl & South Zote, 
District Serchhip and Reiek. 
 
92.26 87.65 Complete 
2 Eco 
Circuit 
2016-17 Development of Eco -
Adventure Circ uit Aizawl – 
Rawpuichhip –Khawhphawp 
– Lengpui – Durtlang – 
Chatlang – 
Sakawrhmuituaitlang – 
Muthee – Beratlawng – 
Tuirial Airfield – Hmuifang 
 
66.37 49.53 Ongoing 
 
 