91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
NINETY-FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS SEVENTY-FIFTH
REPORT ON CROSS-BORDER TERRORISM AND
INSURGENCY IN JAMMU & KASHMIR
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD JULY, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23RD JULY, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
                   
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                        
                                                                
REPORT        
                                                                                                                   
            OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE   
            
            RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                       
                                                                     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee-   Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri Kapil Sibal
3.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5.         Shri Kalraj Mishra
6.          Dr. L.M. Singhvi
7.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
9.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
10.       Shri Drupad Borgohain
   11.    Shri Swaraj Kaushal
12.       Shri Ram Jethmalani
 *13.    Shri Lalu Prasad
 *14.    Shri Motilal Vora
 
LOK SABHA
 
15.       Shri Rajen Gohain
16.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
17.       Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
18.       Shri Anadi Sahu
19.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
20.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
21.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
22.       Shri Manabendra Shah
23.       Sardar Buta Singh
24.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
25.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
26.       Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
27.       Shri K. Karunakaran
28.       Begum Noor Bano
29.       Shri M.O.H. Farooq
30.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
31.       Shri Subodh Ray
32.       Shri B.V.N. Reddy
33.       Shri Ramji Lal Suman
34.       Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
35.       Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
36.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
37.       Shri Adhi Sankar
38.       Shri P.H. Pandian
39.       Dr. Bikram Sarkar
_____________________________________________________________________________________
*Nominated w.e.f. 22 April 2002.
40.       Shri Holkhomang Haokip
41.       Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
42.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
   43.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
 $44.    Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
___________________________
$ Nominated w.e.f. 19 April 2002.
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Ninety-first Report on the Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Seventy-fifth Report of the Committee on
Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu & Kashmir.
 
2.         The Seventy-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented/laid to/in Rajya Sabha/Lok
Sabha on 25 July 2001.
 
3.         Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Seventy-fifth
Report were received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on 19 November 2001.
 
4.         The Committee considered the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry in its sitting held on 18 June 2002.  The
Committee considered and adopted this Report in its sitting held on 5 July 2002.
 
NEW DELHI
;
July 5, 2002    
        PRANAB MUKHERJEE
                                                                        Chairman
Committee on Home Affairs
REPORT
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations as contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in
Jammu & Kashmir which was presented/laid to/in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on 25 July 2001.
 
2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the
observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorized as follows:-
 
(i)
                  Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have been accepted by
the Committee:
 
Para Nos. 68, 68.1, 69, 69.1, 70, 70.1, 72, 72.1, 73, 73.1, 73.2, 74, 74.1, 74.2 and
   74.3.
Total -15
(ii)                Recommendations/observations which the Committee has noted with further
observations/recommendations in view of the Government’s replies:
 
Para Nos. 65, 65.1, 66, 66.1, 67, 67.1, 67.2, 71, 71.1, 75, 75.1, 76, 76.1, 77, 77.1, 78, 78.1, 79, 79.1, 80
and 80.1.
Total – 21
 
3.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of action
taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Seventy-fifth
Report, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 65 & 65.1)
 
4.         The Committee notes the fact that a proxy war is being waged in Jammu & Kashmir at the behest of a
neighbouring country. Foreign mercenaries are being pushed into the valley to engineer large-scale terrorist activities.
Recovery of huge cache of arms and ammunition, killings of hundreds of innocent people and high rate of casualities of
the security forces and detention of foreign mercenaries were proofs enough to substantiate the fact that it was, more
than anything else, a proxy war being waged on the Indian soil by Pakistan. Pakistan was not only aiding, abetting and
financing terrorist activities in Jammu & Kashmir but was also pushing in well equipped and trained mercenaries for the
cause of so-called Jehad against India. The misadventure of Pakistan in Kargil is a clear manifestation of its nefarious
designs on Jammu & Kashmir.

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
 
4.1        The Committee, therefore, has come to the conclusion that a more concerted, well thought out and well-planned
strategy should be chalked out to counter the ill designs of Pakistan aimed at destabilising and disintegrating India.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
4.2     The Government took a number of steps in the post Kargil phase which included, inter-alia, strengthening of the
counter terrorist grid, strengthening and modernization of J&K Police, strengthening and expansion of Village Defence
Committees, launching of pin pointed counter terrorist operations based upon actionable intelligence, strengthening of
security cover for areas inhabited by minorities including Sikhs, dividing the counter terrorist grid into integrated sectors
for synergised operations and checking infiltration through improved border management.  The aforementioned steps
resulted in the killing of approximately 1520 terrorists from August 1999 to August 2000.
 
4.3       As part of its resolve to bring back normalcy in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Government have
embarked upon a three pronged strategy, which comprises proactive tackling with the help of security forces the cross
border terrorism that has been unleashed by Pakistan sponsored terrorist outfits, accelerating economic development as
also redressing the genuine grievances of the people and initiating a dialogue with all those within J&K who abjure the
path of violence.
 
4.4       The strategy used to fight militants is dynamic in nature and is reviewed from time to time through the
mechanism of Unified Headquarters and its Operation and Intelligence Groups at various levels in the State and also
through the Operation Group meetings etc. at Central level.  The security forces and State Police have been alerted of
the designs of the Pak sponsored militants to target the security forces and have been requested to take up appropriate
preventive measures.
 
4.5       The Government is fully committed to eradicate terrorism and bring back normalcy in the State of Jammu &
Kashmir.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
4.6       While noting the reply of the Government, the Committee hopes that it will continue to maintain the
dynamism of its strategy to fight terrorists operating in Jammu & Kashmir.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 66 & 66.1)
 
5.         One such attempt to destablise India was made in the form of large scale armed intrusion from across the Line of
Control (LoC) in Kargil during 1999. The intrusion in Kargil led to the weakening of internal security grid of the
security forces in the entire State of Jammu & Kashmir as forces had to be withdrawn and deployed along the border to
repulse Pakistani attack. The weakening of security grid resulted into the terrorists and mercenaries managing to get
foothold once again. The recent step-up in the strikes by the militants on security installations and innocent people were
largely due to the loosened grip of the security forces. However, the Committee was given to understand that security
forces were trying hard to restore the grid.
 
5.1       The Committee notes the efforts being made to restore the security grid and feels that no stone should be left
unturned to strengthen the grip of the security forces on the militants. The restoration and improvement of the security
grid in the quickest possible time will deal a deathblow to the ever-rearing head of militancy in the State.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
5.2       Kargil incursion led to the breaking of the counter terrorist grid for a few months as security forces had to be
deployed along the border resulting in gaps which were fully exploited by the terrorist organizations especially in
Kupwara and Baramulla districts to push in battle hardened foreign terrorists with state-of-the-art weapons and
equipment.  This emboldened the terrorists to embark upon bold action such as attacks on security forces primarily to
attract media attention as also to demoralize the security forces.  The security forces and State Police have, however,

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
persisted with strong counter measures against the terrorists.  In the calendar year 2000 (full year) and 2001(up to
October), 1520 and 1606 militants, respectively, have been killed.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
5.3       Although the rise in number of killings of the terrorists during 2000-2001 suggests that security forces are
gaining an upper hand over the former, the situation does not appear to have been restored to pre-Kargil days. 
One of the discernible indicators of normalcy returning to the valley prior to Pak incursions in Kargil in 1999
was a steady flow of tourists which touched the figure of one lakh.  In post-Kargil phase, the situation has,
however, not improved to the extent so as to facilitate inflow of tourists.  The normalcy in the situation must be
visible.  In the view of the Committee, the situation leaves much to be desired so far as strengthening of security
grid is concerned. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 67, 67.1 & 67.2)
 
6.         Massive intrusion in Kargil in particular and the unabated growth of militancy in general have proved that
management of Indian border along LoC is not adequate enough to check unstopped exfiltration and infiltration. The
porosity of India's international border with Pakistan and Line of Control is providing safe passage to the militants.
Large scale exfiltration of Kashmiri youth for undergoing training at the terrorist training camps located across the
border and infiltration of trained and armed militants into Jammu and Kashmir was taking place. Huge quantity of arms
and ammunition is dumped near the LoC and international border for the use of militants and mercenaries. All this calls
for better border management on the LoC and the international border. However, due to extensive deployment of
paramilitary forces especially Border Security Force, for internal security duties, it has not been possible to spare
adequate forces to man LoC and international border.
 
6.1       The Committee is of the view that effective border management is key to the curbing of exfiltration and
infiltration across LoC and international border with Pakistan. For that to happen, adequate force level is needed to be
maintained to plug the exfiltration and infiltration routes along the border. The Committee understands the necessity for
deploying security forces extensively for maintenance of internal security in Jammu & Kashmir. But at the same time, it
is of the considered view that unless exfiltration and infiltration is effectively checked, the problems of cross border
terrorism and proxy war cannot be overcome. Moreover, so long as the country's borders remain porous, there cannot be
a foolproof internal security. It is, therefore, essential to relieve as many BSF battalions as possible of their internal
security duties so that they are pressed into their primary responsibility i.e. guarding of country's borders. Army
detachments are also guarding the highway from Srinagar to Ladakh. They need to be relieved of such duties. The task
of guarding the highway and the bridges located along it should be entrusted to the para military forces.
 
6.2       Apart from effective border management, the strengthening of intelligence network in and around border areas is
also the need of the hour. Since borders play crucial role in ex-filtration and infiltration of militants and dumping of
arms and ammunition near them, it is imperative to strengthen the intelligence network in border areas. Vital
intelligence inputs could go a long way in helping security forces to check militant activities. It could also go a long way
in checking the Kargil type infiltration.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
6.3       It has been rightly observed by the Committee that infiltration/exfiltration is the core factor sustaining the cross
border terrorism and proxy war waged by the Pak ISI backed establishment.  Keeping in view the constraints of scarcity
of CPMFs for counter insurgency operations in the hinterland and the spreading arc of terrorism, BSF’s involvement has
been necessitated in counter insurgency along with other security forces including Army.  In order to frustrate the
objective of terrorists (that is to stretch the security forces thin so as to blunt the present thrust and momentum of
counter-terrorism operations), it has not been found operationally feasible after a careful assessment, to immediately
disturb the present counter-insurgency  posture in the State of J&K.
 
6.4  However, it is hoped that with the raising of additional battalions of CPMFs in coming years, BSF presently

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
on counter-insurgency duty could perhaps gradually return to IB/LoC duty.
 
6.5  On the other hand, to check fidayeen attacks on security forces’ convoys etc. on highways, the well equipped and
trained Army along with CPMFs and J&K Police are guarding various highways within J&K to protect and secure vital
supply as well as land communication links as  strategic measures.   
 
6.6  Government are firmly resolved to take all necessary measures to defeat Pakistan sponsored cross border terrorism. 
With a view to deal with the cross border terrorism, the Government has adopted a multi-pronged approach which
includes, inter alia, strengthening the border management, neutralizing plans of the terrorists by appropriate action
against them in the hinterland, gearing up intelligence machinery, greater functional framework of Operational Groups
and Intelligence Groups at the Unified Headquarter and lower levels, improved technology, weapons and equipment  for
security forces, closer vigil on the border, establishment of more naka parties in depth areas to check
infiltration/exfiltration, police pickets, intensive patrolling, etc.
 
6.7  Security forces have also worked out a strategy for checking infiltration and exfiltration, which are given below:
 
(a)
     Improving the multi-tiered deployment along LoC/IB
(b)     Multi-tiered and multi-faceted obstacles
(c)     Ambushes on infiltration routes, and near LoC and in-depth areas
(d)     Identifying and countering the guides and harbourers who support the infiltrators
(e)     Greater coordination between Army/BSF at Loc/IB, State Police in second and third tiers and intelligence
agencies at LoC – as well as more joint operations
(f)       Use of VDCs and locals to help counter infiltration
      
6.8  Both J&K Police and Intelligence Bureau have set up border posts in J&K.  A system of Ops Group and Int.
Group at various levels under the overall guidance and coordination of the Unified Headquarter enables that the
special needs of particular areas including the IB/LoC are catered to.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
6.9       The Committee is of the view that the Government should make efforts to hand over entire border
management along International Border (IB) and Line of Control (LoC) to BSF in an expeditious manner
keeping in view  the fact that additional battalions of BSF are being raised.  The Committee feels that effective
border management can alone plug the holes in border defence.  So far as strengthening of intelligence network
in border areas is concerned, the Committee hopes that measures initiated by the Government for strengthening
of intelligence network in the light of the recommendations of the Group of Ministers (GoM) set up to review the
national security will help it in monitoring and checking infiltration and exfiltration across IB and LoC.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 68 & 68.1)
 
7.         In the post-Kargil era, there has been increase in the number of attacks on security forces and their installations.
Induction of 'Fidayeen ' i.e. suicide squads into militant organisations had also led to the increase in the frequency of
such attacks. The ratio of casualties of security personnel against the militants killed had also increased. Such a trend
has a direct bearing on the morale of the forces especially when militants are resorting to frontal attacks on the camps
and convoys of security forces. A slight fluctuation in the morale of the forces helps the militants and mercenaries to
gain an upper hand over them.
 

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
7.1       Keeping this in view, the Committee feels that there is need for further tightening of security cover for the camps
of security forces. Effective deterrents are needed to see that attacks on camps of security forces are minimized. Basic
facilities like lighting etc. and other infrastructure should be provided to such camps.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
7.2  With the mounting pressure by the security forces on Pak ISI backed Jehadi  terrorist outfits, more and more
attempts of fidayeen attack on security forces’ camps and convoys have been resorted to by the terrorists.  The objective
behind such attacks is to inflict damage on security forces and boost up the flagging morale of the terrorists’ cadre by
attracting media attention.
 
7.3       The security forces and State police have been alerted about the designs of Pak sponsored terrorists and asked to
take appropriate counter measures.  The Central Para Military Forces have stepped up the security of their own
establishments and sensitized the field formations of the forces about the need to be in the state of total readiness to
meet any such eventuality.
 
7.4       Pursuant to a High Level meeting chaired by the Union Home Minister in early October 2001, State Government
in consultation with security forces worked out measures and strategies to respond to fidayeen attacks.  These have been
passed on to security forces’ units for appropriate action.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
7.5       The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos.  69 & 69.1)
 
8.         The decade long militancy in Jammu & Kashmir led to the weakening of police system. However, in the recent
past, there has been revival of police system in the State. Still, there is scope for improvement and further strengthening.
The police of the State needs to be equipped with sophisticated arms and equipment as it was yet to achieve desirable
level of manpower, transport, firearms and communication requirements. The Committee is made to understand that a
broad perspective plan for strengthening and modernisation of Jammu & Kashmir police including the revamp of
intelligence gathering machinery has been sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs by the State Government.
 
8.1       The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should extend all possible assistance to the
Government of Jammu & Kashmir in its efforts to prop up an effective, reliable and efficient police system in the State.
 
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
8.2       One of the important objectives of the Ministry of Home Affairs is to build up the capabilities of the Jammu &
Kashmir Police (JKP) so as to enable it to play the lead role in tackling terrorism/militancy in J&K.  This involves not
only better weaponry and equipment but also training, orientation and the like.
 
8.3       The Ministry has been implementing a Scheme for Modernization of State Police Forces since 1969-70, to
supplement the efforts of the various State Governments on modernizing their police forces.  The Scheme provides
assistance to the State Governments on 50%grants-in-aid and 50 % loan basis for various items, such as purchase of
vehicles, equipment for forensic science laboratories, Finger Print Bureau, police training, communication, light
weaponry, crowd/traffic control equipment, VVIP security and scientific aids to investigation.
 
8.4       The annual allocation of Rs.200 crore, as existed during the year 1999-2000, was found inadequate and
considering the urgent necessity of modernizing the State police forces, it was decided to enhance the annual allocation
for the country as a whole, to Rs.1000 crore from the year 2000-2001.  Items eligible for allocation of funds under the
Scheme were also increased to include construction of operational buildings (such as Police Stations, Chowkis, Police
Lines, Control Rooms and Police Housing).

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
 
8.5  The various State Governments are required to submit their modernization plans, on the basis of studies conducted
by the Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) regarding deficiencies of various items in each State.  The
plans of each State regarding modernization of Police are scrutinized and sanctioned by an Empowered Committee
under the Chairmanship of the Union Home Secretary. During the previous years, a total of Rs.3904.87 lakh was
released to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir under the Scheme, as Centre’s share, as per following details:
 
 
(a)        1996-1997              Rs.  119.770 lakh
(b)        1997-1998              Rs.    81.540 lakh
(c)        1998-1999              Rs.  581.540 lakh
(d)        1999-2000                Rs.    40.770 lakh
(e)        2000-2001              Rs. 3081.250 lakh
 
8.6       In addition to the Modernization of Police Forces Scheme, the Centre has been reimbursing additional Security
Related Expenditure (SRE) to the State Government since 1990-91 in order to help the State in meeting the expenses
incurred in its fight against terrorism/militancy. Special Police Officers, arms/ammunition, vehicles, air-lift charges,
additional battalions, carriage of constabulary, material & supplies, alternate accommodation for security forces,
security works by Police/Jail/Estate Departments, are some of the specific items, which are having a direct impact on
the improvement of the capabilities of the Jammu & Kashmir Police (JKP) not only in terms of better weapons,
mobility, manpower, etc. but also in terms of protective gears and local area security networking.
8.7       A sum of Rs.401.38 crores has been provided to Jammu & Kashmir under SRE on the above items during 1996-
2001 as per following details:
 
(a)        1996-1997               Rs. 43.20 crore }
(b)        1997-1998               Rs. 71.45 crore }
(c)        1998-1999               Rs. 84.35 crore }      Total = Rs. 401.38 crore
(d)        1999-2000                 Rs.117.98 crore }
(e)        2000-2001               Rs.  84.40 crore }
 
8.8       In addition to the above two sources, the Centre has been making efforts to upgrade the capabilities of the J&K
Police through an Action Plan, which is being funded as Special SRE. A comprehensive Action Plan to combat
militancy in J&K was prepared in 1998, under which Rs.192.53 crore, was earmarked for strengthening/modernization
of J&K Police.
 
8.9       Under the said Special Action Plan related SRE Rs.172.34 crores have so far been provided to Government of
J&K.
 
8.10     It may thus be seen that the Ministry is taking a number of steps to build up the capabilities of J&K Police in all
respects with emphasis on curbing/combating terrorism. As a result of all these efforts, the State police is playing crucial
role and responsibility to curb militancy in the State.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
8.11     The Committee notes the reply of the Government.          
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 70 & 70.1)
 

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
9.         The Committee has been given to understand by the State Government authorities that after the lapse of Terrorist
and Disruptive Activities Act (TADA), law enforcement agencies are finding it extremely difficult to cope with the
challenges being thrown up by the terrorists. The absence of an anti-terrorist law is proving to be a major handicap for
the police. In spite of committing heinous crimes, terrorists go scot free as the existing laws fall short of leading to their
conviction.
 
9.1       Keeping this in view, the Committee is of the view that in order to enable the police to curb the activities of
terrorists, a suitable law needs to be enacted with adequate in-built safeguards to prevent misuse as had happened in the
past in case of TADA.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
9.2       The Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance 2001 has come into effect from 24 October 2001.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
9.3       The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 71 & 71.1)
 
10.       The role of Village Defence Committees (VDCs) and Special Police Officers (SPOs) has also drawn the
attention of the Committee. During the visit of the Study Group to Jammu and Kashmir, it was given to understand that
both VDCs and SPOs were playing an important role in combating terrorism especially in the Jammu division. People
living in remote villages have shown keen interest in setting up of such committees. However, the lack of funds is
hampering the efforts of the State Government to further strengthen VDCs. It was also impressed upon the Study Group
that by providing better weapons and communication equipment, VDCs could be made even more effective.
 
10.1     The Committee, having been apprised of the role being played by Village Defence Committees (VDCs),
recommends that more funds should be earmarked for the strengthening of VDCs. It further recommends that efforts
should be made to set up such committees in the Kashmir division also.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
10.2     The scheme of Village Defence Committees (VDCs) is basically and primarily a voluntary one i.e. constitution
of a small group of villagers, who volunteer themselves to  take on the responsibility of keeping a watch on the
movement of terrorists and guarding the village from a possible terrorist attack as far as possible.  All aspects of the
scheme should be viewed/gauged keeping this basic concept in view.  Further, the scheme is not a source of
employment which would have warranted regular enhancement of remuneration/perks.
 
10.3     However, in order to encourage the villagers for joining as members of VDCs, the Government of India is
providing funds to the State Government @ Rs.20,000/- per SPO (Special Police Officer) per annum as Security
Related Expenditure (SRE). Earlier, only one SPO was used to be attached with each VDC and now three SPOs form
the nucleus of each VDC.
 
10.4     The strength of SPOs authorized for purpose of reimbursement to the State Government under SRE has also
been enhanced from 22,200 to 23,200 w.e.f. 02.08.2001. Besides, funds are being provided to the State Government for
providing better arms/ammunition, the equipment, etc. to VDCs/SPOs and J&K Police. The rate of reimbursement of
ex-gratia relief to the next of kin of SPOs killed in action against terrorists, has also been enhanced from Rs.1.25 lacs to
Rs.2 lacs w.e.f. 01.03.2001.
 
10.5     Efforts are also being made by State Government to motivate people to form VDCs in the valley.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
10.6     The Government should continue to make sincere efforts to strengthen Village Defence Committees
(VDCs) as part of its counter-insurgency measures.  It should provide them with better weaponry and
communication equipment in order to make them effective deterrents against militants.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 72 & 72.1)       
 
11.       Recent massacres of local Sikhs and migrant labourers from other parts of the country have exposed the
vulnerability of minorities living in the State. These massacres have also proved the fact that they were part of a well-
planned strategy to attack 'soft targets' in order to create fear psychosis among minorities. It also reveals the contours of
a sinister game plan on the part of terrorists to engineer mass exodus of minorities from the State.
 
11.1     In this regard, the Committee notes the steps taken by the State Government to tighten the security grid around
the villages inhabited by the minorities especially Sikhs. It, however, feels that a comprehensive exercise should be
undertaken to identify hitherto unattacked and potential soft targets so that preemptive measures could be taken to deter
any attack on them by the militants. Efforts should also be made to set up Village Defence Committees (VDCs) in such
villages.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
11.2     Militancy affected districts have mixed population.  In these districts minority pockets have been the targets of
militants with the following objectives;
 
-
          To create panic.
-          To force them to flee to safer places and thereby giving the militants space for carrying out their activity
unreported.
-          To attract international and national publicity.
-          To stretch the security forces by forcing them to provide protection in more and more areas.
-          To create a communal divide thus making the task of both local administration and security forces more difficult.
 
11.3     Civilians belonging to both majority and minority communities have lost their lives in the terrorist attacks in
J&K.
 
11.4     RENEWED STRATEGIES FOR MINORITIES PROTECTION
 
(a)       Revitalization of VDCs; qualitative improvement in training and motivation level of VDCs.
(b)      Identification of Over Ground Workers (OGWs) of the terrorists and relentless pressure maintained on OGWs.
(c)       Increased patrolling of minority villages and pockets; effective coordination between all agencies ensured.
(d)      Effective coordination between all forces deployed in the areas near minority villages to prevent terrorist strikes
in villages.  Well-rehearsed and coordinated drills (mock drills) to refine communication and intelligence
sharing between all agencies to ensure successful pursuit operations after terrorist strikes.
(e)
       Periodic visits by senior State Government and security forces’ officers to remote and minority areas.  This will
boost the morale and increase government and people inference.
(f)        While monitoring the security situation in the State, Operations and Intelligence Groups at all levels from UHQ
to lowest area unit to review the security arrangements for the minorities in the State on regular basis.
(g)       Lying of ambushes near minority villages.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
11.5     The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 73, 73.1 & 73.2)
 

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
12.       In a situation like the one obtaining in Jammu & Kashmir where innocent people are caught between the
terrorists on the one end and the security forces on the other, the violation of  human rights can take place.  However,
any violation of such rights by security forces is hyped and over-publicized which leads to the widening of gulf between
the people and the State.  It is so, primarily because of the fact that State which is meant for the welfare of the people, is
perceived to be working against its very own people.  And, in the process, a common man feels isolated and alienated
from the mainstream.  In sharp contrast to this, the human rights’ abuses by the militants get overlooked for different
reasons.  The net result of all this is that the State is perceived as an enemy of the people.  It becomes all the more
glaring when it receives open support of the propaganda machinery of a hostile neighbour.
 
12.1     The Committee notes the efforts being made to set the human rights record straight by the Government.  It,
however, feels that security forces should win the confidence of the people by exercising utmost restraint while
launching search and combing operations to nab the militants.  Security forces should remember that in their battle
against militants, they will not be able to have the last laugh until they enjoy the support of the local people.
 
12.2     At the same time, the human rights violations committed by the militants and the mercenaries should also not be
allowed to get overlooked. People in general and the international community should be kept abreast of such violations
through print and electronic media. The very fact that acts of violations by militants do not receive the due attention of
human rights bodies has a very demoralising impact on the psyche of the security personnel. Human rights bodies,
national as well as international, must realize the fact that in a situation like this, the human rights of the security forces
as well as of the people being killed and harassed by the militants are also at stake. As a matter of fact, it is not the loss
of any particular individual or group or community rather it is a loss of everyone. In other words, the entire nation is at a
loss.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
12.3     The Indian security forces are operating within the narrow confines of the law while dealing with the activities
of militants/mercenaries and various Pak-based militant Tanzeems. Our security forces are scrupulously abiding by the
operational procedures laid down for such situations, which are designed to ensure full respect for human rights. In
addition to the National Human Rights Commission, the State Government has also set up a State Human Rights
Commission, which goes into each and every complaint of human rights violation. In addition, First Information Report
is registered by the concerned Police Station in respect of every reported case of alleged human rights violations and
investigations are carried out to their logical conclusion.
 
12.4     Allegations of infraction of human rights against law enforcement agencies and security forces are often brought
to notice of the Government by the human rights activists and organizations. Continuous efforts are, therefore, made to
review the functioning and implementation of the various institutions and laws with a view to identify the areas of
weaknesses and initiating remedial measures. Several new enactments and amendments to the existing ones have
resulted from this review over the past few years (e.g. the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1990, the National
Commission for Women Act, 1990 and Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995.
 
12.5     Strict instructions have been issued and reiterated to all concerned, including Army and Para-Military forces to
ensure that they conduct themselves in a humane manner, that alleged cases of excesses are taken serious note of,
inquiries made promptly and firm action taken against those found guilty.  Considerable emphasis has also been laid on
training in human rights related aspects.
 
12.6     Ministry of  Information & Broadcasting  makes serious efforts to expose the cases of human rights violations
committed by the militants and the mercenaries through print as well as electronic media available at their command.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
12.7     The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 74 & 74.3)

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
 
13.       The Committee is given to understand that there are three types of migrants in Jammu & Kashmir:
 
(i)               One is the group of migrants who had come in the wake of armed attack in 1948;
(ii)              The second group is the Kashmiri Pandits who have been given some help in Jammu region; and
 
(iii)             The third group is the border migrants who had to flee the borders because of constant firing by the
Pakistan rangers and Pakistan Army on international border running along Jammu Division.
 
13.1     There is growing discontent among these three groups of migrants who continue to reel under the unabated spate
of terrorism.  These people have been rendered homeless as well as jobless due to the ongoing violence in the State. 
Their agony is further compounded by the fact that the Government, on the one hand, is rehabilitating the surrendered
militants by giving them Government jobs while on the other nothing has been done to provide them employment.  This
has forced them to believe that it is better to be a militant for a while and then surrender so that they can also get
Government jobs.  Some of these unemployed migrants are also falling into the ISI’s trap and are now on the pay rolls
of it.
 
13.2     The ten year long strife in Jammu & Kashmir has taken a very heavy toll on the people of the State.  Thousands
have lost their lives and lakhs have been displaced due to the ongoing bloodshed.  The agony of those who have been
uprooted from their native places is insurmountable.  Uncertainty dogs these people who were forced to flee their homes
leaving behind everything they had inherited from their ancestors.  Today, their ordeal continues with no end in sight. 
These displaced people better known as ‘Kashmiri migrants’ are having to live in miserable conditions in different parts
of the country. They are refugees not only in their own State but in their own country as well.
 
13.3     The Committee expresses its deepest sense of sorrow on the seemingly unending plight of displaced Kashmiris.
It is told that an action plan has been sent by the State Government to the Union Government for the return of displaced
Kashmiris to the valley. The Committee is of the view that sincere efforts should be made to facilitate smooth and safe
return of displaced people to their native places. However, this could be possible only when an atmosphere of peace and
security is created in the valley and displaced people are convinced of their safe return. Meanwhile, all possible help
should be extended to them to ensure a respectable and dignified standard of living for them. Special care needs to be
given to the educational requirements of the children and youth so that they are not left behind in pursuit of their chosen
careers. It should also be ensured that wards of displaced people have no difficulties in getting admission into the
educational institutions located in different parts of the country.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
13.4     The issue of displaced persons of 1947 from Pak occupied Kashmir is being addressed while responding to Para
76.1 of the Report.  Similarly, response regarding border migrants is being provided with reference to Para 75.1.
 
13.5     As regards Kashmiri migrants, who fled from the Valley after terrorism commenced, Government of J&K have
extended the benefits of PMRY and State Self-Employment Scheme to migrants living in Jammu, Kathua and
Udhampur.  They have also been advised to extend the benefit of the state Special Self-Employment Scheme to
migrants living outside the State.   Recently, the Government of India has requested the other States/UTs also to extend
the benefits of PMRY and State Self-Employment Scheme to the Kashmiris who have migrated to other areas.  In
addition, instructions have also been issued to CPMFs for conducting recruitments to give equitable representation to
youths belonging to various    ethnic    minorities   which include
 
Kashmiri migrants, West Pakistani refugees, Gujjars/Bakerwals, etc.   On-the-spot recruitments were made by DGP,
J&K from Purkhoo migrant camp, Jammu and migrant camp  at Udhampur.
 
13.6     The policy of the Government in respect of the Kashmiri migrants is based on the premise that they would return
to the Valley as soon as conditions reasonably conducive for their return are created.   Accordingly, the permanent
rehabilitation of the migrants outside the State or in Jammu region is not envisaged.  In such a situation, the thrust of the
policy has been to ensure that difficulties and hardships of the migrants are minimized and the needy families provided a

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
reasonable amount of sustenance and support.  Government of J&K is giving cash relief of Rs.600/- per head per month
subject to a maximum of Rs.2400/- per month per family plus basic dry ration @ 9 kgs of rice and two kgs of atta per
person and one kg of sugar per family per month to needy migrants.  Government of NCT of Delhi is also providing
same rate of cash relief plus basic dry ration.  The rates for Jammu and Delhi were last revised w.e.f. 1.4.1999.  Other
State/UT Governments, where Kashmiri migrants are residing, are also giving relief as per the rates prescribed by them.
 
13.7     In Jammu, where a sizeable number of migrants are staying in relief camps, the migrant families have been
provided with one-room tenement accommodation.  Necessary physical facilities like water, electricity, sanitation, etc.
have been provided free of cost.  There are 12 dispensaries within Jammu to provide medical facilities to them.  The
living conditions of the migrants in these camps are closely monitored by MHA to make improvements.  In Delhi also,
accommodation, water, electricity, sanitation, etc. have been made available.
 
13.8     In 1996, the then Prime Minister announced a special package of Rs.6.6 crores for improvement of facilities in
Jammu camps.  The amount was utilized on construction of one-room tenements, Sulabh type toilet complexes, drainage
scheme and school buildings.  A further sum of Rs.4.70 crores has been released from SRE for improvement of living
conditions in Jammu camps. 
 
13.9     The State Government has submitted an Action Plan for rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants which envisages an
expenditure of Rs.2589.73 crores.  The Action Plan was discussed in a meeting with State Government officials on
16.11.2000 and in the beginning, only 200  odd families are proposed by the State Government to be rehabilitated in 9
clusters in Srinagar town for the reasons of better security there.  The State Government has been requested to identify
these families and offer them the Scheme so as to ascertain their willingness to return to their homes.  The State
Government has also been requested to create a conducive atmosphere for an early return of displaced Kashmiris to the
Valley.
 
13.10   To provide educational facilities to the migrants in Jammu, the State Government has opened 10 camp schools
and 3 camp colleges.  The University of Kashmir runs a Sub-registry for migrant students in Jammu.  The intake
capacities of B.Ed. College in Jammu and Post-Graduate Camp classes have been enhanced to adequately take care of
migrant students.  Camp classes of Regional Engineering College are also being run in Jammu for migrant students. 
Seats in Jammu Medical College have been increased from 75 to 100 to cater to the needs of migrant students.
 
13.11   Various States have offered reservation in various courses/institutions for the children of Kashmiri migrants. 
The Secretary, Department of Education, in a letter written to Secretary, Higher Education and Secretary, Technical
Education of all States/UTs and VCs of all Central and State Universities has requested to extend the following
concessions for admissions in schools and Under-Graduate/Post-Graduate Programmes in Universities for the wards of
Kashmiris displaced from their homes –
(a)
    extension in date of admission (about 30 days)
(b)    relaxation in cut-off percentage (subject to minimum eligibility requirement) upto 10%
(c)    increase in intake capacity upto 10%
 
13.12   The State Governments have also been requested to consider provision of reservation for at least one seat in the
merit quota in technical/professional institutions for the Kashmiri migrant students.  Besides this, waiving of domicile
requirement and facilitation of migration in second and subsequent years in higher educational courses have also been
proposed.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
13.13   The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
           
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 75 & 75.1)
 
14.       Besides the people displaced from the valley, the plight of thousands of people displaced from the border areas

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
of Jammu division situated along the international border also deserves to be taken care of. These people living in the
villages located near the international border have had to bear the brunt of Pakistani shelling. They have also gone
through the devastation caused during three Indo-Pak wars. During the Kargil conflict, they came under direct attack of
Pakistani guns, which led to the loss of livestock and human lives and damage to standing crops and property. Constant
threat to their lives and property forced them to migrate to safer places where they are put up in make shift tented
accommodation.
 
14.1     The Committee sympathises with the people displaced from the border villages of Jammu division and hopes
that solution to their problems will soon be found by the State Government. It recommends that Government should
come forward with a long-term rehabilitation programme to put an end to the miseries of the affected people. The
programme should inter alia address their various problems such as, alternative accommodation, adequate
compensation for the loss of crop and livestock, enhanced ration, creation of employment opportunities, etc.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
14.2   The displaced persons from the border villages of Jammu Division were provided with the following relief
package from August 1999 –
 
ª       free ration @ 9 kgs of foodgrains per person per month;
ª       free kerosene oil @ 10 liters per family per month;
ª       cash assistance for fodder @ Rs.150/- per large animal per month and Rs.30/- per small animal per month;
ª       cash assistance for essentials @ Rs.200/- per person per month;
ª       house rent @ Rs.200/- per month for those families who are required to move out due to continued shelling in
the 16 most vulnerable villages in Drass, Kargil and Batalik sectors;
ª       ex-gratia relief @ Rs.1 lakh to the next of kin  of persons killed;
ª       compensation for immovable property damaged @ 50% of the loss assessed subject to a ceiling of Rs.1 lakh
per case;
ª       free medical treatment including cost of drugs; and
ª       free medical treatment to the livestock.
14.3     A sum of Rs.57.80 crores has so far been released to the State Government for providing relief to the displaced
persons from the border villages including Kargil and Leh Districts.
 
14.4     As intimated by the State Government, many families have since returned to their villages. 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
14.5     While taking note of the reply of the Government, the Committee recommends that the house rent being
paid to the families of sixteen most vulnerable villages in Drass, Kargil and Batalik sectors should be adequately
enhanced.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 76 & 76.1)
 
15.       Another human suffering, which needs attention, is the misery of Sikhs who migrated from Pakistan Occupied
Kashmir (PoK) to Jammu& Kashmir. The irony of their fate is that the Government does not consider them refugees.
The Government's stand is based on the premise that since PoK is a part of Jammu & Kashmir people living there are
also residents of Jammu & Kashmir and hence cannot be accorded the status of refugee within their own State. This
stand of the Government deprives these migrant Sikhs of the benefits which accrue to the people who have migrated
from the valley to Jammu division.
 

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
15.1     The Committee is of the considered view that these migrant Sikhs should not be left to fend for themselves.
They crossed over to the Indian side of LoC with high hopes and a sense of belonging. It is, therefore, incumbent upon
the Government to extend a helping hand to them in their hour of crisis. Moreover, when a set of benefits are accruing
to the people displaced from Kashmir, it defies the logic of comprehension as to why they should not be extended to the
people displaced from PoK. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Government should favourably consider the
case of Sikhs who have migrated from PoK and extend all the benefits to them which are available to the displaced
Kashmiris.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
EX-GRATIA PAYMENT ETC. TO DISPLACED PERSONS FROM PAK OCCUPIED KASHMIR, 1947
 
15.2     In the wake of Pakistani aggression in J&K in 1947, mass exodus of population took place from Pak occupied
area of Kashmir (PoK).  31,619 families were registered from 1960 to 7
th August 1962.  The rehabilitation package
sanctioned to these families in June, 1960, included for rural settlers, 2-3 acres of irrigated land or 4-6 acres of
unirrigated land per family (depending on the size of the family) and Rs.1, 000/- per family as ex-gratia payment and for
urban settlers ex-gratia payment of Rs.3, 500/- per family, besides allotment of plots and residential quarters.
 
15.3     The cases of 9,500 families for the payment of rehabilitation assistance, etc. were rejected on the grounds (a)
those who did not migrate during the period between September 1947 and December 1950 (b) whose monthly income
was more than Rs.300/- per month (c) in whose case the head of family did not migrate with the family and (d) who did
not stay in the camps.
 
15.4     In October 1997,  the representatives of the J&K Sharnarthi Action Committee headed by Shri Hardit Singh
Panchhi and the Jammu and Kashmir Displaced Persons Refugee Association met the then Home Minister with the
request to look into their grievances/demands.  The then Home Minister, Shri Indrajit Gupta directed that a Committee
be constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri R.D. Kapur, the then Additional Secretary (Home) with a representative
each of the State Government and the Ministry of Home Affairs to listen to the grievances of the displaced persons and
submit a report.  The associations of these displaced persons furnished their representations to the Committee.
 
15.5   Based on the recommendations of the said Committee, the Government of India has issued administrative
sanction to grant rehabilitation relief/assistance to the displaced persons as under in order to close this matter once for
all:
 
15.5.1  Ex-gratia payment @ Rs.25,000/- per family to the following categories of displaced persons:
(a)
         Those who were held in Pak captivity during the crucial period between September 1947 and
December 1950.
(b)        Those who did not stay in camps.Those in whose cases head of family did not move along with family
before the cut off date.  The above ex-gratia payment is subject to the condition that the income of each
family at the relevant time did not exceed Rs. 300/- per month. 
(c)         Furthermore, in case where the State Government of J&K had paid cash grant of Rs.1,000/- per family
to rural settlers in the past but allotted land to them, the amount of cash grant would be scaled down
proportionately to Rs.7,000/- per family.
 
15.5.2  Besides, Government of India agreed for payment of cash compensation for land deficiency at a time of
Rs.5,000/- per kanal subject to maximum limit of Rs.25,000/- per family, an amount of Rs.2 crore to be provided for
allotment of plots to those displaced persons who have already been settled in the State of J&K and not been allotted
plots in the past and Rs.25 lakhs to be provided to the State Government of J&K for improvement of civic amenities in
46 regularised colonies. In order to ensure expeditious settlement, the Government of India also constituted a
Committee comprising the officials of the Government of India and the State of J&K to identify/scrutinize the genuine
persons eligible for above benefits.  This Committee has already initiated action.  The Committee has been directed to
expedite the process of identification of the genuine claimants.

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
15.6     The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in regard to the process of identification of
genuine claimants of the scheme meant for rehabilitation/relief of the persons displaced from Pakistan occupied
Kashmir (PoK).
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 77 & 77.1)
 
16.       As a result of the ongoing violence, the people of the State have lost their traditional means of livelihood. A
large number of uneducated and unemployed youth are falling prey to the militancy. The dearth of adequate educational
and vocational institutions in the State is one of the causes for growing number of uneducated youth. The current
situation calls for opening up of sufficient number of educational and vocational institutions so that human resource of
the State could be nurtured.
 
16.1     The Committee is, therefore, of the view that special attention should be paid to the setting up of adequate
number of educational and vocational institutions. Such a step will help the State not only to overcome the scourge of
illiteracy but will also enable the youth to be proficient in various self-employment trades. Besides, the Government
should also make efforts to generate employment opportunities by setting up small and medium industrial
establishments and also by reviving cottage industries in the State.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
16.2     Education and industries are State subjects as regards the State of J&K. The matter has been taken up
with the State Government for augmenting the educational and vocational institutions in the State. The Ministry
of Human Resource Development has two kinds of schemes in the education sector – (i) Central Sector Schemes;
and  (ii) Centrally Sponsored Schemes implemented through the State Governments or their agencies and
through voluntary organisations in the field of elementary education, secondary education and higher education.
As regards setting up of small and medium industrial establishments and revival of cottage industries, the
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion have informed that they are in the process of preparing an
industrial package for providing incentives to new and existing industries in the State. Ministry of Home Affairs
have implemented a debt relief scheme for small operators (below Rs.50,000/-) in trade, tourism, transport and
small industries under which an amount of Rs.296 crores have already been released.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
16.3     The Committee would like to be informed as to whether any new educational and vocational institutions
have been opened in Jammu & Kashmir.   It would also like to be apprised of the steps taken to revive the
industrial sector of the State.
 
 RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 78 & 78.1)
 
17.       It has been over ten years ever since Jammu & Kashmir is in the grip of a turmoil. The resources meant for
developmental activities had to be diverted to tackle militancy. It goes without saying that developmental activities have
taken a backseat. But with the rise in the scale of militancy, the funds earmarked for security related heads are also
proving to be inadequate. As things stand today, there is lack of funds on both the fronts. Though, Union Government
has been meeting the funds requirements of the State Government for both development as well as security related
activities, there is always a crunch situation as State's own sources of income generation have suffered badly due to
ongoing strife. The State's expenditure for maintenance of law and order is met from the funds provided by the Union
Government as "Security Related Expenditure" (SRE). In view of the special circumstances being faced by Jammu &
Kashmir, the State Government has been demanding that the facility of advance payment under this head should be
extended to it so that it does not have to run on overdrafts which accrue high rate of interest. In regard to the plan
allocation, the delay in approval was a major stumbling block. This delay in release of funds causes many difficulties for
the State. Because of a very short work season, the delayed arrival of funds means that a large chunk of it remains

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
unutilized.
 
17.1     The Committee understands the kind of difficulties being faced by Jammu & Kashmir and feels that keeping in
view its special circumstances, an out of the way mechanism should be found to ensure timely allocation and speedy
release of requisite funds so that the very purpose behind the desired funds does not get defeated.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
17.2     The annual plan outlay for J&K for the year 2001-02 was finalized in July 2001.  Funds are released by
the Ministry of Finance as per the requirement of the State Government. However, Planning Commission as well
as Ministry of Finance has been requested to evolve suitable mechanism for timely finalization of Annual Plan
Outlay and also for timely release of funds to the State Government.  As informed by the Ministry of Finance,
Plan and Non-Plan funds amounting to Rs.2615.23 crore have been released to J&K during 2001-02.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
17.3     The Committee would like to know as to whether the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance have
evolved suitable mechanism for timely finalisation of annual plan outlay and also for timely release of funds to
the Government of Jammu & Kashmir.  At the same time, the Committee recommends that an in-built
mechanism should also be evolved in the system for proper monitoring of the utilization of funds sanctioned to
the State Government.
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 79 & 79.1)
 
18.       Central para-military forces are playing a crucial role in the fight against the militancy. Indo-Tibetan Border
Police (ITBP) is one of these forces. It has been assigned the task of guarding Banihal tunnel on Jammu-Srinagar
national highway. This tunnel is a vital link between Jammu and Srinagar and has been in the eye of militants for long.
ITBP has been doing commendable work by keeping round the clock vigil on the tunnel. In order to maintain foolproof
security of the tunnel, ITBP requires sophisticated surveillance equipment for keeping watch on the movement of traffic
passing through it.
 
18.1    The Committee appreciates the role being played by ITBP in guarding the Banihal tunnel and recommends that
its requirement for installation of state-of-the-art surveillance equipment in the tunnel should be accorded highest
priority by the Government.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
18.2     The enhanced security measures for Jawahar Tunnel are under the active consideration of the Government.  At
present security forces are manually checking with the help of sniffer dogs the vehicles on NH 1 and near Banihal
tunnel.
 
18.3     In order to formulate a view about the security aspects of the Jawahar Tunnel (Banihal), a Technical committee
has been constituted to examine the techno-economic feasibility, suitability and desirability of various appropriate
security measures for the tunnel.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
18.4     The Government may intimate the Committee as to whether the Technical Committee constituted by it to
examine the techno-economic feasibility, suitability and desirability of various appropriate security measures for
Banihal tunnel, has submitted its report and if so, the measures taken in the light of the recommendations of the
Technical Committee.
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (para nos. 80 & 80.1)

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
 
19.       Kargil has borne the brunt of Pakistan's misadventure of altering the Line of Control (LoC). The exchange of
gunfire between Pakistani and Indian army, left the houses shattered, livestock dead and people homeless. In the post-
conflict period, the wounds of the affected people seem to have not been assuaged by the Government. The
compensation for the loss of livestock amounting to Rs.505 lakh has not yet been paid by the Central Government. This
apart, the State of telecommunication and electricity services is in total disarray.
 
19.1     The Committee recommends that monetary compensation due to the people of Kargil for their losses during the
conflict with Pakistan should be released without any further delay. Besides, the electricity and telecommunication
requirements of the region should be looked after by the Government. The operationalisation of the airport being built in
Kargil should be expedited so as to bring the region on the tourism map of the country. The development of the region
as a tourist destination could provide the people of Kargil better means of livelihood.
 
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
 
19.2     The matter regarding compensation for the loss of livestock during Kargil conflict has been taken up with
the State Government. An additional Central assistance of Rs.3 crore has been sanctioned by the Planning
Commission during the last financial year for reconstruction of damaged infrastructure in Kargil district. As
regards telecommunication and electricity services, the State Government has been requested to provide the
details so that the matter could be taken up with concerned Ministries/Departments. As regards the Kargil
Airport, the Ministry of Civil Aviation have informed that it is not possible to extend the existing airstrip.
However, the matter has been taken up with the Indian Airlines for providing suitable aircrafts for commercial
flights to the Kargil airport. The matter regarding development of tourism in Kargil has also been taken up with
the State Government for formulation of suitable schemes.
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
 
19.3     The Government may apprise the Committee as to whether the damaged infrastructure of Kargil has been fully
restored including telecommunication and electricity services.  The Government may also inform the Committee about
the position in regard to the commencement of Indian Airlines commercial flights to Kargil and steps taken for
development of tourism in Kargil.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
·        While noting the reply of the Government, the Committee hopes that it will continue to maintain the dynamism
of its strategy to fight terrorists operating in Jammu & Kashmir.
 
(Para 4.6)
Although the rise in number of killings of the terrorists during 2000-2001 suggests that security forces are gaining
an upper hand over the former, the situation does not appear to have been restored to pre-Kargil days.  One of the
discernible indicators of normalcy returning to the valley prior to Pak incursions in Kargil in 1999 was a steady
flow of tourists which touched the figure of one lakh.  In post-Kargil phase, the situation has, however, not
improved to the extent so as to facilitate inflow of tourists.  The normalcy in the situation must be visible.  In the
view of the Committee, the situation leaves much to be desired so far as strengthening of security grid is
concerned. 
(Para 5.3)
The Committee is of the view that the Government should make efforts to hand over entire border management
along International Border (IB) and Line of Control (LoC) to BSF in an expeditious manner keeping in view  the
fact that additional battalions of BSF are being raised.  The Committee feels that effective border management
can alone plug the holes in border defence.  So far as strengthening of intelligence network in border areas is
concerned, the Committee hopes that measures initiated by the Government for strengthening of intelligence
network in the light of the recommendations of the Group of Ministers (GoM) set up to review the national

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
security will help it in monitoring and checking infiltration and exfiltration across IB and LoC.
(Para 6.9)
The Government should continue to make sincere efforts to strengthen Village Defence Committees (VDCs) as
part of its counter-insurgency measures.  It should provide them with better weaponry and communication
equipment in order to make them effective deterrents against militants.
(Para 10.6)
While taking note of the reply of the Government, the Committee recommends that the house rent being paid to
the families of sixteen most vulnerable villages in Drass, Kargil and Batalik sectors should be adequately
enhanced.
(Para 14.5)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in regard to the process of identification of genuine
claimants of the scheme meant for rehabilitation/relief of the persons displaced from Pakistan occupied Kashmir
(PoK).
(Para 15.6)
The Committee would like to be informed as to whether any new educational and vocational institutions have
been opened in Jammu & Kashmir.   It would also like to be apprised of the steps taken to revive the industrial
sector of the State.
(Para 16.3)
The Committee would like to know as to whether the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance have
evolved suitable mechanism for timely finalisation of annual plan outlay and also for timely release of funds to
the Government of Jammu & Kashmir.  At the same time, the Committee recommends that an in-built mechanism
should also be evolved in the system for proper monitoring of the utilization of funds sanctioned to the State
Government.
(Para 17.3)
The Government may intimate the Committee as to whether the Technical Committee constituted by it to examine
the techno-economic feasibility,  suitability and desirability of various appropriate security measures for Banihal
tunnel, has submitted its report and if so, the measures taken in the light of the recommendations of the Technical
Committee.
(Para 18.4)
The Government may apprise the Committee as to whether the damaged infrastructure of Kargil has been fully
restored including telecommunication and electricity services.  The Government may also inform the Committee
about the position in regard to the commencement of Indian Airlines commercial flights to Kargil and steps taken
for development of tourism in Kargil.
(Para 19.3)
MINUTES
 
XXIV
 
 TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 18 June 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee ─ Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
3.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
4.         Shri Drupad Borgohain

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
5.         Shri Ram Jethmalani
 
            LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
7.         Shri Anadi Sahu
8.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
9.         Shri Vinay Katiyar
10.       Shri Manabendra Shah
11.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
12.       Begum Noor Bano
13.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.       Shri Subodh Ray
15.       Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
16.       Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
17.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
18.       Shri P.H. Pandian
19.       Dr. Bikram Sarkar
20.       Shri Holkhomang Haokip
21.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary           
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *         
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
5.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.         *                                                          *                                                          *
7.         *                                                          *                                                          *
(The Committee then adjourned for tea at 1:45 A.M. and  reassembled at 12:03 P.M.)
 
8.         Taking up for consideration the Action Taken Replies of the Government on the recommendations/observations
of the Committee as contained in its Seventy-fifth Report, the Chairman recollected the visit of the Committee to
Jammu & Kashmir in July, 2000 and  presentation of the Report, based on the Study Tour.  He felt that Action Taken
Replies  should be considered in the light of the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in the light of
the study visit of the Committee and its interactions with  various  bodies/individuals. He then observed that since the
Committee’s visit to Jammu & Kashmir, lot of developments had taken place therein, and suggested that the Home
Secretary may be  invited to brief the Committee on the latest situation in Jammu & Kashmir.
 
9.         Some Members were of the view that a quick on-the-spot review of the situation was required.  Other Members
endorsed the suggestion of the Chair, that Home Secretary should be called to give oral evidence before the Committee.
 

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
(Chairman in the Chair)
 
10.       At this point, Members said that solution to insurgency and terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir lay in some way on
training of the forces and military action.
 
11.       The Committee then decided to take up for consideration its Report on Action Taken Replies in another meeting
and also to invite the Home Secretary to apprise it of the latest situation in J &K.
 
12.       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
13.       The Committee adjourned at 1.20 P.M. to meet again on 3 July 2002.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
                                                                                      XXVIII
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 5 July 2002 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee─ Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Kalraj Mishra
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
6.         Shri Moti Lal Vora
 
            LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
8.         Shri Anadi Sahu
9.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
10.       Shri Manabendra Shah
11.       Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
12.       Begum Noor Bano
13.       Shri M.O.H. Farooq
14.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
15.       Shri Subodh Ray
16.       Shri Ramji Lal Suman
17.       Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
18.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
19.       Shri Adhi Sankar
20.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
21.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary

91st Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/91streport.htm[30-06-2016 17:51:23]
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman took up for consideration and adoption the Ninety-first draft Report of the Committee
on Action Taken Report by the Government on the recommendations made by the Committee in its Seventy-fifth
Report  on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu & Kashmir.  He informed the Members that he was open
to suggestions for modifications.
                                                                                                                              
2.1       A Member pointed out certain contradictions in the Report.  The Chairman clarified the point and later agreed to
redraft the sentences containing ambiguity. 
 
2.2       The Chairman, on the suggestion of Members for creating a monitoring agency to monitor the functioning of
State Governments, opined that to have proper utilization of funds, there should be an in-built mechanism so that some
sort of monitoring could be done.
 
2.3       On the point of house rent given to the families  who were required to move out due to continued shelling,  a
Member felt that the amount was inadequate,  to which the Chairman agreed and the Committee  then  adopted the draft
Report with these modifications.
 
2.4       The Chairman, then nominated, Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj and Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai for presenting  the
Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anadi Sahu and Shri Adhi Sankar for laying the Report on the Table of the Lok
Sabha, on  23 July, 2002.
 
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
5.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.         *                                                          *                                                          *
6.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.3       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.4       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.5       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.6       *                                                          *                                                          *
7.         *                                                          *                                                          *
7.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
7.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
7.3       *                                                          *                                                          *
7.4       *                                                          *                                                          *
8.         *                                                          *                                                          *
9.         The Committee adjourned at 12.25 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on 17 July 2002. 
_____________________
*** Relates to other matters.