116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRSONE HUNDRED AND
SIXTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF 
IMPROPER USE) BILL, 2004
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 25TH AUGUST, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 25TH AUGUST, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/BHADRAPADA, 1927 (SAKA)
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in
CONTENTS
1.   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05)
2.   INTRODUCTION
3.   REPORT
4.   OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS—AT A GLANCE
5.   RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
6.   ANNEXURES
      I. STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER USE) BILL, 2004
      II. EMBLEMS AND NAMES (PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 1950
      III. ORDERS RELATING TO THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA
      IV. THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 5th August,2004)
     1.  Shrimati Sushma Swaraj  —  Chairperson
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Shri V. Narayanasamy
     3.  Shri Rishang Keishing
     4.  Shri R.K. Dhawan
     5.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
     6.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
     7.  Shri N. Jothi
     8.  Shri Janeshwar Mishra
     9.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra
  *10.  Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
          LOK  SABHA
    11.  Shri L.K. Advani
    12.  Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
    13.  Shri C.K. Chandrappan
    14.  Shri Biren Singh Engti
    15.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
    16.  Shri Tapir Gao
    17.  Shri T.K. Hamza
    18.  Shri Naveen Jindal
    19.  Shri Ajit Jogi
    20.  Shri Tek Lal Mahato
    21.  Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
    22.  Shri Sachin Pilot
    23.  Shri Ashok Pradhan
    24.  Prof. M. Ramadass
    25.  Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
    26.  Shri Bajuban Riyan
    27.  Dr. H.T. Sangliana
    28.  Choudhary Bijendra Singh
    29.  Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30.Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31.Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
·          Nominated w.e.f. 5th September, 2004 vice Shri Manoj Bhattacharya expired on 14th February, 2005.
 
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
          Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
          Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
          Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorized by the
Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Sixteenth Report of the Committee on the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004*.
2.       In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in
consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 (Annexure I),
as introduced in Lok Sabha on 10 December, 2004 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report.
3.0      The Committee held four sittings on the Bill. In its meeting held on 25 February 2005, the Committee heard the presentation of the
Union Home Secretary on the Bill and held discussion thereon. In its sitting held on 20 April, 2005, the Committee took up clause-by-

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
clause consideration of the Bill, which was deferred to 
30 June, 2005 as some clarifications from the Ministry of Home Affairs on the Schedule to the Bill were called. In the meeting on 30
June, 2005 too the Schedule could not be adopted. Finally on 22 August, 2005, the Committee adopted the Schedule.
3.1      The Committee also considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 22 August, 2005 and adopted the same.
4.       For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
 August 22, 2005           
SUSHMA SWARAJ
 Chairperson
Committee on Home Affairs
                  
  
         
 
* Bill published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section-2, dated 10 December, 2004.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 418, 8 dated 27 December, 2004.
REPORT
            The main objective of the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 is to provide self-contained statutory
provisions for regulating the use of State Emblem of India1, which is the official seal of the Government.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
2.0        The use of State Emblem of India hitherto is governed by the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950
(Annexure-II) and a set of executive instructions titled "Orders relating to the State Emblem of India" (Annexure-III).
2.1        The Emblem and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950 is administered by Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). That Act prohibits commercial exploitation of a large number of emblems and
names (both national and international) including State Emblem of India for which the prescribed maximum punishment is a meagre Rs.
5002 which hardly acts as a deterrent. Moreover, the scope of the Act is limited to the commercial exploitation of State Emblem only.
2.2        The executive instructions inter alia provide guidelines for the use of emblems in official seals, use on stationery, display on
vehicles, display on public building, use for educational purposes.
2.3        The executive instructions also mention that the State Emblem has been adopted by the Government of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Rajasthan and West Bengal. The State Emblem has been incorporated in the Emblems adopted by the
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa, Punjab and Tamil Nadu. The
State Governments and Administrations of all Union Territories other than Chandigarh use the State Emblem.
Need for new law
2.4
               The absence of self-contained legislative framework and executive instructions having no legal enforceability has resulted in the
State Emblem been misused by organisations and individuals who are not authorised to use the same under the said instructions.
1    The State Emblem of India is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Asoka, which is preserved in the Sarnath Museum. The Lion Capital has four
lions mounted back to back on a circular abacus. The frieze of the abacus is adorned with sculptures in high relief of an elephant, a galloping horse, a bull and a
lion separated by intervening Dharma Chakras. The abacus rests on a bell-shaped lotus. The profile of the Lion Capital showing three lions mounted on the
abacus with a Dharma Chakra in the centre, a bull on the right and a galloping horse on the left, and outlines of Dharma Chakras on the extreme right and left
has been adopted as the State Emblem of India. The bell-shaped lotus has been omitted. The motto "Satyameva Jayate" - Truth alone triumphs-written in
Devanagari script below the profile of the Lion Capital is part of the State Emblem of India. The motto is taken from the Mundaka Upanishad (Orders Relating
to State Emblem of India, p. 1).
2               Section 5.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
2.5.0          Instances of misuse of the State Emblem by private individuals/organisations/ companies/former MPs/former MLAs/retired IAS
Officers were brought to the notice of the Committee by the Ministry of Home Affairs during the presentation of Home Secretary on the
Bill.
2.5.1     The need for a self-contained legislation has therefore been felt by the Government to check improper/unauthorised use of State
Emblem by the members of public including retired Government Officials/Public servants by regulating its use by Government
functionaries.
2.5.2     A National Flag Committee constituted in October 2000 to examine various issues relating to the use/display of the National
Flag, in its report, has inter-alia  recommended for enactment of a separate legislation regulating the use of the State Emblem of India.
The recommendation was agreed to by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 15th January, 2002. Thus came the State Emblem of India
(Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004.
Objectives of the Bill
2.5.3     The proposed Bill seeks to achieve the following objectives :
                 (i)  Prohibition of misuse of State Emblem by unscrupulous members of public and by retired/former Government
officials/public servants, etc. with the intent of misleading;
                (ii)  Prohibiting the use of State Emblem for professional and commercial purposes by unscrupulous persons;
               (iii)  Regulating its use by Government functionaries;
               (iv)  Prohibition of improper use of State Emblem, which tends to create an impression that it relates to the Government;
                (v)  Prohibition of the use of State Emblem for wrongful gain i.e., for purpose of any trade, business or profession;
               (vi)  General powers of the Central Government to regulate the use of State Emblem for different purposes by authorised users
viz. State Governments, Government officials, public servants, Indian Missions, etc.;
              (vii)  Penalty prescribed for contravention of the provisions of the Bill; and
              (viii)  Power to make rules to vest with the Central Government.
SAFEGUARDS
3.0        To protect a common man from punishment/harassment for any innocuous misuse of the State Emblem, a safeguard has been
provided in the Bill to the effect that no prosecution for any offence punishable under the law shall be instituted, except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government or of any Officer authorised in this behalf by general or special orders of the Central Government.
Subordinate Legislation
3.1        The following rules regarding State Emblem are proposed to be framed under the present Bill {clause 6(2)} :–
                 (i)  Standard Design;
                (ii)  Its use as Official Seal by specified dignitaries;
               (iii)  Use on stationery by Ministers and Officers;
               (iv)  Display on vehicles;
                (v)  Display on public buildings;
               (vi)  Use on publications;
              (vii)  Use by personnel of Armed Forces/Police;
              (viii)  Use for educational purposes;
               (ix)  Use by Government officials;

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
                (x)  Use by State Governments/Indian Missions abroad; and
               (xi)  Miscellaneous uses like use on badges, collars, buttons, etc.
3.2        The Bill in nutshell, proposes to provide legislative back up to the existing executive instructions and incorporate the portion
relating to State Emblem in the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950, in it.
PENALTIES
4.0        The penalty for unauthorised use of the State Emblem with an intent to mislead has been 
prescribed as imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend up to Rs. 5000/- or with both.
4.1        The penalty for unauthorised use of the State Emblem for commercial purposes has been prescribed as imprisonment which shall
not be less than six months but may extend to two years and with fine up to Rs. 5000/-.
VIEWS EXPRESSED DURING DELIBERATIONS IN THE COMMITTEE
5.0        A Member raised a point that the prosecuting agency to initiate the proceedings in respect of violation of the provisions of the
proposed law, should be specially provided therein.
5.1        In this regard the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) is of the view that it is not necessary to make any
such provision for the reason that sub-section (2) of Section 4 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for trial of offences under
laws other than Indian Penal Code, 1860. It has been clarified further that where the general law relating to trial of offences as embodied
in the CrPC is intended to be made applicable, it may not be necessary to make any special provisions on the prosecution agencies and
other related matters. There are number of legislative precedents of this practice. The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
has been quoted as one such example.
5.2        Another Member of the Committee raised the issue of prohibition on the display of National Flag on sports gear like T-shirts,
helmets etc. by sportspersons in various national and international sports meet. 
In this context, the Member drew pointed attention of the Committee to the restrictive provisions of Explanation 4(e) of Section 2 of the
Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971. He contended that the restriction imposed by the said explanation was greatly
demotivating for members of general public and sportspersons to freely use the National Flag. He also stated that display of National Flag
on sports gear, enhances the respect for the Flag and does not in any way disrespect it. He therefore strongly felt that Explanation 4(e)
under Section 2 of the Act cited above needed to be suitably amended so as to enable public in general and sportspersons in particular to
display the Tricolour on headgears, vests, T-shirts, blazers etc. in a respectful manner as is the practice in other countries of the world.
5.3        The Committee endorsed the views and suggestions of the Member and authorised the Chairperson to write to the Minister of
Home Affairs in this regard. Accordingly, the Chairperson wrote to the Union Home Minister on March 1, 2005 requesting him to
consider the suggestion of the Member as endorsed by the Standing Committee so as to bring necessary amendment to the Prevention of
Insults to National Honour Act, 1971. The Home Minister vide his letter dated March 7, 2005 has acknowledged the reference from the
Chairperson and has stated that he is having the matter looked into. The Committee is happy to note that the Prevention of Insults to
National Honour (Amendment) Bill, 2005 (Annexure-IV) which seeks to amend explanation 4(e) of section 2 of the said Act, has been
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 22 August, 2005.
6.0        The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on the 20 April, 30 June and 
22 August, 2005 in the presence of Home Secretary and representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department).
Clause 2
6.1.0     The clause defines the terms 'competent authority' and 'emblem' for the purpose of the Bill.
6.1.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 3

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
6.2.0     The clause prohibits improper use of the emblem or any imitation thereof without the previous permission of the Central
Government or any Officer of the Central Government authorised for that purpose.
6.2.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 4
6.3.0     The clause prohibits commercial exploitation of State Emblem of India.
6.3.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 5
6.4.0     The clause prohibits registration of the trade mark or design which bears the emblem and grant of patent in respect of an
invention which bears a title containing the emblem by a competent authority.
6.4.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 6
6.5.0     The clause empowers the Central Government to frame rules to regulate the use of the emblem.
6.5.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 7
6.6.0     The clause prescribes penalties for misuse of the State Emblem in contravention of clause 3 and 4 of the Bill.
6.6.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 8
6.7.0     The clause provides for the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any officer authorised in this behalf, for the
purpose of prosecution for any offence punishable under the law.
6.7.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 9
6.8.0     The clause is a savings clause.
6.8.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 10
6.9.0     The clause gives overriding effect on any other law connected with the State Emblem.
6.9.1     The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 11
6.10.0   It devolves powers on the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the proposed law, which would be laid
on the Tables of both Houses of Parliament.
6.10.1   The clause is adopted without any change.
Schedule

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
6.11.0   The Schedule describes the State Emblem and its design as set out in Appendices I and II.
6.11.1   The Committee was inter-alia informed that the motto "Satyameva Jayate" - Truth Alone Triumphs - written in Devanagari script
has been taken from Mundaka Upanishad and is an integral part of State Emblem.
6.11.2   In the meeting of the Committee held on 20 April, 2005, it was pointed out by some Members that certain States are using the
State Emblem of India in their own emblems in a modified way and not conforming to the design set out in the Schedule. The issue was
flagged and the Ministry of Home Affairs was asked to ascertain the position from different States and UTs and apprise it of the status by
4 May, 2005. The Committee accordingly deferred clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
6.11.3   The Ministry sought three extensions of time in succession upto 15 June, 2005 to submit the relevant information that were
granted by the Chairperson of the Committee. Finally, the Ministry submitted the desired information on 20 June, 2005.
6.11.4   The Ministry of Home Affairs while replying to the points raised in the Committee, inter-alia informed that vide  their
Memorandum No. F 24/8/49 - Public dated 23 June, 1949, it was clarified that the provincial Governments were free to adopt distinctive
seals of their own or the Government of India's seal with such modifications as they may desire. The Ministry further informed that the
States/UTs may be categorised into four parts viz. States/UTs who have adopted the State Emblem of India without any modification
3;
States/UTs who have adopted their own Emblem 4; States that have incorporated the State Emblem of India in their Emblems without
modification5; and States that have incorporated the State Emblem of India with some modification6.
6.11.5   From the replies received from the Ministry and upon scrutiny of Emblems of various States/UTs two points emerged for the
consideration of the Committee. Firstly, some of the Emblems were prima facie  not in consonance with the secular ideals of our
Constitution and secondly, what would be the position of such Emblems and the Emblems which are not consistent with the design
enumerated in the Schedule of the Bill, after the enactment of the Bill.
6.11.6   The Committee resumed clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on 30 June, 2005, wherein the aforesaid
issues regarding use of State Emblem of India by different States/UTs were brought to the notice of the Home Secretary. The Committee
suggested that the Home Secretary may like to consult the Home Minister and the concerned States/UTs and make the Governments'
view available by 8 August, 2005, so as to enable the Committee to present its Report to Parliament during the Monsoon Session. The
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill once again remained inconclusive.
6.11.7   In response to the direction of the Committee, the Ministry vide their communication dated 28 July, 2005 inter-alia stated that the
matter has been considered in detail and it has been felt that since certain extremely emotive issues, particularly those relating to religion
and language are involved, the matter would require detailed deliberations with the concerned State Governments. It has, accordingly,
been decided to convene a meeting of the representatives of the concerned State Governments to discuss the objectionable features
(wherever applicable) in their Emblems. The Ministry has further stated that while it is proposed to call the said meeting shortly, it is
unlikely that the issues involved will get thrashed out in one meeting as the representatives of the State Governments may like to get back
to their respective Governments for consultation. The Ministry, therefore, has anticipated that it may take quite some time for them to
finalize its report on the various points raised by the Members of the Committee and it is expected that it would require about six months'
time to complete this exercise. The Ministry, therefore, sought six months' time from the Committee for furnishing the information
desired by it.
6.11.8   The Committee considered the matter again in its meeting held on 22 August, 2005 and was of the view that no useful purpose
would be served by keeping the Bill pending for such a long time.
6.11.9   In the light of the deliberations held on the use of State Emblem as contained in the Schedule, the Committee has flagged the
above issues and calls upon the Ministry to appropriately address its concerns articulated in paras 6.11.2 and 6.11.5 before bringing the
Bill for consideration in Parliament.
6.11.10 In regard to the Ministry's Memorandum No. F 24/8/49 - Public dated 23 June, 1949, (referred to in para 6.1.4) which was issued
prior to the adoption of the Constitution by the Constituent Assembly on 26 November, 1949, and its enforcement on 26 January, 1950,
the Committee is of the view that the said Memorandum needs to be reviewed after the enactment of this Bill, so that it is in consonance
with the secular ideals enshrined in the Constitution of India.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
6.11.11 Subject to the above observations, the Schedule is adopted.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
6.12.0   Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which are of consequential or drafting nature,
namely, "2004" and "Fifty-fifth" to be substituted by "2005" and "Fifty-sixth", respectively.
7.         The Committee, however, appreciates the move of the Government to bring in a self-contained legislation to regulate the use of
State Emblem of India and endorse the Bill.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS—AT A GLANCE
            The Committee endorsed the views and suggestions of the Member and authorised the Chairperson to write to the Minister of
Home Affairs in this regard. Accordingly, the Chairperson wrote to the Union Home Minister on March 1, 2005 requesting him to
consider the suggestion of the Member as endorsed by the Standing Committee so as to bring necessary amendment to the Prevention of
Insults to National Honour Act, 1971. The Home Minister vide his letter dated March 7, 2005 has acknowledged the reference from the
Chairperson and has stated that he is having the matter looked into. The Committee is happy to note that the Prevention of Insults to
National Honour (Amendment) Bill, 2005 (Annexure-IV) which seeks to amend explanation 4(e) of section 2 of the said Act, has been
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 22 August, 2005.                             (Para 5.3)
            In the light of the deliberations held on the use of State Emblem as contained in the Schedule, the Committee has flagged the
above issues* and calls upon the Ministry to appropriately address its concerns articulated in paras 6.11.2 and 6.11.5 before bringing the
Bill for consideration in Parliament.                                                                     
(Para 6.11.9)
            In regard to the Ministry's Memorandum No. F 24/8/49 - Public dated 23 June, 1949, (referred to in para 6.1.4) which was issued
prior to the adoption of the Constitution by the Constituent Assembly on 26 November, 1949, and its enforcement on 26 January, 1950,
the Committee is of the view that the said Memorandum needs to be reviewed after the enactment of this Bill, so that it is in consonance
with the secular ideals enshrined in the Constitution of India.             (Para 6.11.10)
            Subject to the above observations, the Schedule is adopted.                                    (Para 6.11.11)
            The Committee, however, appreciates the move of the Government to bring in a self-contained legislation to regulate the use of
State Emblem of India and endorse the Bill.                                                                      (Para 7)
·         As mentioned in paras 6.11.0 to 6.11.8 of the Report.
 
MINUTES
*XX
TWENTIETH  MEETING
          The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 25 February, 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
          MEMBERS PRESENT
     1.  Shrimati Sushma Swaraj  —  Chairperson
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Shri V. Narayanasamy
     3.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
     4.  Shri N. Jothi

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
     5.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra
          LOK  SABHA
     6.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
     7.  Shri Tapir Gao
     8.  Shri Naveen Jindal
     9.  Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
    10.  Shri Sachin Pilot
    11.  Shri Ashok Pradhan
    12.  Shri Bajuban Riyan
    13.  Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
          Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
          Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
          Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
          WITNESSES
          Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
     1.  Shri Dhirendra Singh, Home Secretary
     2.  Shri Anil Chowdhry, Special Secretary
3.Shri K.M. Singh, DG, CISF
 
* First to Nineteenth meetings relate to other matters.
     4.  Shri P.V. Bhide, Additional Secretary
     5.  Shri J.K. Dutt, Additional DG, CISF
     6.  Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Secretary
     7.  Shri V.N. Gaur, Joint Secretary
     8.  Shri Yashwant Raj, Joint Secretary
     9.  Shri Pravir Pandey, Deputy Secretary
    10.  Shri Shyam Jindal, Deputy Secretary
    11.  Shrimati Manjari Juruhar, IG, CISF
    12.  Shri Taj Hassan, DIG, CISF
          *                                *                                  *
          Representative of Ministry of Law and Justice
          (Department of Legal Affairs)
          Shri D.P. Sharma, Additional Secretary
          (Legislative Department)
     1.  Shri V.K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
     2.  Shri Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2.       *                                *                                  *
3.       *                                *                                  *

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
3.1      *                                *                                  *
3.2      *                                *                                  *
3.3      *                                *                                  *
3.4      *                                *                                  *
3.5      *                                *                                  *
3.6      *                                *                                  *
3.7      *                                *                                  *
3.8      *                                *                                  *
3.9      *                                *                                  *
4.    The Chairperson then invited the Home Secretary to make presentations on the Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal
Bill, 2004 followed by the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004.
*** Relates to other matters.
5.       *                                *                                  *
5.1      *                                *                                  *
5.2      *                                *                                  *
6.       Thereafter, the Home Secretary made a Power Point presentation on the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill,
2004. In his presentation the Home Secretary stated that the State Emblem was the official seal of the Government; its use on any
document or thing gave an impression of it being an official document/thing. He also mentioned about the existing regulations regarding
its use, instances of its misuse and the need for legislation, objectives and features of the present Bill and the penalties proposed and
safeguards provided in the Bill. He also mentioned about the rules to be framed under the present Bill after its enactment.
7.       A Member of the Committee raised the issue of prohibition imposed under Explanation 4(e) of 
Section 2 of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 on display of National Flag on sports gear like T-shirts, vests and
helmets, etc. particularly by sportspersons who represent the country in various national and international events. That Member pleaded
that they should be allowed to display national flag on their cap/helmet and apparels as a matter of pride and sought Committee's
approval for amendment to the Act. The Committee while unanimously endorsing the sentiment of the Member authorised its
Chairperson to write to the Union Home Minister requesting him to bring forth suitable amendment in the law in the light of the points
raised in its meeting.
8.       *                                *                                  *
9.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10.
               The Committee then adjourned at 4.48 P.M.
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matters.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
*XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH  MEETING
          The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 20 April, 2005 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
          MEMBERS PRESENT
     1.  Shrimati Sushma Swaraj  —  Chairperson
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Shri V. Narayanasamy
     3.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
     4.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
          LOK  SABHA
     5.  Shri C.K. Chandrappan
     6.  Shri Biren Singh Engti
     7.  Shri Tapir Gao
     8.  Shri T.K. Hamza
     9.  Shri Naveen Jindal
    10.  Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
    11.  Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
          Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
          Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
          Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
          WITNESSES
          Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
     1.  Shri V.K. Duggal, Home Secretary
     2.  Shri Anil Chowdhry, Special Secretary
     3.  Shri Yashwant Raj, Joint Secretary
     4.  Shri J.B. Sinha, Director
          Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
          (Legislative Department)
     1.  Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2.Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
 
* Twenty first to twenty fourth meetings relate to other matters.
          (Department of Legal Affairs)
     7.  Shri D.P. Sharma, Additional Secretary
2.       At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the new Home Secretary alongwith his colleagues to the meeting and wished him success
in his new assignment.
2.1      She then briefly mentioned the procedure to be followed for clause-by-clause consideration of the State Emblem of India
(Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 under consideration of the Committee.
3.0      The Committee then took up consideration of the Bill clause-by-clause.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
Clause 2
3.1.0   The clause defines the terms 'competent authority' and 'emblem' for the purpose of the bill.
3.1.1   The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 3
3.2.0   The clause prohibits improper use of the emblem or any imitation thereof without the previous permission of the Central
Government or any Officer of the Central Government authorised for that purpose.
3.2.1   The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 4
3.3.0   The clause prohibits commercial exploitation of State Emblem of India.
3.3.1   A Member raised a query whether Public Sector undertaking can use State Emblem. The representatives of Ministry of Home
Affairs responded that as per existing executive guidelines PSU can not use State Emblem.
3.3.2   The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 5
3.4.0   The clause prohibits registration of the trademark or design which bears the Emblem and grant of patent in respect of an invention
which bears a title containing the emblem by a competent authority.
3.4.1   The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 6
3.5.0   The clause empowers the Central Government to frame rules to regulate the use of the emblem.
3.5.1   The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 7
3.6.0     The clause prescribes penalties for misuse of the State Emblem in contravention of clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill.
3.6.1     The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 8
3.7.0     The clause provides for the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any Officer authorised in this behalf, for the
purpose of prosecution for any offence punishable under the law.
3.7.1     The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 9
3.8.0     The clause is a saving clause.
3.8.1     The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 10

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
3.9.0     The clause gives overriding effect of the proposed new law on any other law connected with the State Emblem.
3.9.1     The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 11
3.10.0   It devolves powers on the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the proposed law, which would be laid
on the Tables of both Houses of Parliament.
3.10.1   The clause was adopted without any change.
4.         A Member wanted to know whether the words 'Satya Meva Jayate' in the State Emblem could be legally used in other
constitutionally recognised regional languages as is being done by some of the States.
4.1        The Ministry responded that States can adopt the State Emblem of India with slight modifications as their respective State
Emblem after obtaining approval from Central Government. However, they sought time to send written replies to the Secretariat after
getting authentic information from State Governments.
5.0        The Committee then decided to defer the consideration of the Schedule, Clause 1, Enacting Formula of the Bill and Title till the
replies from the Ministry of Home Affairs were received.
5.1        The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 P.M.
11.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
*XXVII
TWENTY-SEVENTH  MEETING
          The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 30 June, 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
          MEMBERS  PRESENT
     1.  Shrimati Sushma Swaraj  —  Chairperson
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Shri V. Narayanasamy
     3.  Shri Rishang Keishing
     4.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
          LOK  SABHA
     5.  Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
     6.  Shri C.K. Chandrappan
     7.  Shri Tapir Gao
     8.  Shri T.K. Hamza
     9.  Shri Naveen Jindal
    10.  Shri Tek Lal Mahato
    11.  Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
    12.  Shri Sachin Pilot
    13.  Shri Bajuban Riyan
    14.  Dr. H.T. Sangliana
    15.  Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
    16.  Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
    17.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
          Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
          Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
          Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
          WITNESSES
          Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
     1.  Shri V.K. Duggal, Home Secretary
2.Shri P.V. Bhide, Additional Secretary
 
* Twenty sixth meeting relate to other matters.
     3.  Shri Yashwant Raj, Joint Secretary
     4.  Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Secretary
     5.  Shri Rama Raman, Director
     6.  Shri J.B. Sinha, Director
          Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
          (Legislative Department)
     1.  Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary
     2.  Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
     3.  Shrimati Sharda Jain, Deputy Legislative Counsel
          (Department of Legal Affairs)
     1.  Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
          The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.
          *                                *                                  *
1.1      She then informed the Committee about the agenda of the meeting of the Committee and briefly recapitulated the proceedings of
the last sitting in which the Committee had undertaken clause-by-clause consideration of the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of
Improper Use) Bill 2004 and that while considering the Schedule appended to the Bill a point was raised regarding use of National
Emblem in a modified form in the Emblems of certain States than enumerated in the Schedule. The Ministry of Home Affairs was asked
to ascertain the position from different States and UTs and apprise the Committee of the status. The chairperson then stated that a status
report has since been received on the subject from the Ministry, which had been circulated to the Members. Thereafter, the Home
Secretary and other officials were called in. The Chairperson then welcomed the Home Secretary alongwith his colleagues to the
meeting.
1.2      The Committee then took up the consideration the report received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on the State Emblem of
India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill 2004. As per the report furnished by the Ministry, a Government Order of 1949 permitted the
States to use State Emblem of India in their respective Emblem with/without modifications. The Chairperson asked the Home Secretary
to explain how the use of State Emblem in the official seal of States is to be regulated after the enactment of the Bill, particularly in those
States, which have used the National Emblem in a modified form.
2.       The Home Secretary informed the Committee that due to the Government Order of 1949, States were allowed to use State Emblem
as it was or in a modified form but after the present enactment it would be regulated as per new Act but the State Emblems already
adopted by the States in a modified form would not be affected by the present legislation.
3.       A Member brought to the notice of the Committee the State Emblem of Mizoram which did not comply with the secular ideals as
enshrined in the Constitution and felt that the Government Order of 1949 should have been revised/amended in the light of the Forty
Second Amendment to the Constitution of India which had brought in the word "Secular" in the Preamble. However, apprehensions were
expressed about the use of religious symbols in State Emblems and use of State Emblem in a distorted form even after the proposed
enactment, even while the Home Secretary stated that the existing officials seals of the States might not be affected by the new Act. Thus,

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
the efficacy of the present Bill to prohibit the improper use of State Emblem was questioned.
4.       The Home Secretary while replying to the query stated that the issue was very delicate and that he would bring it to the notice of
Home Minister, the concerns expressed in the Committee, for his consideration and may take up the matter with the concerned State
Governments to find out a solution to the problem through discussion.
5.       The Committee decided to await for the response of the Ministry and deferred consideration of the Schedule appended to the Bill.
6.       *                                *                                  *
6.1      *                                *                                  *
7.       *                                *                                  *
8.       *                                *                                  *
9.0      *                                *                                  *
9.1.0   *                                *                                  *
9.1.1   *                                *                                  *
9.2      *                                *                                  *
9.3      *                                *                                  *
10.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11.
               The Committee then adjourned at 4.28 P.M.
 
 
*** Relates to other matters.
*I
FIRST  MEETING
          The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 22 August, 2005 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
          MEMBERS  PRESENT
     1.  Shrimati Sushma Swaraj  —  Chairperson
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Shri V. Narayanasamy
     3.  Shri R.K. Dhawan
     4.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
     5.  Shri N. Jothi
          LOK  SABHA
     6.  Shri C.K. Chandrappan
     7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti
     8.  Shri Tapir Gao

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
     9.  Shri T.K. Hamza
    10.  Shri Naveen Jindal
    11.  Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
    12.  Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
    13.  Shri Bajuban Riyan
    14.  Dr. H.T. Sangliana
    15.  Chaudhary Bijendra Singh
    16.  Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
          Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
          Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
          Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
          WITNESSES
          Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
     1.  Shri V.K. Duggal, Home Secretary
     2.  Dr. D.K. Sankaran, Secretary (Border Management)
3.Shri P.V. Bhide, Additional Secretary (C.S.)
 
* Committee reconstituted w.e.f. 5 August, 2005.
     4.  Shri Yashwant Raj, Joint Secretary
     5.  Shri R. Bhattacharaya, Joint Secretary
     6.  Shri Ashim Khurana, Joint Secretary
     7.  Shri M.P. Sajnani, Advisor (DM)
     8.  Shri P.G. Dhar Chakrabarti, Executive Director, NIDM
          Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
          (Legislative Department)
     1.  Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
     2.  Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary
     3.  Dr. Sanjay Sigh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
     4.  Shrimati Sharda Jain, Deputy Legislative Counsel
          (Department of Legal Affairs)
          Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2.       At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the reconstituted Committee and apprised them of the
agenda for the day viz. further consideration of the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 and clause-by-clause
consideration of the Disaster Management Bill, 2005.
3.       *                                *                                  *
4.       The Chairperson then recapitulated that the Committee had deferred the clause-by-clause consideration of the State Emblem of
India (Prevention of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 in its meeting held on 30 June, 2005 to enable the Ministry of Home Affairs to submit
responses to the queries raised during the course of the meetings on the Schedule appended to the Bill. In response, the Ministry had
sought six months time for furnishing the information desired by the Committee, in view of the fact that it involved extremely emotive
issues, particularly those relating to religion and language. The Chairperson further apprised the Committee that two extensions had
already been given to the Ministry for the purpose and that no useful purpose would be served to grant another extension and the

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
Committee may give its Report on the Bill.
4.1      The Committee agreed to the suggestion and decided to adopt the Schedule of the Bill with the rider that the issues raised by
Members regarding State Emblem of some states and their status after enactment of the legislation were appropriately addressed before
piloting the Bill in the Parliament.
4.2      Thereafter, the 116th Report on the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 was adopted by the
Committee.
5.0 to 5.45         *                                *                                  *
6.       *                                *                                  *
7.       The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports on the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004 and the
Disaster Management Bill, 2005 to both Houses of Parliament on 25 August, 2005. The Committee authorised its Chairperson and in her
absence Shri R.K. Dhawan to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorised Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy and in
his absence, Shri Naveen Jindal to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
8.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9.
       The Committee adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matters.
 
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE-I
(See page (iii) para 2 of the report)
AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA
10 DECEMBER, 2004
Bill No. 98 of 2004
THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER USE) BILL, 2004
A
BILL
 to prohibit the improper use of State Emblem of India for professional and
commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
            BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows :–
 
         1. (1) This Act may be called the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of
Improper Use) Act, 2004.
        (2) It extends to the whole of India, and also applies to citizens of India
outside India.
            (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent,
application and
commencement.
         2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
                (a) "competent authority" means any authority competent under any law
Definitions.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
for the time being in force to register any company, firm, other body of
persons or any trade mark or design or to grant a patent;
                        (b) "emblem" means the State Emblem of India as described and
specified in the Schedule to be used as an official seal of the Government.
Prohibition of improper use
of emblem.
        3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no person shall use the emblem or any colourable imitation thereof in any
manner which tends to create an impression that it relates to the Government or that
it is an official document of the Central Government or, as the case may be, the
State Government, without the previous permission of the Central Government or
of such officer of that Government as may be authorised by it in this behalf.
            Explanation— For the purposes of this section, "person" includes a former
functionary of the Central Government or the State Governments.
 
Prohibition of use of
emblem for wrongful gain.
            4. No person shall use the emblem for the purpose of any trade, business,
calling or profession or in the title of any patent, or in any trade mark or design,
except in such cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed.
 
Prohibition of registration
of certain companies, etc.
        5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, no competent authority shall,—
                (a) register a trade mark or design which bears the emblem, or
                (b) grant a patent in respect of an invention which bears a title containing
the emblem.
            (2) If any question arises before a competent authority whether any emblem
is an emblem specified in the Schedule or a colourable imitation thereof, the
competent authority shall refer the question to the Central Government and the
decision of the Central Governemnt thereon shall be final.
 
General powers of Central
Government to regulate use
of emblem.
        6. (1) The Central Government may make such provisions by rules as appears
to it to be necessary, to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal that is used in
offices of the Central Government and the State Governments and their
organisations including diplomatic missions abroad, subject to such restrictions and
conditions as may be prescribed.
        (2) Subject to the provision of this Act, the Central Government shall have
powers—
                (a) to notify the use of emblem on stationery, the method of printing or
embossing it on demi-official stationery by the constitutional authorities,
Ministers, Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies,
officers of the Central Government and the State Governments;
                (b) to specify the design of the official seal consisting of the emblem;
                (c) to restrict the display of emblem on vehicles of constitutional
authorities, foreign dignitaries, Ministers of the Central Government and the
State Governments;
                (d) to provide for guidelines for display of emblem on public buildings in
India, the diplomatic missions and on the buildings occupied by India's
consulates abroad;
                (e) to specify conditions for the use of emblem for various other purposes
including the use for educational purposes and the armed forces personnel;
                        (f) to do all such things (including the specification of design of the
emblem and its use in the manner whatsoever) as the Central Government
considers necessary or expedient for the exercise of the foregoing powers.
 
         7. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, or if having been
previously convicted of an offence under this section, is again convicted of any
Penalty.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
such offence, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent
offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months,
which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
            (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 4 for any
wrongful gain shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months, which may extend to two years and with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
             8. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be
instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any
officer authorised in this behalf by general or special order of the Central
Government.
Previous sanction for
prosecution.
             9. Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other
proceedings which might be brought against him under any other law for the time
being in force.
Savings.
             10. The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other enactment
or instrument having effect by virtue of such enactment.
Act to have overriding
effect.
         11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
        (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
                (a) cases and conditions regulating the use of emblem under 
section 4;
                (b) making rules to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal of the
Government and specifying restrictions and conditions relating thereto under
sub-section (1) of section 6;
                (c) the use of emblem on stationery, design of official seal consisting of
emblem, and other matters under sub-section (2) of section 6;
                (d) authorising officer by general or special order for giving previous
sanction for instituting prosecution under section 8; and
                (e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
            (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make rules.
 
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(b)]
STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA
DESCRIPTION AND DESIGN
        The State Emblem of India is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Asoka which is preserved in the Sarnath Museum. The
Lion Capital has four lions mounted back to back on a circular abacus. The frieze of the abacus is adorned with sculptures in high relief
of an elephant, a galloping horse, a bull and a lion separated by intervening Dharma Chakras. The abacus rests on a bell-shaped lotus.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
        The profile of the Lion Capital showing three lions mounted on the abacus with a Dharma Chakra in the centre, a bull on the right
and a galloping horse on the left, and outlines of Dharma Chakras on the extreme right and left has been adopted as the State Emblem of
India. The Bell-shaped lotus has been omitted.
        The motto "Satyameva Jayate"—Truth alone triumphs—written in Devanagari script below the profile of the Lion Capital is part of
the State Emblem of India.
            The State Emblem of India shall conform to the designs as set out in Appendix I or Appendix II.
 
APPENDIX-I
 
 
Note.—This design is in simplified form and meant for reproduction in small sizes, such as for use in stationery, seals and die-printing.
APPENDIX-II

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
 
Note.—This design is more detailed and meant for reproduction in bigger sizes.
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
        The use of State Emblem of India is presently governed by a set of executive instructions, which cover various aspects, such as,
standard design of the State Emblem of India, its adoption by the State Government, its use in the official seals and on stationery, design
of official seal, display on vehicles and on public buildings, use for educational and various other purposes, etc. However, these
instructions or orders do not have any legal sanction. The State Emblem of India being the official seal of the Government, its use on any
document or thing tends to create an impression that it is an official document or thing of the Government. Therefore, there is a need to
prevent its misuse by unauthorised persons.
2.     In order to regulate the use of State Emblem of India with a view to 
(i) prohibiting the use of the State Emblem of India by members of the public, including retired/former Government officials/public
servants, etc., unless specifically authorised by the Central Government; (ii) prohibiting the improper use of State Emblem of India for
professional and commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; and (iii) regulating its use by
Government functionaries, it is proposed to enact a self-contained legislation.
3.     The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
SHIVRAJ V. PATIL

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
  NEW DELHI;
The 26th August, 2004.
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
        Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to regulate the use of State Emblem of India in official seal of
the Central Government and the State Governments and their organisations including diplomatic missions abroad.
        Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill. Without prejudice to the
generality of such rule making powers, they include regulating the use of State Emblem of India for professional and commercial
purposes, in the official seal used by the Central Government, the State Governments and their organizations; on stationery, vehicles,
public buildings, etc., and authorizing an officer for giving previous sanction for instituting prosecution against the offenders.
            The rules are confirmed to matters of procedure and details and the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.
 
LOK  SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________
 
 
 
 
 
A
BILL
to prohibit the improper use of State Emblem of India for professional and commercial
purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 
 
 
 
 
_______________
 
 
 
 

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
 
( Shri Shivraj V. Patil, Minister of Home Affairs )
ANNEXURE-II
(See Page 1, para 2 of the report)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE EMBLEMS AND NAMES (PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 1950
No. 12 of 1950
SEAL
(1st March, 1950)
An Act to prevent the improper use of certain emblems and names for professional and commercial purposes.
            BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :–
         1. (1) This Act may be called the Emblems and Names
(Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950.
        (2) It extends to the whole of India, and also applies to citizens
of India outside India.
            (3) It shall come into force on such dates (1st September,
1950) as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent,
application and
commencement.         2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
                (a) "emblem" means any emblem, seal, flag, insignia,
coat-of-arms or pictorial representation specified in the
schedule;
                (b) "competent authority" means any authority competent
under any law for the time being in force to register any
company, firm or other body of persons or any trade mark or
design or to grant a patent;
                        (c) "name" includes any abbreviation of a name.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
improper use of
certain emblems and
names.
            3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, no person shall except in such cases and
under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, use, or continue to use, for the purpose of any trade,
 

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
business, calling or profession, or in the title of any patent, or in any
trade mark or design any name or emblem specified in the Schedule
or any colourable imitiation thereof without the previous permission
of the Central Government or of such officer or Government as may
be authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.
Prohibition of
registration of
certain companies
etc.
        4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, no competent authority shall:
                (a) register any company, firm or other body of persons
which bears any name, or
                (b) register a trade mark or design which bears any
emblem or name, or
                (c) grant a patent in respect of any invention which bears
a title containing any emblem or name.
        If the use of such name or emblem is in contravention of
section 3.
            (2) If any question arises before a competent authority
whether any emblem in an emblem specified in the Schedule or a
colourable imitation thereof, the competent authority may refer the
question to the Central Government, and the decision of the Central
Government thereon shall be final.
 
Penalty.             5. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to Rupees five
hundred.
 
Previous sanction for
prosecution.
            6. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act
shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central
Government or of any officer authorised in this behalf by general or
special order of the Central Government.
 
Savings.             7. Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit
or other proceeding which might, apart from this Act, be brought
against him.
 
Power of the Central
Govt. to amend the
Schedule.
            8. The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, add to or alter the Schedule, and any such addition
or alteration shall have affect as if it had been made by this Act.
 
Power to make rules.         9. The Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
            Encl : Schedule . . . .
 
 
THE SCHEDULE
(See Sections 2(a) and 3)
1.     The name, emblem or official seal of the United Nations Organisation.
2.     The name, emblem or official seal of the World Health Organisation.
3.     The Indian National Flag.
4.     The name, emblem or official seal of the Government of India or of any State, or any other insignia or coat-of-arms used by any
such Government or by a Department of any such Government.
5.     The emblem of the St. John Ambulance Association (India), and the St. John Ambulance Brigade (India), consisting of the device of
a white eight pointed cross embellished in the four principal angle alternatively with a lion passant quadrant and a unicorn passant,
whether or not the device is surrounded or accompanied by concentric circles or other decoration or by lettering.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
6.     The name, emblem or official seal of the president, governor (Sardar-I-Riyasat) or Republic or Union of India.
7.     Any name which may suggest or be calculated to suggest :–
                 (i)  The patronage of the Government of India or the Government of a State; or
                (ii)  Connection without any local authority or any corporation or body constituted by the Government under any law for the
time being in force.
8.     The name, emblem or official seal of the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisations.
9.     The name or pictorial representation of Rashtrapati, Rashtrapati Bhavan, Raj Bhavan.
9.     A.  The name or pictorial representation of Mahatma Gandhi, Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, Chhatrapati Shivaji or
the Prime Minister of India or the words 'Gandhi', 'Nehru' or 'Shivaji', except the pictorial use thereof on calendars where only the names
of the manufacturers and printers of the calendars are given and the calendars are not used for advertising goods. (Ins. by Notification No.
S.O. 1503 dated the 8th April, 1970).
10.    The medals, badges or decorations instituted by the Government from time to time or the miniatures or replicas of such medals,
badges or decorations (or the names of such medals, badges or decorations or of the miniatures of replicas thereof).
11.    The name, emblem or official seal of the International Civil Aviation Organisation.
12.    The word "Interpol" which is an integral part of the International Criminal Police Organisation.
13.    The name, emblem or official seal of the World Meteorological Organisation.
14.    The name and emblem of the Tuberculosis Association of India.
15.    The name, emblem and official seal of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
16.    The names "Ashoka Chakra" or "Dharma Chakra" or the pictorial representation of Ashoka Chakra as used in the Indian National
Flag or in the official seal or emblem of the Government of India or of any State Government or of a Department of any such
Government.
17.    The name of the Parliament or the legislature of any State, or the Supreme Court, or the High Court of any State, or the Central
Secretariat, or the Secretariat of any State Government or any other Government office or the pictorial representation of any building
occupied by any of the aforesaid institutions.
18.    The name and emblem of the Ramakrishna Math and Mission consisting of a swan floating on waters, with a lotus in the foreground
and the rising sun in the background, the whole being encircled by a wild serpent, with the words ... ... ... ... superimposed on the bottom
portion.
(Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2356 Dated 4th August, 1973)
19.    The name and emblem of Sri Sarada Math and Ramakrishna Sarada Mission consisting of a swan (facing right) floating on waters,
with lotus in the foreground and the rising sun in the background, the whole being encircled by a wild serpent (facing right with the
words ... ... ... ... superimposed on the bottom portion.
(Ins. by notification no. S.O. dated the 11th September, 1973)
20.    The name of the 'The Bharat Scouts and Guides' with the 'Emblem'.
(Ins. by notification no. S.O. dated the 10th July, 1974)
21.    The name and Emblem of the International Olympic Committee consisting of five interlaced rings.
(Ins. by notification no. S.O. 2457 dated the 18th August, 1978)
22.    The name and the emblem of the National Youth Emblem which is in black and white and carries the profiles of the faces of the
two onward looking young persons – male and female – inscribed with a circle. Both faces are tuning towards the right and the profile of
the male face is in black and is situated behind that of the female face. The back of the profile of the female face forms the tail and wing
of a dove flying in the opposite direction with its beak extending outside the circle and carrying a twig with leaf. The profile of the dove
is in white and the balance space of the profile of the female face is covered with horizontal lines in black. The space in between the
profile of the dove and the circle to the left of the dove is also black. The leaf and twig is in black. On eye of the dove is shown in the
form of a dot.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
(Ins. by notification no. S.O. 373 (E) dated the 23rd June, 1986)
23.    The name and emblem of the 'Auroville' consisting of two concentric circles; the inner circle is joined to the outer circle with five
equidistant radial lines to form five petals; one of the radial lines is oriented vertically downwards. An inner dot is placed at the centre of
the symbol. The petals may be shaded in orange or any other colour, or may be unshaded.
(Ins. by notification no. S.O. 593 (E) dated the 22nd July, 1999)
 
ANNEXURE-III
(See page 1, para 2 of the report)
 
ORDERS
RELATING TO THE
STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NEW DELHI
ORDERS RELATING TO THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA
I–STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA—DESCRIPTION AND DESIGN
(1)        The State Emblem of India is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Asoka which is preserved in the Sarnath Museum.
The Lion Capital has four lions mounted back to back on a circular abacus. The frieze of the abacus is adorned with sculptures in high
relief of an elephant, a galloping horse, a bull and a lion separated by intervening Dharma Chakras. The abacus rests on a bell-shaped
lotus.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
            The profile of the Lion Capital showing three lions mounted on the abacus with a Dharma Chakra in the centre, a bull on the right
and a galloping horse on the left, and outlines of Dharma Chakras on the extreme right and left has been adopted as the State Emblem of
India. The bell-shaped lotus has been omitted.
            The motto "Satyameva Jayate",—Truth alone triumphs—written in Devanagari script below the profile of the Lion Capital is part
of the State Emblem of India. The motto is taken from the Mundaka Upanishad, an ancient scripture.
            NOTE : The State Emblem of India has been referred to as the State Emblem in the following paragraphs.
            (2) For the accurate reproduction of the State Emblem, two standard designs have been approved. Prints of these designs are at
Appendices I and II. Design I is in a simplified form and is intended for reproduction in small sizes such as for use in stationery, seals and
die-printing. For reproduction in bigger sizes, only design II, which is more detailed, should be used.
            All reproductions of the State Emblem should strictly conform to Design I or Design II.
            Photographic designs of the State Emblem can be obtained from the Manager, Photo Litho Wing, Government of India Press,
New Delhi.
            Samples of standard dies of the State Emblem can be obtained from the Office of the Chief Controller of Printing and Stationery,
New Delhi.
II—ADOPTION BY STATE GOVERNMENTS
            The State Emblem has been adopted by the Governments of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Rajasthan and West
Bengal and has been incorporated in the Emblems adopted by the Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka, Orissa, Punjab and Tamil Nadu. The Governments and Administrations of all Union Territories other than Himachal Pradesh
and Chandigarh use the State Emblem. The Union Territory of Chandigarh has incorporated the State Emblem in the emblem adopted by
it.
III—USE IN THE OFFICIAL SEALS
            The State Emblem is the official seal of India. The use of the State Emblem for official seal is restricted to the following :
                 (i)  President;
                (ii)  Vice-President;
               (iii)  Union Ministers;
               (iv)  Ministers and other Officers of the Central Government including Diplomatic Missions abroad;
                (v)  Governors, Lieutenant Governors, Chief Commissioners and Administrators of Union Territories; and
               (vi)  Ministers and Departments and Offices of the State Governments and of Union Territory Governments and
Administrations who have adopted the State Emblem.
            Offices of Central Government permitted to use distinct emblems of their own may, however, use the same in their seals.
IV—USE ON STATIONERY
            (1) The State Emblem when printed or embossed on demi-official stationery used by Ministers and Officers should appear on the
top left hand corner. The lettering like "Home Minister" or "Ministry of Home Affairs" should appear on the top right hand corner.
            (2) The demi-official stationery used by Ministers should be embossed or printed in blue.
            (3) The demi-official stationery used by officers should be embossed or printed in red colour except where an officer is
specifically authorised to use such stationery in some other colour. Names of officers should not be printed on such stationery.
            (4) The Members of Parliament may have the State Emblem embossed or printed on their stationery. The colour to be used for the
purpose in the case of the Members of the Lok Sabha is green and that in the case of the Members of the Rajya Sabha is red. Such
stationery, when supplied by the Chief Controller of Printing and Stationery, does not contain the names or addresses of the Members.
But the Members may, at their discretion get such stationery, with their names and addresses, printed at private presses approved for this
purpose by the Government of India in the Ministry of Urban Development.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
            (5) Where the stationery used by the Members of Parliament, contains the State Emblem it should not bear words like "Advocate,
Supreme Court/High Court" and "Editor......Journal", below their names in the letter-heads.
            (6) The Members of Legislative Assemblies of Union Territories and the Members of Metropolitan Council of Delhi may have
the State Emblem embossed or printed on their stationery. However, the stationery containing the State Emblem should not bear words
like "Advocate, Supreme Court/High Court" and Editor...........Journal", below their names in the letter-heads.
V—DESIGN OF OFFICIAL SEAL
            (1) The designs of the brass seals and rubber stamps consist of the State Emblem enclosed in oval frame of adequate thickness.
The name of the Ministry or Office should appear between the inner and outer rims of the frame. The abbreviated forms of names of
Ministries/Offices may be inscribed where it is not possible to accommodate the names in full.
            (2) Offices/Officers already permitted to use round shaped brass seals may however continue to use them. Round shaped rubber
stamps may be used by—
                 (i)  Indian Missions/Posts abroad;
                (ii)  Ministry of External Affairs for special purposes such as on Passports, diplomatic identity cards, visas or entry permits.
The round shaped embossing machine consisting of State Emblem is also being used by passport authorities in India and
abroad; and
               (iii)  Ministries of the Government of India on communications addressed to Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
VI—DISPLAY ON VEHICLES
            (1) The State Emblem may be displayed on the—
                 (i)  Cars of the Rashtrapati Bhavan when the President or his wife is travelling by such vehicles and the spare car following the
car of the President;
                (ii)  Car of the Vice-President when he or his wife is travelling;
               (iii)  Cars of Raj Bhavans or Raj Niwases when the following dignitaries or their wives are travelling by such vehicles within
the State of Union Territory concerned :—
                        (a)  President,
                        (b)  Vice-President,
                        (c)  Governor of the State,
                        (d)  Lt. Governor of the Union Territory;
               (iv)  Cars of Rashtrapati Bhavan when the following dignitaries or their wives are travelling by such cars :—
                        (a)  Visiting Heads of Foreign States,
                        (b)  Visiting Vice-Presidents of Foreign States or dignitaries of equivalent status,
                        (c)  Visiting Heads of Foreign Governments or dignitaries of equivalent status like Crown Prince and Princess of Foreign
States;
                (v)  Cars of Raj Bhavans or Raj Niwases when the following dignitaries or their wives are travelling by such vehicles within the
State or Union Territory concerned :—
                        (a)  Visiting Heads of Foreign States,
                        (b)  Visiting Vice-Presidents of Foreign States or dignitaries of equivalent status,
                        (c)  Visiting Heads of Foreign Governments or dignitaries of equivalent status;
               (vi)  Cars and other means of transport used by the Heads of India's Diplomatic Missions in the countries of their accredition;
              (vii)  Cars and other means of transport used by the Heads of India's Consular posts abroad in the countries of their accredition
subject to the laws, regulations and usages of the countries concerned;
              (viii)  Cars maintained by the Protocol Division of the Ministry of external Affairs when in use for duty with the foreign
dignitaries of the rank of Cabinet Ministers and above visiting India and escorting the Ambassadors accredited to India on
ceremonial occasions.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
            (2) Triangular metal plaques showing the Ashoka Chakra (i.e. Dharma Chakra which is a part of the State Emblem) may be
displayed on—
                (a)  Cars of the following dignitaries when they are travelling anywhere in India :—
                      Cabinet Ministers of the Union,
                      Ministers of State of the Union,
                      Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha,
                      Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha;
                (b)  Cars of the following dignitaries when they are travelling within their State or Union Territory, as the case may be :—
                      Cabinet Ministers in States,
                      Ministers of State in States,
                      Speakers and Deputy Speakers of the State Legislative Assemblies,
                      Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the State Legislative Councils,
                      Ministers (other than Deputy Ministers) of Union Territories with legislature,
                      Speakers and Deputy Speakers of Legislative Assemblies in Union Territories.
VII—DISPLAY ON PUBLIC BUILDINGS
            (1) The State Emblem may be displayed only on very important public buildings like the Rashtrapati Bhavan, Raj Bhavans, Raj
Niwases, Supreme Court, High Courts, Central Secretariat, Parliament House, State/Union Territory Secretariats and Legislatures.
            (2) The State Emblem may be displayed on the premises of India's Diplomatic Missions abroad. The Heads of Missions may
display the State Emblem at their residences.
            (3) The State Emblem may be displayed on the buildings occupied by India's Consulates abroad at the entrance doors thereof and
on the residences of Heads of Consular posts subject to the laws, regulations and usages of the receiving State.
VIII—USE FOR VARIOUS OTHER PURPOSES
            The State Emblem may be used on—
                 (i)  Publications issued and films produced by Government;
                (ii)  Coins, currency notes, promissory notes and postal stamps with such modifications as may be considered necessary by the
Mint or the Press;
               (iii)  Medals and Sanads instituted by Government;
               (iv)  Invitation cards for State functions;
                (v)  New Year and Greeting Cards sent by officers of Indian Missions abroad for legitimate representational purpose;
               (vi)  Representational Glassware Crockery and Cutlery used at the Rashtrapati Bhavan, Raj Bhavans, Raj Niwases and Indian
Missions/Posts abroad; and
              (vii)  Badges, collars, buttons, etc., of uniforms of Police, Excise Constabulary, etc., which carried before adoption of this
Emblem, the old Coat-of-Arms or Crown; Uniforms of various categories of Class IV staff of Rashtrapati Bhavan;
uniforms of Class IV staff of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
IX—USE BY THE ARMED FORCES PERSONNEL
            The use of the State Emblem on the uniforms badges etc., of the Armed Forces shall be governed by the instructions laid down by
the Ministry of Defence in this behalf.
X—USE FOR EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES
            (1) The State Emblem may be printed in school textbooks, books on history, art or culture or in any periodical as part of the text
of a Chapter, Section etc., for the purpose of explaining or illustrating the origin, significance or adoption of the State Emblem.
            Note : The State Emblem shall not be used on the front page, title or cover of any publication except a Government publication.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
XI—GENERAL
            (1) The State Emblem shall not be used for any trade, business, calling or profession or in the title of any patent, or in any trade
mark or design except in such cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Governments under Section 3 of the
Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Unauthorised use of the Emblem for such purposes is an offence under
that Act.
            (2) Private persons, bodies of persons, sports associations, etc., are not permitted to use the State Emblem on their letter-heads,
seats, crests, badget, house flags or for any other purpose except with the permission of the Government.
 
 
APPENDIX
APPENDIX-I
Appendix-II
 

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
 
ANNEXURE-IV
(See page 4, para 5.3 of the report)
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
22 August, 2005
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 115 of 2005.
 
THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
           BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the
Republic of India as follows :–
 
             1. This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to
National Honour (Amendment) Act, 2005.
Short title.
         2. In the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971,
in section 2, in Explanation 4, for clause (e), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely :—
        "(e) Using the Indian National Flag,–
                (i) as a portion of costume, uniform or accessory of any
description which is worn below the waist of any person; or
                        (ii) by embroidering or printing it on cushions,
handkerchiefs, napkins, undergarments or any dress material; or".
Amendment of
section 2 of Act 69 of
1971.
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
        Section 2 of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, inter alia , provides punishment for disrespect to the National
Flag. One of the actions that constitutes disrespect to the National Flag is using the National Flag as a portion of costume or uniform of
any description or embroidering or printing it on cushions, handkerchiefs, napkins or any dress material.
2.     There were demands from the common citizens in general, and the sportspersons in particular, to express their love and affection for
the National Flag by displaying it on their dresses, headgear, T-shirts, vests, etc., in a respectable manner. The Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs was also of the view that the restrictions imposed by Explanation 4(e) of section 2
of the said Act are demotivating the general public and sportspersons.
3.     In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the said Explanation of section 2 of the said Act, which will enable the members of the
public to use the National Flag on their costumes, uniform or accessory of any description in a respectable manner with the safeguard that
the National Flag shall not be used as a portion of costumes, uniform or accessory of any description worn below the waist, nor it would
be used by way of embroidering or printing in items of daily use such as cushions, handkerchiefs, napkins, undergarments or any dress
material.
4.     The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
SHIVRAJ V. PATIL
  NEW DELHI;
The 10th August, 2005.
 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR ACT, 1971
(69 OF 1971)
 *              *              *              *              *  
         2. Whoever in any public place or in any other place within public view
burns, mutilates, defaces, defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or
otherwise shows disrespect to or brings into contempt (whether the words,
either spoken or written, or by acts) the Indian National Flag or the
Constitution of India or any part thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
        Explanation 1.—Comments expressing disapprobation or criticism of the
Constitution or of the Indian National Flag or of any measures of the
Government with a view to obtain an amendment of the Constitution of India
Insult to Indian National
Flag and Constitution of
India.

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
or an alteration of the Indian National Flag by lawful means do not constitute
an offence under this section.
        Explanation 2.—The expression "Indian National Flag" includes any
picture, painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible representation of the
Indian National Flag, or of any part or parts thereof, made of any substance or
represented on any substance.
        Explanation 3.—The expression "public place" means any place intended
for use by, or accessible to, the public and includes any public conveyance.
        Explanation  4.—The disrespect to the Indian National Flag means and
includes—
                (a) a gross affront or indignity offered to the Indian National Flag;
or
                (b) dipping the Indian National Flag in salute to any person or thing;
or
                (c) flying the Indian National Flag at half-mast except on occasions
on which the Indian National Flag is flown at half-mast on public
buildings in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government;
or
                (d) using the Indian National Flags as a drapery in any form
whatsoever except in State funerals or armed forces or other para-
military forces funerals; or
                (e) using the Indian National Flag as a portion of costume or
uniform of any description or embroidering or printing it on cushions,
handkerchiefs, napkins or any dress material; or
                (f) putting any kind of inscription upon the Indian National Flag; or
                (g) using the Indian National Flag as a receptacle for receiving,
delivering or carrying anything except flower petals before the Indian
National Flag is unfurled as part of celebration on special occasions
including the Republic Day or the Independence day; or
                (h) using the Indian National Flag as covering for a statue or a
monument or a speaker's desk or a speaker's platform; or
                (i) allowing the Indian National Flag to touch the ground or the floor
or trail in water intentionally; or
                (j) draping the Indian National Flag over the hood, top and sides or
back or on a vehicle, train, boat or an aircraft or any other similar object;
or
                (k) using the Indian National Flag as a covering for a building; or
                (l) intentionally displaying the Indian National Flag with the
"saffron" down.
*              *              *              *              *
LOK  SABHA
______________
A
BILL

116 thr report on commettie on home affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/116threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:33:42]
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
_______________
( Shri Shivraj V. Patil, Minister of Home Affairs )